Thursday, 01 March 2007

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you.

2.34
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As we speak now the High Court is under siege once again by what is commonly known as the Black Mambas. Yesterday the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs assured us that Government will comply with the court’s ruling. This morning, nine of the 13 PRA suspects were brought before court as ordered by court and the Judge ruled that they be granted bail until the 7th of this month. They went to the registrar’s office and duly complied with the bail requirements. Six of them had sureties around, the other three’s sureties were still coming into court. What is known as Black Mambas, men dressed in Police uniforms, raided the registrar’s office and forcefully handcuffed the suspects on bail. As I talk now, there is a serious scuffle in court. The High Court of Uganda is once again under siege.  

Mr Speaker, we need this House to condemn, in the strongest terms, the abuse and breakdown of the constitutional order. Yesterday I did predict this. I said that the PRA suspects are going to be brought today before court, but we all know that it is a mockery of the Judiciary. The verdict was delivered many weeks ago when the President of Uganda said that the only way they will be out of court will be through amnesty. I beg this House to condemn the act and to preside over the Executive to abide by the rule of law.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for giving way before the Leader of Government Business comes in. Mr Speaker, after everything that this Parliament has done, we still see what is happening today in the High Court, where people released on bail are being re-arrested by some unknown security men. This Parliament still has capacity to take on the line minister in terms of even a censure motion. We cannot just sit here and laugh and claim we are lawmakers, yet those who have been released by the highest court in this land are being arrested just ten seconds after their release. That is also another option we can start considering very seriously, so that we see ways of trimming the Executive to shape, with all due respect to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.  Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you for that very important information. Mr Speaker, amnesty cannot be a substitute for a free and fair trial. Amnesty is not a shortcut for a free trial. These people are before court defending their innocence, but the state leaves them no option but to take amnesty. I raised this matter yesterday and you so wisely ruled that a committee of Parliament should investigate this. I pray that among other options, the committee works immediately and we get a report within two days. Thank you.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my other capacity I am an advocate of the High Court.  This afternoon, one of my lawyers who was at court called and told me that the suspects have been released. By about 15 minutes ago, they were processing their bail papers. I want clarification as to whether what the hon. Beti Kamya is saying is factual, or is it because of the fact that by now the suspects have come out? The information I have is that there is no impediment whatsoever. The bail papers are being processed. So, how do we ask the House to condemn the activities when we are not sure that factually –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, we are just coming from court, unless you doubt us. Beti Kamya is one of those who signed the bail papers.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This matter will be investigated by the Minister of Internal Affairs and he is going to report on Tuesday to this House. I thank you.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, justice delayed is justice denied, and justice against one person is one injustice to many. To answer the hon. Rukutana, I just came from court. I am one of the sureties and I signed the papers. Six of the nine had fully complied with the bail applications. I inform this House that the Black Mambas raided the registrar’s office and forcefully handcuffed the suspects. As far as I know, they were forcing them out of the registrar’s office. That is the status.  

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, in this Parliament we took oaths. We make laws and we also took an oath to protect and defend the Constitution. There is no way, for instance, as Member of Parliament for Bunyole County I will condone any criminal or any person whose activities can become a threat to this nation. It is over a year ago when these people were arrested. May I seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business, are they still gathering evidence? What is preventing prosecution to be conducted? If they are found guilty, if they are to be hanged, let them be hanged or whatever course of action is supposed to be taken, let it be taken. This is, unfortunately, dragging another arm of Government into affairs, which would ordinarily follow the course of the law. What is preventing the hearing and prosecution of this? That is one thing I want to seek clarification on. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, to answer hon. Dombo, prosecution was proceeding but you recall that there was a reference both by Government and the lawyers of the suspects. There were a number of references to the Constitutional Court, and those references took a long time to be settled. That is why prosecution did not continue on schedule. Now that these references have been settled by the Constitutional Court, certainly there is nothing that will stop the state from continuing with the prosecution. That is the answer I thought I should give hon. Dombo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek further clarification from the Leader of Government Business. As a Member of Parliament sitting on the government side, I must confess that this puts us and the entire House in a moral crisis. We are here and it is well known, it is not disputable, that the NRM restored the rule of law in Uganda, which had deteriorated for a long time. Why then do we seem to be the first to retrogress from that direction? I am seeking clarification because I am aware that it has also put you in a difficult situation on how to rule on such a matter. We have Government leadership in Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It has not put me in a difficult situation. What I can only say is, as I came here I did not know what happened in court. The first piece of information that this House received from the hon. Member for Lubaga North said that this is what happened. As we were listening to that, another honourable member from the Front Bench came up to contradict what was stated by hon. Kamya. As of now, we have two stories. Hon. Rukutana says the process is being followed and hon. Kamya says something else. It will definitely cause a problem if you debate this issue. On which facts are you going to base your debate? 

A report has been made. The best thing to do is to get the facts. Is it the story by hon. Kamya, Member for Lubaga North, or that by hon. Rukutana, that is factual? For you to say that you can debate this issue, I wonder on what facts you are going to base your debate. It is a matter that has been reported. I have no reason to doubt the story by Kamya and the one by the other member. I think we have to get the facts and then be able to competently deal with this matter. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The Leader of Government Business is fully in charge of whatever is happening in the country, so he should be bold and tell us exactly what is what. From that point, we can progress to debate. He is here with us, if he misleads this House in one way or the other, the blame should be put squarely on him. Otherwise, I concur with your ruling. 

I really request the Leader of Government Business to tell us, to tell the entire country, what is taking place. He can be in a position to tell us. It is just a phone call away. We may then distinguish between hon. Betty Kamya’s statement and that of the Minister, hon. Rukutana, here and now. I thank you.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I just want to pray that everybody in Government does everything possible to save us from the kind of embarrassment that Betty Kamya explained, if it is true. We do not want to go back where we were. I have had, should I call it, the misfortune of having practiced law in this country for the last 30 years. 

During what is commonly known as the Obote II period, I was a Member of Parliament here and a practicing advocate. I had the misfortune, on several occasions, of representing people in the High Court. The High Court would order that they be released, you would escort them to the gate of the High Court and you would find soldiers waiting to re-arrest them. Indeed, they would re-arrest them and take them back to prison. One of those people was the late Prof. Kyesimira who was a Member of this Parliament. This happened to him. I hate to believe that that kind of situation can be repeated now, 20 years after that eventuality, for whatever reason. 

I beg everybody in Government to ensure that this does not happen. Actually, it does not save Government, if we want to know. The Obote Government did it several times and they did not survive. If you are talking about security of the nation, it does not do anything like that. So, whoever is involved in this exercise should be told to let justice take its course and this country will be better saved. I pray that immediate action is taken rather than dillydallying on this serious matter because it might get out of hand. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hardly two weeks ago, members on this side where I am, protested to actions of this nature. The High Court or the Court of Appeal sets conditions for people like this PRA and they are given bail. One of the reasons the Opposition walked out of this House was to express our dismay to the Executive for having committed these kinds of acts like has happened today. 

Hon. Kawanga has articulated this nicely that those of us who laboured and struggled to liberate this country under this regime - the NRM doing the exact things that the very regimes we fought did, is a shame, in 2007! When people shed their blood to make sure that this country’s people are free! When the court sets them free, they are free. I was looking around to see those who call themselves “shareholders” to tell me whether this is exactly what we fought for.

It is a shame that today -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. But you see hon. Mathius Nsubuga, this is the dilemma I have. You have had one Member standing here saying what hon. Beti Kamya has said is not true. We have a problem of sorting out what the state of affairs is.

MR NSUBUGA:  Mr Speaker, hon. Rukutana was not even sure of what he was saying because he said -(Interruption)

MR NJUBA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am always very careful and I was very reluctant to talk at this stage because I am a leading lawyer for the team and I was in court unlike hon. Rukutana who is basing on hearsay. I was in court. The judge ordered that the suspects be taken to the registrar to complete the bail process. There was resistance at first by the prison officers. So, we told them this was a court order. The advocate led them to the registrar’s office and the process started. It was at that time that somebody in Prisons alerted the so-called Black Mamba and they stormed the High Court. So what we are saying is a very serious matter, I want the Leader of Government Business to know, and not to talk about “we shall investigate.” It is a very serious matter that must be condemned in the full stand. This House must stand on its legs and say something seriously.

I must take this opportunity to thank the court because the judge was firm that the court order must be implemented; not his order, but the order of the original judge. So, we must pay tribute to the court for that. But we must condemn in the strongest terms those who have overridden our Constitution; this is a rape of the court.

THE SPEAKER: Since the matter that has been reported by the hon. Member for Lubaga North is contradicted by the honourable minister, I suggest that we can ascertain the facts first. We will be able to know what actually has happened today because we always say tomorrow never comes; but tomorrow will come so that after we have got the facts, we will be in position to deal with this matter on Tuesday when all the facts are known. Otherwise, I have no reason to doubt you or him. So why do we not stay it until Tuesday when we shall deal with this particular subject when all the facts are known?

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It disturbs me to see that the Leader of Government Business who is in charge is here; unless he tells us that he is not in charge. We can adjourn for five minutes and he gives us the facts. We are representatives of people, it is not that I represent the people of Bukoto alone, but I am a leader in this country.

THE SPEAKER: No. I have said, let us obtain the facts and it will be subject to debate on Tuesday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker in the meantime, where are those who are being illegally arrested, where will they be between now and Tuesday? We may have a nice weekend, go for sauna, but where will these people be, in whose custody? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the wise guidance you are giving this House but when our colleague out there moved a motion in this House - I think it was hon. Ndeezi there, this issue we are debating right now was committed to the relevant committee. Those committee members - our colleagues - came back to this House but we do not know what happened to that report? Although they said that it was ready, it was never tabled here for discussion.  

The same issue, Mr Speaker is being referred -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am not referring –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: To Tuesday -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on please, your submission is irrelevant to what I have said. I have said this matter has been reported, it is on record and it has been contradicted but we shall be able to know the facts today and on Tuesday on this Floor - I am not referring to any other person. I have said on Tuesday when we re-convene we shall deal with the matter. This is what I have said, please!

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, when such a kind of incident -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is what I have said. The matter is closed.

MR BANYENZAKI: It is a different matter, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No; the matter is closed.    

MR BANYENZAKI: I am on a different matter, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No. You are not allowed.
 
MR BANYENZAKI: I think you have to be fair to me.

THE SPEAKER: Sit down, please. Next item!

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: I have got an excuse from hon. Onzima, let us get the statement of the minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, WOMEN AFFAIRS (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. You are all aware that March 8th   is designated by the United Nations as the International Women’s Day. Member states have commemorated this day since 1975, which was the International Women’s year. In Uganda the International Women’s Day is gazetted as a national day and ceremonies are organised at the national level as well as within local governments. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by Government to the goals of gender equality and empowerment of women. 

These goals are an important element of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government’s vision of prosperity for all and transformation in a peaceful and stable Uganda. The goals are also upheld by the Constitution, which guarantees equality of all citizens irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, faith and ability.  

This year, 2007 marks the 30th anniversary of the adoption by the UN of a resolution proclaiming a day for women’s rights and international peace. The United Nations theme for 2007 is, “Ending Impunity for Violence against Women and Girls.” In Uganda, national themes drawing attention to the nature and consequences to stop the acts of violence were selected in 2002 and 2003.

The NRM Government is committed to eliminating violence against women and girls. In this regard, several programmes and structures exist in various sectors to address this concern. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission is compiling a legislative proposal for a specific law on domestic violence and at an appropriate time, this proposed law will be tabled in this august House.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this year, my ministry has decided to align the theme for the International Women’s Day (IWD) with the theme for the Eighth Commonwealth Women’s Affairs Meeting (8WAMM), which the government of Uganda will host from 11th to 14th June 2007. The 8WAMM theme is, “Financing Gender Equality for Development and Democracy.” This theme tasks the Commonwealth member states and governments to account for actions to promote gender equality as a development goal as well as a key aspect for democracy and good governance. In line with this, Uganda’s IWD theme is; “Promoting Women’s Empowerment for Development.”

Honourable members, promoting women’s empowerment is at the helm of the National Resistance Movement’s consolidated programmes, which are responsive to gender and marginalised groups. This objective is being pursued to guarantee prosperity for all, focusing on strategic interventions in the areas of good governance, improving the quality of life, economic regional integration and international relations, peace and security.

Achievements by the Movement Government in the legal and policy arena have been translated into concrete benefits for girls and women. The key interventions include agriculture modernisation, promotion of micro-finance services and access to credit, training and technical input for agro-processing and marketing. Other interventions are in:

•	Infrastructure development (roads, markets, water and energy supply);
•	Capacity building for leadership and decision-making, taking full advantage of affirmative action policy;
•	Education through Universal Primary Education (UPE) and the recently introduced Universal Secondary Education (USE), Functional Adult Literacy (FAL) and tertiary education; and
•	Health care and the fight against HIV/AIDS.

With the above in mind, my ministry will co-ordinate the activities for the national celebrations at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds on Thursday, 08 March 2007. District local governments have been guided to commemorate the day with activities, which could include demonstrations of women’s projects and business skills training for women. Community members can also engage in self-help activities. In this regard, all actors in various sectors including district political leaders, women leaders, civil society, Government departments, the media and private sector are expected to participate in the preparations to ensure that this year’s IWD is memorable. The theme is expected to guide our thinking and actions throughout 2007.

Honourable members, I wish to inform you further, that this is the second IWD celebration under the Multi-party system of governance in our country. The first celebrations under the new era of political pluralism were held last year, 2006 under the theme, “Women and Multi-Party Democracy”.

I, therefore, call upon you to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the IWD at Kololo and also support your constituencies to commemorate the day.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to inform Members that as we commemorate this day, a number of activities have been identified for the week: 

We are going to clean the city, on Saturday, 03 March 2007, which will be launched by the First Lady at Kibuli;

We shall have an exhibition at the National Theatre starting on Monday 5th March to be followed by a free music concert in the evening by women artists who will perform starting at 6.00 p.m.;

We shall have a public dialogue on sexual and gender based violence at Grand Imperial Hotel on Tuesday, 06 March 2007, starting at 2.00 p.m. up to 5.00 p.m.; 

We shall have a memorial lecture on Tuesday, 06 March 2007, starting at 4.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m. at the National Theater; and then

We shall have the Women’s Day on 8th, March, that is, at Kololo. 

All Members are invited to attend. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.07
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. Last year, it will be recalled that we, in the Forum for Democratic Change, tried to attend the International Women’s Day but our women were turned away on the pretext that they were improperly dressed. We did report to this House that our women were properly adorned but those who were adorned in banana leaves were allowed to enter. For that matter, we do not want to suffer that indignity again. So, we are also organising our own celebrations. The organisers will be giving out a programme to the country. We will, therefore, invite all citizens of good will to join us at an appropriate place within this country. Thank you. (Laughter)

3.09
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for her statement - in addition to hon. Arumadri’s information. 

The Minister’s statement talks quite a lot about the equality of gender, sex, race and all the things that should be equal in a modern society. But the women of FDC were excluded from the national celebrations in 2005. That was not all. When the people of Lubaga North tried to secure funding, not “bonna baggawale” but funding from micro-finance, we had statements from the ruling party that the Opposition should not be benefiting from state resources. We keep hearing this, Mr Speaker, it was reported in the papers but it was denied. My question to the Minister and to this House is to what extent do words like “equality for all”, “equality of gender”, of “race”, or “sex” - to what extent does the government them mean as far as opposition participation in national resources goes? 

I also want to mention here that during the ongoing preparations for the International Women’s Day celebrations, it has been a tradition in the past for the previous Member for Kampala District, hon. Margaret Zziwa, to be the host and rightly so. But when the current MP for Kampala tried to get involved in the organisations as the host MP and as established before, she found it difficult. It was like they did not know what to do with her; they did not know how to work with her in the new status as a Member of the Opposition. I would like the Minister to inform this House what equality means to this Government. Thank you.

3.11
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it seems we are now in the world of celebrating what it means to be a woman. Unfortunately, this is taking place at a time when Government is seemingly committing itself to the calls of women. The Minister has given us an elaborate set of activities that she is going to do among which is cleaning the city, the public dialogues; these are the issues that are coming on an important day called the International Women’s Day in celebration of the achievements that have been enlisted here under the NRM Government. 

You will recall since 1962 to 1986 and from 1986 to date, we are almost talking about an equivalent number of years. What it generated during what they called the turbulent times and what this time round so many of our brothers or fathers still remember and recall in the good old days, is going to the ruins. When you are cleaning the city, what happens to the unclean trenches in Arua? What happens to the women who are suffering in hospitals who are not having the maternity kits? Should we be talking about cleaning the city when deep down there things are not moving right? What are we celebrating? 

What is the common woman in Arua celebrating on this day? Is it because it is a pronouncement by the United Nations that it is an obligation on the part of Government and, therefore, everyone else to celebrate such a day when we cannot have clean water access? Are we mourning or we are going to celebrate in mockery of women in this country? 

We are talking about a public dialogue; I wish this dialogue could be taking place in Madi-Okollo, part of my constituency, and I tell the women - I could celebrate if I had the resources and if I would not be mocked by saying that I should be putting on yellow in order to undertake the day like it happened here. Either way, Mr Speaker, I might have to seek special protection from you from the government Whip.

THE SPEAKER: You have my protection.

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR ODIT: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I am prompted to provide this information because of special reference to the status of women vis-à-vis the celebration being planned for. Earlier on I consulted the Minister of Health concerning last week when I was confronted by a large group of women from Erute County South, my constituency, and also from Lira District generally. These women are sad simply because all along they had been introduced to ARVs treatment but for the last one month, they have been served with Septrin only and the conditions are deteriorating. These are women not men. Similarly, Lira Regional Referral Hospital has no machine for CD4 count and the women have got to travel to Gulu. I was disturbed when I got this invitation from the Minister that women should mobilise themselves and celebrate. When I reflect on the status of my people, I do not know whether to celebrate or to mourn. Thank you.  

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Steven Mallinga): I thank the hon. Member of Parliament from Arua for allowing me to seek clarification from the hon. Member of Parliament from Lira area. Mr Speaker, I made it clear to my honourable brother that if there was a breakage in the CD4 count machine - that is the machine which is used to count the cells for immunity - if the cell count is below 200, then that person is placed on medication. Then after that as a follow up, there is an estimation of the cell count to see if they are responding properly to ARVs treatment. If there were breakages in the machines, it should have been reported to the Ministry. We do not have that report. 

We have enough ARVs in the country for the next one year. If the people in Lira failed to collect the medication from NMS, they have to be blamed for the suffering of women in that area. What my honourable friend should have done is to consult the District Director of Health Services to find out why there was a shortage of ARVs in his area. We have the medication. If you are concerned, it just follows that you should do something about it.

Septrin medicine is relevant in the treatment of HIV/AIDS. If there is any sign of infection, or if you are not taking the medication and there is a danger that you are going to develop infection, then as a way of prevention, you are given this medication. It is not irrelevant that they are receiving the medication. Because of the laziness of those who are supposed to collect ARVs at the NMS, the people’s lives are in danger. That is what I wanted to make clear. Thank you very much.

MS AKIROR: I have just heard the honourable minister assuring this House that we have enough ARVs for one year and yet I am one of those Members of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and most of the times we are told that we do not have enough ARVs for all those people who need to use the drugs. Is the honourable minister being sincere? Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: I think this thing has got to be made clear. If someone is HIV positive, it does not necessarily mean that they have to be on medication. We have about –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the thing is very clear. She is saying she has been told the medicine is not there. You are saying it is there. What is the truth?

DR MALINGA: The medicine is there.

THE SPEAKER: Okay then.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is just a sincere revelation that we are not going to celebrate but will be mourning if we are sane enough. They have given us an elaborate set of activities I was still talking about. The public dialogue that is going to take place in Kampala; we are dialoguing here while our people are actually not even informed about the mere basics of their health status. But we are going to be elaborately dialoguing here about gender equity.

That brings me to one thing; the poverty status of women in this country. When women leaders visit the constituents, we are saddened just because there is a total breakdown in their livelihood and all the mechanisms have broken down particularly in Northern Uganda. Tell me how I should carry my banners to the IDP camps and say I am celebrating the Women’s Day; what will I mean to them? When I come to the people who are suffering with jiggers in Masindi, what will I be saying?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a contradiction. The shadow minister in charge of this sector has said they are going to celebrate although on a different venue. Which is which?

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the Member holding the Floor in order to insinuate that Masindi women, including myself, are dying of jiggers? I am aware there is a plague, but it is not caused by jiggers; it is caused by rats and fleas. (Laughter) Is the Member in order to distort facts and try to drive her point home in a distorted manner and misleading this House, therefore? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you mix up plague and jiggers?

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I have just been meeting one of the commissioners of the Ministry of Health. He told me that a high profile letter had reached his office to try to contain the situation of jiggers in the district. So, I am not lying. For that matter, I am very sure that the people in that region who are suffering from jiggers are not going to celebrate the Women’s Day but their feet are going to be sick; or they will be hurt. They may not even have the opportunity to put on slippers.

DR MALLINGA: Honourable Speaker, I think we are extremely concerned regarding the health of the people of this country. For a Member of this Parliament to stand here and allege that there is another outbreak of a disease, which has not been reported - we are in constant monitoring of Masindi. 

For the information of the hon. Members of Parliament, there was a lady who came from Nebbi and possibly, I would say surely she was incubating plague, the bubonic plague, which is spread through breath. When she visited Masindi, she fell sick within three days and died. Those who attended to her and accompanied her body back for burial eventually fell sick and died. This is typical of the bubonic plague. There are no jiggers involved here. The hon. Member of Parliament should be responsible in choosing her words and make allegations, which are correct. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Otherwise what the Minister is saying that we should be sympathetic to the actual situation of plague other than confusing it with jiggers which is simplifying the problem.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am more than humbled that this is not a laughing matter. It is a very serious issue. I am not confusing the two. I mean jiggers - and if you went to clearly meet some of these commissioners in the ministry, you might find out that I am actually giving him the reality. Otherwise, the fact of the matter is, to us women who are disadvantaged particularly in the Northern region, we do not find it befitting to call this a celebration. We will be mourning from our graves while others will be celebrating the so-called Women’s Day. Thank you very much.

3.27
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for her statement. In her statement, she talks about the activities that are going to take place one of which is sensitisation about “prosperity for all”, cleaning the city and sexual violence awareness.  

In the last Parliament I was the leading advocate of the micro-finance services, which has now been named bonna bagagawale. During my term as a Member of Parliament, there were issues, which I think the Minister needs to pay attention to, especially the policy framework and the legal frame work to guide this “prosperity for all”. It is for this matter that my colleague, hon. Beti Kamya has complaints in her constituency where she could not access such kind of funds. Through the Leader of Government, if we do not address this, I had kept quiet for some time about this issue of policy for the micro-finance institutions and bonna bagagawale. If we do not address ourselves to this problem, even the bona bagagawale we are talking about may not take off. 

On the issue of cleaning the city, as legislators in this Parliament, it is good women are coming up to participate. Today I was a bit disgusted. On Agha Khan road, there is a point where they collect all rubbish, buveras, all the shit you can think of. They put all this in the middle of the city. I hope these ladies, led by the First Lady and hon. Member for Ruhama, are not going to do the same by collecting the garbage and putting it in the middle of the road. It is on this matter that I call upon the Minister in charge of this sector to think about banning these buveras as soon as possible.

There was sensitisation and sexual violence. Mr Speaker, you remember DRB in the last Parliament was highly hyped and up to now we do not know where it is. Maybe it could have addressed this issue of sexual offences. Maybe we even need a sexual offences Bill.  

Hon. Members of Parliament, girl children have been defiled, raped and faced with all kinds of abuse that you can think of. Their heads have been cut off. I think we need to address this issue much more seriously than mere calling for public dialogue. It is good the Front Bench is talking about it but I think they need to do so with more seriousness.

Madam Minister, though the issues I have raised are not in your ministry, you could still network in your sector wide approach and address this issue. Having taken this Floor, I urge my colleagues across to celebrate the day. This is an opportunity for you, the MP who was on the Floor who said she has nothing to tell people with jiggers. If they are there in my constituency they are there, but this is your opportunity to tell them to clean their feet and get away with the jiggers. If they are poor - I have poor people in my constituency - this is your opportunity to mobilise them and tell them to work hard and get rich. That way they will prosper and “prosperity for all” will become a reality. This is the opportunity to have that gathering and if at all, like hon. Kamya’s issue, if there is any case of human rights not being addressed, this is your opportunity to tell these people what is going on without being tear-gassed. I thank you.

3.33
MR JOHNSON TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the Minister for the statement she has made and to say that this International Women’s Day is an international day. It is not only for women of Uganda. This is for the women of the whole world and I think the most important thing is for the people, our women, to get an opportunity to come together and review their welfare and Government programmes.

My only concern is that wherever we have these celebrations, they are centered at the headquarters. The celebrations are by people who are really well off. These are women of high status. Our rural women get very little of these celebrations. I, therefore, would like to clarify from the Minister, what practical efforts are they taking to ensure that every woman in this country celebrates this day? Are celebrations taking place at the sub-counties? Is facilitation being sent to these areas? 

Mr Speaker, we are aware that wherever we go out to our constituencies, the women councillors do not understand why they were even elected. They are just there. They do not get any funding towards their activities. For instance when we talk about Government programmes like UPE, has any organ or has the ministry taken trouble to go round and find out why even after giving UPE, girls are not benefiting? There are some people who are deliberately refusing to take their children to school. Even with USE, I doubt if all the girls who qualify will be beneficiaries. Is the minister taking an extra mile to crosscheck so that we can intervene and our girl children benefit from the programmes of this country? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But I have closed the debate. We shall have the Member for Lubaga South and then end with the Chairperson of UWOPA. Debate is supposed to last only one hour. We have so far used over 50 minutes.

3.36
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): I thank the minister for this statement. Honourable minister, you told us that one of the government efforts to empower women is “Prosperity for All” programme. I would like you to give us at least one example of the countries where this programme has been successful. 

More than 70% of our women are farmers who cannot even find market for their agricultural products. More than 20% of women in Uganda are below the poverty line. It takes a woman a decade to get just $1 –(Interjections)– Yes, we women suffer a lot. We are the victims of every problem on this universe. We lack access to safe and clean water, we lack access to sanitation. I can give you an example. In some areas in Uganda – [NRM Members: “Lubaga”] - women do not have latrines. So, they wait until it is dark in order to do their thing. So, in the process – (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, shadow minister for giving way.  I am provoked to give this information because of the reaction from the other side. When she said it takes a decade for some of our women to earn $1, the reaction was that that was not true.

Some of us supported the DRB because we thought we were going to cure that problem. Here comes a rural woman without land, who is married and taken to a family, which looks at her as property. Every shilling she earns is for the husband. When I hear women disapproving this from the other side I do not understand which part of the country they come from. (NRM Members: “Kasese”]. These must be women who are just driving around Kampala and who think that the rural woman is just like them. That is the information I wanted to give to the country. Thank you very much.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you my colleague for that information. Women Members, I was just telling you that in the process of doing that, they are exposed to sexual harassment and assault in some places. We are sitting here ignorant of what is taking place outside there. We do not know what is happening to our fellow women deep in the villages.

Therefore, honourable minister, I do not think there is any reason we should celebrate this day. We shall just gather and mourn for our fellow women. I thank you, Mr speaker.

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON OF UGANDA WOMEN PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (UWOPA) (Ms Winifred Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for availing me this opportunity to speak on the statement made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would like to appreciate the theme that Uganda has curved out of the international theme that was given out, “Promoting Women’s Empowerment for Development.”

I strongly believe that it is through economic development especially that women will be free from oppression, suffering and being treated as objects. I would like to call upon all the women especially women members of Parliament - I do this in my capacity as the Chairperson of UWOPA, which cuts across. It does not consider political affiliation or any other divisions that might be in our county but considers all women. All women are the same, regardless of which political party we subscribe to, or even which class.

Most of the challenges that women are faced with are the same. I would, therefore, like to request all the women of this country that this is an opportunity. Let us not be derailed from what we have achieved and what is likely to help us move forward. It is not fair for us to politicise Women’s Day! And I will say it again and again because as the chairperson of UWOPA, we have been planning around this programme and theme and we have come out with a proper statement that it is to benefit us as women.

I, therefore, request that we do not lose sight of where we are going. This is because we are looking for emancipation. The moment we lose that, then we are likely to go back to where we came from. Remember where the NRM Government found us: we had no laws in place to protect us; our husbands would sell land without our consent; we used not to have a gender sensitive Constitution that has led to all these laws that have come up.

Let us look at the theme and make sure we ask ourselves, “What can we contribute for the woman who might not be as privileged as we are now?” Once we do that, we shall help the poor women we are talking about to come up.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister, in the way forward, for saying that they are going to prioritise attention to sexual and gender based violence by developing a national policy and action plan. We have been longing to have the Sexual Offences Bill passed, to no avail, for a long time. Therefore, when a national policy and action plan are talked about, I would like the minister to help us understand on what basis this will be formed. I request that the ministry moves ahead to bring this Sexual Offences Bill for us to discuss. I do appreciate that some components have been put in the Penal Code (Amendments) Bill, but that is not all we need. We need this Sexual Offences Bill to come to Parliament for the Members to debate. This is the same to the gender based violence, which have all be discussed and researched but they are sitting somewhere where we think they are not making any headway to come to the floor of this House.

The Domestic Relations Bill we still hold it dearly. We had agreed in the last Parliament that we remove those issues that are likely to be contentious, but at least we pass what we think would be useful to us. So, I would like to request the Ministry of Gender to really spearhead this, and bring this to the Floor of Parliament. 

I was privileged last week to attend the International Women’s Day in Rwanda. Mr Speaker, whereas we are the people that promoted the rule of law in the Rwanda Parliament, and whereas we are the people that supported them to start another association like UWOPA, they are much ahead of us. When we were discussing with them, we did not feel at ease because most of these things like the Sexual Offence’s Bill, Kenya and Tanzania have got it, but Uganda does not.  They have passed land laws that favour women, but we have not. 

So, Mr Speaker, I propose that if it is difficult, I hope Members will be allowed to move them as private member’s bills so that at least we can move and see things done. We would not like to lag behind when we have been at the front line in Africa in advocating for the emancipation of women. I hope this Women’s Day is going to be a reflection on what we have done.  

Let us together with government pull our socks where we have lagged behind. We have not even ratified the protocol on the rights of women; the Sexual Offences Bill and the Gender Based Violence Bill are not there.  Mr Speaker, I think we need to be serious.  But I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I request all of us, women of this country, to stand and make sure that this day is celebrated with happiness and success because it is our day as women of Uganda. I thank you.    

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you remember it is only two days ago when we passed an amendment to allow us to debate a ministerial statement and put a rider that the debate should not exceed an hour. I have been monitoring this, we have clocked an hour now and I think since this is the first time to invoke an amendment, let us comply with it. We shall continue to follow up the issues of gender and women empowerment so that both are celebrated; we have had celebrations by the minister and by the shadow minister. 

I think let us see what we benefit out of these two celebrations. This should end the debate because yesterday I promised hon. Odit that this time we shall debate the report. The longer we take, the less are chances for us to debate that report. So, bear with me, let us now move to another item on the Order Paper.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for their responses and I would like to inform them that when we celebrate the Women’s Day, we are not celebrating our failures, but we are recognising the achievements of women because these are achievements, which are being recognised around the world. 

Before 2007, we did not have 100 women in Parliament; that alone is an achievement. And when we talk of achievements, NRM achievements are women’s achievements. So, I want to inform Members that we have really taken down your concerns but that is why we are celebrating the day. And I would like to invite all of you to attend that day’s celebrations.

I would also like to respond to hon. Nampijja about the countries, which have succeeded in “Bonna bagaggawale”. We have Singapore, Malaysia, North Korea and all these are third world countries and they have succeeded in “Bonna bagaggawale”. I would also like to tell honourable members that we should sensitise our people. If you talk of jiggers, what is your role as a leader in your society? You need to sensitise your people about sanitation and about jiggers because government cannot come to your localities and start telling people about removing jiggers from their feet. So it is your responsibility as a Member of Parliament to sensitise the people about that.  

I invite all of you to come and attend all these activities. The First Lady is going to show the people that when you clean the compound, you should not heap the things in the middle of the courtyard. So, I think this is what the First Lady is going to do as a role model to tell other people that they should be clean within their environments. Otherwise, I thank you very much for your responses.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance in my capacity as shadow minister of internal affairs. I have received information right now to the effect that there is shooting around court and the people inside are some of the ones I represent, including women. I found myself uncomfortable and I thought it would be good manners to ask for your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry about what you have told me. So, if it is true, the guidance I can give is go and protect your people if you can rescue them. But thank you for the information. Let us verify it. But as I told you, this subject is fixed for Tuesday that was to enable us to verify the facts. But that information you have given us is alarming. We pray that it really cools down.

There was a statement by hon. Onzima, but he came late because of certain circumstances. Maybe you want to make your statement before we see how we proceed. Let us expedite our process.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.53
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some minutes back, I sent you a note that I was going to High Court and I also sought your permission to make a statement after the ministerial statement and I am glad that you gave me the go ahead.  

Before I make this statement, I went to the High Court to sign as one of the sureties of the PRA suspects. When I got there, as usual the High court was sealed off by security personnel. I met a very large number of police and prison officers. And there were others, you would not tell whether they are security personnel or not, putting on plain clothes.

When I got there, everything was normal; the situation was calm. I was led to the officer responsible and I signed the documents. After that, I came back immediately. So that was the prevailing situation when I was there. I think the details of any new developments will be brought in later. Now let me make the statement – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is a good report; if that is what happened, but proceed with your statement.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I am moving under Rule 42(2) of our Rules of Procedure, therefore, I am making a personal statement, of which I sent a copy to you yesterday.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I hereby do register thanks to the Seventh Parliament of Uganda and the NRM Government for the creation of Nyadri District. Mr Speaker, I also take this opportunity to thank you for foiling two fraudulent and vigorous attempts by hon. Kabwegyere, who was then the Minister of Local Government, Bakoko Bakoru who was then Minister of Gender Labour and Social Development, and a section of politicians from Terego, who wanted to rename the district Kubala instead of Nyadri and also have it inserted in the Constitution during the process of amending the Constitution. Above all –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague hon. Onzima is moving this personal explanation under Rule 42. This rule says, “A Member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter…” The matter my colleague is bringing here is very controversial; it is a matter of litigation. The papers are being lodged in court. My colleague hon. Kassiano Wadri is not in this House, he travelled this morning to attend to this same matter. So, if it is under this rule, I don’t know if we should proceed unless there is a better explanation. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think hon. Onzima you are entitled to make your personal statement, but the second paragraph brings a problem in the statement. Because when you say, “…Foiling two fraudulent and vigorous attempts by hon. Kabwegyere, Bakoko and Terego politicians… “, it definitely becomes a very controversial statement, and these people say it is out of order because it is imputing improper motives on members. 

So, it is true you informed me yesterday that you want to make a statement, but I did have time to read through. Maybe, we have to give you some time to study the statement and edit it especially this term “Fraudulent,” fraud is a crime. So take time, next week I will accommodate you after you have edited this statement otherwise it is going to make much controversy here.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I am very obliged and for the sake of harmony, let me withdraw that statement and proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Which statement, I don’t know what is in the others – okay, you withdraw the allegation of “fraudulence”.  

MR ONZIMA: Withdrawn, Mr Speaker. Well, yesterday I was in the Ministry of Local Government. The information I got from the director in the Ministry of Local Government is that, he had not received any communication from the court. So as of now, the position is that we are relaying on what the papers are reporting; there is no official report from the court.

Mr Speaker, above all, I thank God for making it possible for the government to come up with the final position that this district be named Nyadri, which is actually named Maracha – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, having run through the report, I think I should give you more time to look at your statement, because I see other paragraphs that are going to attract more objections. Go through your statement over the weekend, and look at the rule then on Tuesday or Wednesday, I will accommodate your statement in respect to this subject matter. Otherwise, see that objections must come because of other paragraphs that you have not reached. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bukedea, before I came in, the Minister of Finance got in touch with me and expressed their inability to answer your question. However, it will be answered next week when the ministers responsible, that is either Mr Suruma or Gen. Salim Saleh, are here. So, we shall deal with it next week.

QUESTION NO. 24 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.05
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO, (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. “Does the ministry have a plan to have reliable documentation on the prevalence and magnitude of the different forms of child labour in Uganda, and to have monitoring and evaluation systems that can provide timely and reliable data on this phenomenon? If yes, what are the details of plan, and if not, when will the plan be developed?

(i)	Does the ministry have an institutional framework and implementation mechanism of protecting Uganda children against engagement in work that is dangerous and harmful to their health, safety and moral development?”

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank you hon. Loi Kiryapawo, Member of Parliament for Budaka County. Mr Speaker, the answer to the first question is yes, the ministry has knowledge on the prevalence and magnitude of the different forms of child labour in Uganda and it has a plan, policy and a legal framework to deal with the problem. 

Honourable members, in order for you to appreciate the problem, allow me first to dwell on the concepts. Not all work done by children is classified as child labour. Activities such as helping parents fetch water, collect firewood, weeding in the gardens, harvesting crops, looking after animals etc, if done under the supervision and observation of parents and in moderation and consideration of the capacity and age of the child as a process of learning the roles that they will take on in adult life, are acceptable and actually encouraged as they are termed as light work. But to qualify as light work, these cores must not affect the health and personal development of the child or interfere with his/her education.

The term “child labour” therefore refers to work that deprives children of their childhood, their potential and their dignity. It is characterised by dangerous and harmful activities that jeopardize the health, safety and morals of a child or interferes with its education. Child labour is usually associated with the use of dangerous tools, long hours of work, heavy loads and tasks, exposure to chemicals and dangerous substances, confinement and cruelty by employers, slave-like activities, separation of children from families, sexual abuse and exploitation. Such child labour is deemed to be among what we term as the worst forms of child labour and these forms are prohibited.  

We define child labour as comprising of the following:

1.	All children involved in work if they are between the ages of five to 11 years.
2.	All children aged between the years of 12 to 14 who are involved in work beyond their capacity or work, which is not light work as provided for in the national legislation or if they work for a total of more than 14 hours per week.
3.	All working children aged between the years of 15 and 17 if they are involved in hazardous work and or if they work the equivalent of 43 or more hours per week.

This definition of child labour fits squarely within the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention description on child labour and our national labour legislation. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as you may be aware, Uganda has a population of approximately 27 million people growing at the rate of 3.4 percent per annum. Of this population, 32 percent are children aged between the years of five and 17. Data available, according to the Uganda demographic and health survey of 2001/02, indicates that Uganda has a total of 7.9 million children in the country who are aged between the years of five to 17. Out of this total, 2.7 million are at work.  

The incidence of child work is as high as 34 percent and this is higher than the estimated average for sub Saharan Africa, which is 24 percent within the same age group. More child workers, 3,160,200, fall within the age category of five to 14 years. 75 percent of all working children reside in urban areas and work in urban informal sector. 

Child labour, Mr Speaker, is one of the principle sources of exploitation and abuse and is a growing problem in this country and other undeveloped countries. As defined in the International Labour Organisation Convention, convention 182 of 1989 which was ratified by the Government of Uganda, the term worst forms of child labour include the following:

1.	Child slavery or practices similar to slavery such as sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdom use of children in armed conflict.

2.	The use, procurement and offering of a child for prostitution and pornography.

3.	The use of children in illicit activities such as smuggling and drug trafficking.

4.	Work that is likely to harm the health, safety and morals of children. 

Mr Speaker, some children work in dangerous and hazardous sectors or occupations such as working in hazardous informal sectors, commercial agriculture especially in plantations like tea, sugar, tobacco and rice plantation. There are elements of commercial sexual exploitation while some children are involved in fishing, construction and in stone crashing.  These practices are in violation of the government’s constitutional requirement of protecting children from harmful and hazardous work.  

I refer you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to Article 34 (4) of the Constitution and sections 32 and 34 of the Employment Act No.6 of 2006. I also refer you to the provisions of the Children’s Act chapter 59 of 2000 among other legislations. Beyond that, it is recognised that there is a close link between eliminating child labour and other important national concerns including eradication of poverty.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, sorry to interrupt but these answers should be very brief and actually our rules require that a reply to a question be limited to three minutes. Some of these explanations actually prolong the question and it becomes complicated.

MR RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. And to answer question number two which was whether the ministry has an institutional framework and implementation mechanism of protecting Uganda’s children from engagement in work that is dangerous and harmful to their health, safety and moral development, the answer is yes. There is an institutional framework with necessary linkages to other key players.

Mr Speaker, the activities on child labour are carried out in the department of labour. In this department, there is a child labour unit which handles the oversight and which has put in place a national steering committee that oversees the protection of child labour. The ministry has also put in place a policy to do with child labour that has been approved by Cabinet and it is called, “The National Child Labour Policy.” I want to lay it on the Table.  

Again there are surveys that have come up with reports on the question of child labour, which reports I want to lay on the Table. I thank you very much.

4.17
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know all he has just said, but who is in charge of protecting the children of Uganda? 

Secondly, how can you differentiate between child work and child labour because that is where the problem is? Very few people can differentiate between the two. For instance, you gave an example of herding cattle. Personally I take this as child labour not child work because the child spends more time in the bushes keeping the cattle. I would like you to explain further on this.

Also as somebody who is in the government, what machinery do you have in place to see that you protect the children of Uganda from engaging in child labour? Thank you.

4.18
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I would like the minister to clarify this. Taking, for instance, the small house girls and baby sitters who are underage and are being kept by your wives because they cannot look after their children and are being paid between Shs 15,000 to Shs 20,000, can that be classified as child labour or as a legitimate action by that child to help the family?  

4.19
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a supplementary question and a concern in as far as the problem of child labour is concerned. Honourable minister, whereas the NRM Government has provided one of the key solutions to child labour, which is to keep the children of UPE and USE school going age in school so that they or their parents are not tempted to misuse them and deny them the opportunity to grow up as responsible people, there is an increasing rate of drop out. 

What is your ministry doing in line with the Ministry of Local Government to make sure that our children of UPE and USE going age are not sent as house girls, baby sitters, kept on farms or digging at a family level when government has provided UPE and USE. I thank you so much.

4.20
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question is about the disabled children. The disabled are at a further disadvantage because of their nature and in one of the strategies proposed by the minister, that is strategy no.4, he talks about formal and informal or vocational training. In this country, there used to be several rehabilitation and training centres for disabled children. One such centre is Ruti Rehabilitation Centre in Mbarara. I have another school for invalids in Rwampara called, Tukore Invalids School but there is no programme as of now either under UPE or USE or under the ministry itself to cater for those children and apparently all those centres are closed- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, we are not discussing a general policy on children. The question was directed towards child labour so unless your question is connected with child labour, it cannot be a supplementary question. Yours, for instance, is a general question on policy of dealing with children with disabilities, which is different.

MR NGABIRANO: Mr Speaker, I was connecting it because one of the reasons why these children go into child labour is because they are redundant and cannot go to school thus they are susceptible to being taken over. Therefore, honourable minister, can you answer my two concerns in that area. Thank you very much.

4.22
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the minister aware that International Labour Organisation recently warned us of the escalating labour of children? Furthermore, is he aware that we are number one in sub-Saharan Africa regarding that issue? Thank you.

4.23
MR JULIUS PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is this issue that I need the minister to explain.  Somebody harvests his crops in the garden. He brings a vehicle and a tractor and the children are interested in boarding them. The man then ends up selling all his crops from the garden to his home without paying anybody or any child anything. Is this really child labour?

4.24
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his comprehensive answer. We have laws and policies regarding children, but children are being abused left and right at homes everywhere. What mechanism has the minister put in place to capture those culprits who are abusing the children? Thank you very much.

4.25
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Women Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like the minister to help me understand some of the issues that he has raised as being characteristic of what child labour is. Is he aware that there is plenty of trafficking of children in this country? If he is aware, what has he done about it? It should be one of the issues he should have mentioned as being associated with child labour.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LABOUR) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, honourable members. This policy on child labour is relatively new, possibly that is why the honourable members are raising these questions. I can assure you that if you look at the policy, it addresses all your concerns squarely. It is true we have not yet distributed it. We are in the process of disseminating it, but the issues raised by honourable members are clearly catered for.

Hon. Kibanzanga was asking about those children who work in towns and earn Shs 15,000. Definitely, that is child exploitation. It is true we do not have a minimum wage, but children are not supposed to be employed in situations likely to interfere with their education. These children who work as house girls here definitely do not go to school. Being paid Shs 15,000 per month is exploitation, and the policy caters for that.

The honourable member was asking about school dropouts. There are so many factors that cause this, and that is why this child labour policy is multi-sectoral. We deal with all the concerned ministries to ensure that all the factors that cause children to drop out of school are catered for. If the policy is well implemented, we shall definitely eradicate the problem of school dropouts.

The honourable member from Rwampara talked about the rehabilitation centre and how they do not have the USE programme. The programme exists in Rwampara and is not restricted to the street people. Even the disabled children can go and access it.  

The hon. Nampijja, I know that the International Labour Organisation is very concerned about the predicament of child labour, but it is not true to say that we rank number one. I have not seen it anywhere. I do not know where you got your information. It is true that in this country there are some elements of child labour, as I said, but definitely we are not number one.

Hon. Baba Diri, the mechanism to protect the children is in this policy. We have a child protection unit. We are putting in place a multi-sectoral steering committee that will come up with a policy looking at the protection of children wherever they are, and it will address all issues regarding child labour. I thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will remember, the committee presented its report through hon. Butime and subsequently there was an addendum to the report. This addendum was in response to Prof. Francis Omaswa’s response to statements that were part of the report. Now you can debate the report so that we dispose of it.  That is the status of this report, unless the chairperson wants to add something.

4.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Perhaps it would be good for me to present the addendum officially for the benefit of our Members who might not have the opportunity to read it. It is a short piece.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ODIT: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker and the House, for the opportunity given to me on behalf of the committee to present this addendum. More so, I want to sincerely thank our colleague, Col Tom Butime, who presented the report very fairly on behalf of the committee to the House. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises presented a report on the performance of National Medical Stores in accordance with the rules of this House. You will also recall that on Thursday, 22 February 2007, debate of the report was halted due to the fact that one person mentioned therein, Prof. Omaswa, approached the Office of the Speaker for redress. He, in fact, wrote a memorandum to be considered by the committee. Prof. Omaswa subsequently followed his written submission with a request to appear before the committee, which the committee duly granted. On Tuesday, 27 February 2007, he did appear and was cross-examined by the committee.

Allow me to list down his submissions before I get to the findings: 

Annex A presented to the committee was a letter from Dr Kihumuro Apuuli to the then general manager National Medical Stores, dated 27 September 1996, recommending the procurement of surgical gauze and cotton wool from Medical Products.  

Annex B, a letter from the general manager National Medical Stores to the Director of Health Services, dated 13 September 1996; a meeting to buy Medical Products’ surgical gauze and bandages, but limiting it to test marketing basis only.  

Annex C, minutes of the meeting held on 21 November 1996, chaired by Dr Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Health, to evaluate the performance of the surgical gauze.  

Annex D, a letter from hon. J.S Mayanja Nkangi dated 21 June 1997 to Dr C. Kiyonga, Minister of Health, emphasizing the need to promote local industries and fair competition against the Chinese company, which had won award for supply of medical products without following procurement procedures required, using SWIPCO at the time in defense of Medical Products Ltd.   

Annex E, an extract from the IGG’s report, which investigated the conducts of National Medical Stores with special reference to the Medical Products materials supplied, and was rejected by management.  

Annex F, introducing the stock movements for National Medical Stores between 2003 and 2004.  

Annex G, a letter from Prof. Omaswa to the Chairman Board of Directors of National Medical Stores, dated 13 January 2003, on the delayed payment for surgical gauze and bandages from Medical Products.

Annex H, a letter from the chief inspector of drugs to the head of pharmaceuticals National Medical Stores, dated 7 January 2002, giving the results of the analysis on the gauze absorbent batch No.001 from National Medical Stores.  

Annex I, a letter from Brig. Jim Muhwezi, Member of Parliament and Minister of Health, to hon. Gerald Ssendaula, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 9 August 2002, pleading for the delay and demanding for re-payment of Non-Performing Assets Recovery and Trust money from Medical Products due to their poor performance.

The last one is a letter from His Excellency, the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 21 July 2003, reminding the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about the government policy of promoting local industries with special reference to this Medical Products.

I, therefore, wish to lay all these documents on Table in support of the submission from Prof. Omaswa. 

In his submission, Prof. Omaswa explained the genesis of these products, how they were introduced to the health services. The surgical gauze and bandages in question are manufactured in Kampala by an enterprise known as Medical Products Ltd. owned by Dr John Muguma, Prof. Mondo Kagonyera and others. 

This product hit the Ugandan market in 1996 and Prof. Omaswa, the chief surgeon of government and Director of Uganda Heart Institute at the time, was among the first surgeons to test this gauze and bandages and he found them to be satisfactory. He subsequently recommended to the Director General of Health Services, Dr Kihumuro Apuuli, who in turn recommended to the General Manager of National Medical Stores for introduction of this gauze to the National Medical Stores. The National Medical Stores General Manager accepted to procure the products only when their existing stocks were used.  

Evaluation of the performance of Medical Products’ surgical gauze and bandages: In 1997, Medical Products approached the government to have their products applied in the government health facilities. The then Minister of Health, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, convened a meeting of representatives of Medical Products and leading medical specialists in Uganda to evaluate the suitability of the gauze for use in the government health facilities. The gauze had been previously distributed by Prof. Omaswa to specialists in Mulago for testing. The General Manager NMS and Chief Inspector of Drugs from the National Drug Authority who had tested the gauze also attended the evaluation meeting.

Findings from the specialists

There were strong and weak points about this gauze. The strong points were that it doesn’t fluff and so it does not leave behind small foreign bodies in wounds. It is also good to apply in order to decrease pressure when stopping bleeding. 

The major weakness of the gauze was its low absorption capacity, which was observed by all surgeons. Nobody was sure of the cotton content since it was not labeled, but the proprietors assured the consultants that the gauze is 100 percent cotton.  It was learnt that it was knitting rather than weaving, which had brought about most of the differences pointed in the product. 
 
In their conclusion, the specialists enumerated the following:

•	The meeting concluded that the gauze from Medical Products Ltd had some role in surgical practice in Uganda.  
•	The gauze could be further improved through studies done by surgeons and sponsored by Medical Products Ltd. 
•	The products should be adequately described and given a standard according to the prevailing difficulty in comparison with international studies;
•	Medical Products Ltd should also allow surgeons to provide guidelines for other users;
•	The estimates of the quantity required by the country that could be filled by this gauze were also recommended; and  
•	Finally, in the spirit of nationalism, these gaps continued to be abridged in the short-term with the understanding that the producers would become more efficient and eventually sell at competitive prices.

The challenges that faced Medical Products Ltd were the following:

Unfair competition from international firms including Chinese companies prompted the then Minister of Finance, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, to intervene. He advised the Minister of Health to enable the National Medical Stores use appropriate procurement procedures to award tenders to suppliers using SWIPCO services. 

He reiterated that local firms needed support, and government was awarding 15 percent price advantage to local manufacturers as compared to foreign manufacturers. 

Views from the National Drug Authority were also sought and it carried out a lot of analysis of the gauze absorbent batch No.001 from Medical Products Ltd and made the following observations: 
•	It has low absorptive power and would be rough. 
•	It could be used more as a bandage and for scrubbing scaly wounds. 
•	The manufacturers should submit their characteristics and certificate of analysis to facilitate their assessment.

Financial performance of Medical Products Ltd was also highlighted in the submission of 2002. The then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Ssendawula, had demanded for the recovery of the None-Performing Assets Recovery Trust money from Medical Products Ltd which was a beneficiary, among others, with a deadline to start on repayment. 

Honourable Jim Muhwezi, the then Minister of Health, pleaded for more time to be given to Medical Products Ltd before the loan recovery could be made since the Ministry of Health would soon start buying their products. 

Further consultation with the President prompted the Minister of Finance to allow for more time for None-Performing Assets Recovery Trust repayment, and indeed to provide Ugshs 200 million to Medical Products Ltd for financing working capital.  

Mr Speaker, in our conclusion, we were of the view that with all these vital developments and clear submission from Prof. Omaswa as a technical officer in the Ministry, they found it difficult to stand in the way of government’s policy of supporting local investors.  

The products procured could be used as bandages and for scrubbing scaly wounds.  These are still very vital activities in the surgical operations, which would not render the product useless even if they had been paid for already. The actions could not constitute any serious financial loss.

It is against this background that the committee has made amendments, which I now wish to present as follows:

In the main document that we submitted before, we would urge the House to delete the second last sentence on page 60, which says, “This erratic action caused a financial loss to the Corporation amounting to Ugshs 14,840,000.” Because the products were proved to have been useful in many respects, this penalty will not be a serious one. We, therefore, withdraw it.

 On page 61, the recommendation on top of the page should be deleted and replaced with the following: “The committee observed that because of being enthusiastic with promoting the local industry, Prof. Omaswa was left with no alternative but to disregard a governing of the procurement procedures by pursuing the Board of National Medical Stores to effect payment for the products that had been already ordered.”
  
Furthermore, government should allow its institutions to operate without too much interference.  Similarly, there must be fair competition without some local investors being privileged to access resources with protection from the state. 

The committee further recommends that in future, procurement regulations must be adhered to. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.  Any debate?

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The committee chairperson is recommending the deletion of a statement on page 60, alluding to some loss.  I had a glimpse at the submission of Prof. Omaswa and it stated that this gauze was more costly than the one, which was already in use and yet no fault had been found with that in use.  Now, by pushing for the purchase of the gauze, which cost much more, the taxpayer was being asked to meet costs, which could otherwise have been avoided by extension. Therefore a loss was incurred. I want the –(Interruption).  

THE SPEAKER: He has explained that it was for the protection of the local industry. Sometimes you can incur more expenses so long as you encourage local industries because they will create employment and other things.  That is the reason why they say, “balancing the two”.

MR ODIT: Besides hon. Speaker, National Medical Stores accepted this product on test basis to see whether their traditional customers would accept them.  So, there were no serious losses as far as they are concerned.


4.49
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman and indeed the entire committee for the job well done. I only want to raise a few issues, especially, in regard to the addendum on page 5, where the committee in their recommendation No. 2, says, “They observed that because of being enthusiastic in promoting local industries, Prof. Omaswa disregarded the laws governing procurement procedures by pursuing the Board of National Medical Stores to effect payment."

First of all, the process of procurement of this gauze in question started around 1996 and that is when they started testing the gauze. By the time Prof. Omaswa wrote to the Chairman of the Board of Directors of National Medical Stores, that was in January, 2003, the gauze had already long been procured. 

When I perused through that letter which the professor had written to the Chairman Board of Directors, in his concluding remarks, he raised concern that procurement of the gauze could be ordered for by the National Medical Stores and after getting it into their stores they declined to pay following an argument now from the National Drug Authority that the gauze was not of good quality. 

But the concern of the Director General of Health Services in his letter is and I quote: “In the circumstances, I wish to request the Board of Directors of National Medical Stores to revisit this case and if considered necessary appoint qualified, competent and credible surgeons and nurses to carry out studies to repeat and validate the earlier findings”. So, the earlier findings that he was referring to were those of the consultant surgeons, which were given in a meeting, chaired by the Minister of Health then, Dr Crispus Kiyonga. This meeting was held in November 1997.  

My observation is that the consultant surgeons, headed by the Chief Surgeon gave their technical opinion on the qualities, merits and demerits of the gauze. I only found difficulty in comprehending the reason why the chairman of that meeting, the Minister of Health, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, could invite the consultant surgeons to give their technical opinion or evaluation on the quality of the gauze and also invite the very supplier of the gauze to attend the same evaluation meeting. I think it was not very fair for a supplier of a product to be part of the team to evaluate his own product. Maybe that is where problems started.  

But, Prof. Omaswa in his letter to the Chairman of Board of Directors only stated that he was rather surprised that the opinion of the consultant surgeon on the quality of the gauze could be disregarded. If National Medical Stores found it necessary, then they could constitute another credible team to investigate further on the qualities of that same gauze. So, in his letter, nowhere do I find him directing the National Medical Stores to pay and I thought that particular paragraph on page 5 of the addendum is not bringing out things clearly. 

In the terms of reference of a Director General of Health Services, I think Prof. Omaswa’s letter was still in consonance with his terms of reference that say that, “The Director General of Health Services will coordinate with the National Drug Authority and the National Medical Stores to ensure that high quality drugs, equipments and sundries are available in the country.” 

He did in his letter, confirm to that particular task that if need be to verify the quality of this gauze further, the National Medical Stores could constitute a team. That particular paragraph, Mr Chairman, in my opinion is not representing well the grounds on which Prof. Omaswa had written to the board. It was not to direct or to effect payment, but to revisit the whole matter. I would probably at an appropriate time request that we delete that paragraph from the addendum. I think that is all I could comment in as far as this report is concerned, and the committee has done quite a good job in this line. Thank you.

4.56
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this report. First of all, let me thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for the good work done.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to express my concern about the process of the transaction being reported on which took place sometime from 1997 to 2000/2001. My concern is that since that time up to 2007, the parliamentary committee had not examined this statutory institution. 

The point here I would like to emphasis is that I was at one time a Chairman of the Board of National Medical Stores, and when I went there, I found the case of this gauze which had already been received in National Medical Stores and some of it already distributed to health facilities, but payment was not made.  The analysis of the gauze as stated by National Drug Authority could override the observation of the expertise of the surgeons who actually used the gauze. 

I am aware, but I can be corrected that National Medical Stores is a regulatory authority and it has a quality control laboratory for analysing drugs not medical sundries; medical gauze is a medical sundry. Therefore, for National Drug Authority to base itself on the observation of the gauze and to dismiss it that it will not be of use in surgical operations, I thought it was a little bit of a misstatement.

I would like to support the view of the committee that there was no financial loss in this transaction because the gauze was used in health facilities in Uganda. It is true that it might have been more expensive than the imported gauze, but I think National Medical Stores was following the policy then of protecting local industries.

The last point I would like to mention is that once National Medical Stores had accepted the gauze from the producer, it was by law obliged to pay. I think the letter of the Director General of Health Services National Medical Stores then to pay was just a re-enforcement of the spirit of the law.  

Although a lot of things happened in National Medical Stores, I would like to state in this House that National Medical Stores is one of those public institutions, which is critical in the delivery of health services in this country. I, therefore, would like to appeal to hon. colleagues to look at National Medical Stores as a national asset and not as an institution, which is losing public funds. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara District): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  My concern after reading this report is on two issues. One, on page 14, the report mentions that there is increased activity and volume of stock and therefore there is shortage of storage space at the National Medical Stores and this is a problem. 

Secondly, on page 64, the report ably tells us that there was stoppage of service delivery by the NMS at the districts as this greatly impacts negatively on the lower units who end up having meager supplies of drugs. There was a recommendation that the distribution process needed to be streamlined and harmonised together with the issues of capacity in terms of both humans and vehicles.
 
Every time we are in this Parliament, many Members complain that our lower units in the districts do not have drugs. I do not like to oppose or doubt the statement the Minister of Health made this afternoon that there are drugs available and that our medical personnel at the districts are to blame for the drugs not getting to the population. 

I would not like to doubt the statement he made but the fact is, if this persisted for all these years that there are no drugs in our lower units and the reasons are that our medical personnel at the districts are not collecting these drugs, I would be very happy to know what the Minister has done to ensure that these personnel who do not implement national and government activities to satisfy our population are brought to book. Because it is not fair that our people complain of no drugs and yet the stores are full to capacity to the extent of having some of these drugs expiring.

If the fault is at the districts, I would like the Minister to come up with a solution because - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If I may come in, are these hospitals in the districts given free drugs or they have to purchase or pay for drugs supplied? Could it not be that the resources are the ones preventing these units from stocking their stores?  

MRS BOONA: Well, as far as I know, for example, ARVs are supposed to be free and consequently there would be no reason for the medical officer to say that there is no money to buy these ARVs.
 
MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I think the ministers are here to explain. There is money under what they call credit line, which is normally allocated by government through this Parliament for referral hospitals and for districts hospitals for drugs. All that the districts need to do is to keep on collecting their drugs from the National Medical Stores and then they have the charge on their vote in the National Medical Stores. But there are some districts or hospitals that are not able to collect their drugs and the money remains on their account under unclear circumstances which we do not know.

THE SPEAKER: Are they unable because of transport?

MR ODIT: No, the transport sometimes I think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I can give you experience myself. When this cost sharing was removed and a number of people rushed to these units because they were not expected to pay, the numbers overran these units and drugs got finished. I had personally to buy drugs for these units in my constituency. I do not think there was a free drug and we said we do not have the drug.  This happened.

MR ODIT: No. Mr Speaker, what we are saying is that this is a government programme and in our recommendations - unfortunately honourable members have not had time to be critical. The NMS has vehicles to dispatch the drugs to the districts and to the regions.  Our problem is that sometimes when the drugs are dispatched to the districts, the lower health units may not have the capacity to come and collect them from the districts.  

Secondly, government has given what they call ambulances, but these are pick-ups.  These pick-ups would serve better purposes for distributing these drugs to the lower health units.  The NMS services stop only at the districts. They cannot go down to supervise what is going on.  So, the District Director of Health Services is at liberty to abuse this authority because they are very free.  So, they end up keeping the stock sometimes at the district or they do not even bother to make requisitions for what is owed to the districts from NMS.  

These are the problems and we have looked at it and made some recommendations for the Ministry to help in that area and be able also to decentralise the storage from the centre to nearer to the districts where the users actually exist.  I think that is the difference but there is no question of lack of money for procuring the drugs.

THE SPEAKER: So, we have the drugs –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: The drugs should be here but the question of dispatching them is the problem.

MR SEMATIKO KATENDE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I was once a board member to NMS and a pharmacist by training.  One of the biggest problems of NMS is to combine the two, that is, being a service industry and a professional industry. Most of the drugs in the store have to be paid for even if there is need at the grassroots. That is problem number one. 

The second problem is that NMS stores drugs of other programmes, for example, the Malaria Programme. NMS management would have no control on who is to take the malaria drugs unless the Malaria Control Programme issues it to the recipient.  

The same happens to the Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs). They would keep drugs and it is only a few staff at the Ministry headquarters that can issue the delivery orders.  So, at such times you would find that stock is there and when there is need, the owner of the project would first have to authorise delivery of those drugs.  

That brings in a third problem where NMS would have its own stock, not issued because different programmes have their own stock and in the process some products would be over stocked.  You will find an item like Panadol or Paracetamol stocked by the STD project, stored by the Malaria Programme and even several other programmes like Mother to Child. Therefore, you find one product bought 10 times for almost the same users. So, unless there is proper coordination, certain drugs will expire in stock when there is need for the same drugs.  That is the information I wanted to give.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  It is true that there is a problem with space for storage at the NMS and we are trying to address that problem.  At the moment there is a plan at Butabika where part of the land will be used for construction of a storage facility of medicine for immunisation and that will help to store some of the other medicine too especially, from projects as he has mentioned. 

I think there is a big demand at the NMS for storage, but all this could be relieved if the districts and regional hospitals ordered readily and collected their items readily.  There are trucks, which go to regions, but a truck might leave Kampala, go to Jinja and find that Mbale has not ordered for their drugs.  They proceed to Soroti, and find that Soroti has not ordered but they have to deliver to Lira.  So there is a problem of the district and regional hospitals ordering for their drugs on time and relieving storage space at the NMS -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: They are giving you information to enrich you.

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is still in line with the availability and scarcity of drugs. I would like to bring to the Minister’s attention the plight of people with suppressed immunity who at times end up suffering from meningitis. 

Two weeks back, I was in Kumi hospital and the doctor was doing a puncture on one of the patients. I asked him, “What do you suspect?”  He said, “Well, many of these patients have meningitis, but we just do a puncture because they cannot afford to buy the fluconaze for treatment.” 

So, when we had a meeting in the committee on HIV/AIDS I raised the issue with those organisations dealing with HIV/AIDS. They said that the drug would be available to Ugandans free of charge, but it is due to lack of accountability that the drug is not available.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware, and what he is trying to do to rescue their plight.  Thank you.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for giving information about my concerns on the requisitions and shortage of drugs in our various Heath Centers III’s and IVs. 
 
Finally, about the requisitions by every district, it is true some district medical officers do not quickly requisition for these drugs. I was going to ask our Minister here, since we sit here together in Parliament it would be useful information for us if we got to know which of our districts refuse to requisition for drugs. As a result our people suffer and die and yet we have been assured here that there are drugs for all our people in the stores.  

It is very unfair that the country should import drugs and these drugs remain in the NMS. Some of our medical personnel intentionally frustrate these programmes and our people die from lack of drugs, which are in plenty in the National Medical Stores. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Shouldn’t we end this debate?

5.17
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done that is hon. Odit and his team. However my concern is on page 65 of this report, the second paragraph that says, “Among others affected, the committee looked at the large volumes of redundant stocks of malaria drugs which is estimated to be eight million doses of Homapac, another batch of five million doses being expected and then ten million condoms….” and so on and so forth.  My concern here is -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I thought this paper had been debated and the only item remaining was the response of Dr Omaswa.  We are going to debate the whole paper again. We should clarify on the response of Dr Omaswa and see if there was wrongdoing on his part, or if he was doing his job when he wrote that letter. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: You see the report was given and it made a number of recommendations. There are things that we are learning like, for example that there is medicine but sometimes we incur expenses from our pocket for nothing yet the medicine is there.  I think what is going to happen is that since this was a report by a Standing Committee on the Statutory Corporation and there are other committees which are interested like the Committee on Social Services, because it deals with hospitals and queries of lack of drugs, it will look at this report again and then try to advise those running our services that, “No, your claims are not true, please improve on your system of procuring drugs from National Medical Stores”. That is the purpose of this debate. If we adopt it, other stakeholders in the process will use it.  

MR OTEKAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My biggest worry is particularly on the observations by the committee. They said that NMS Management informed the committee that it could have been a result of government change of policy.

Mr Speaker, the same thing goes on to page 66 on drug expiry in National Medical Stores. Again National Medical Stores Management informed the committee that change of policy towards drugs, for example, the current policy, which favours Coartem against other malaria drugs could have caused the expiry of other drugs like Homapac malaria and so forth. I was wondering why a change of policy abruptly stops the use of other drugs.  

For instance when Coartem was introduced, why couldn’t Coartem continue being used alongside Homapac?  Because as we talk now, in Soroti District, where I come from, Homapac has really helped rescue the lives of children in particular. Local communities now use that and it is available in homes. 

I had my child sick recently at home and I had to go to the community health worker who had to give me malaria tablets. However, that person was saying, “These are the few doses we have and we do not have any more,” yet I see in the report of the committee that stocks and stocks of piles of Homapac are lying in National Medical Stores because government has changed policy to Coartem.  

Can’t government think of shifting to Coartem while also encouraging the use of Homapac in the villages until Coartem catches up? I think we have not even used it for long and they have already changed to another one. Tomorrow the ministry will come with another one and then we shall dispose of those other stockpiles of Coartem.

Fansidar is now lying in stores and no body using it. Is there a way government can make sure that if a policy comes in even the other one continues along for areas where Coartem has not yet reached? My appeal is that can we have policies changing over slowly until the new policy catches up with the whole country?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Dr Mallinga, do you want to answer that?

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We have recommended that gradually we are going to change to Coartem but for the moment we recommend that we continue using Homapac. In fact I encourage members of Parliament to go and pick up Homapac for their constituencies. There is some at the National Medical Stores but first come to me and I will get you a technical person who will direct you to the National Medical Stores to pick up as much as you want of the Homapac.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.  

MR ODIT: Rt honourable Speaker, I think what the minister is telling us will put us in trouble. First of all, ethically we are not trained health personnel. Secondly, I remember when I was chairing the Committee on Agriculture when we heard that in the sixth Parliament this kind of arrangement for the distribution of coffee seedlings.  Members of Parliament picked coffee seedlings themselves and went and distributed them. Some of them actually established plantations in areas where there were no rains.  

The government incurred huge debts because of indefinite distribution. So, when it comes to medicine which affects human lives and members of Parliament have got to go to the stores and start picking them to distribute them–(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Not to individuals. I think they are to take them to their health units.  

MR ODIT: Okay, that will be a very good idea.  Thank you very much.

5.23
MR PATRICK AMURIAT  (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one question to the committee and also a comment particularly on the conclusion in their addendum. First of all, I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the members for the report well written.  

My question is whether the committee felt it necessary to interface with National Drug Authority especially in the matter of the gauze that was produced by a local firm. I am asking this question because this afternoon the chairman of the committee tabled a document here of a meeting on the gauze production by Medical Products Ltd. In that meeting that was chaired by the then Minister of Health, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, there were eminent surgeons including Prof. Omaswa, the chief surgeon. There were also representatives of the National Drug Authority and precisely the General Manager of the National Medical Stores. 

It was from that meeting that was meant to share experiences with the surgeons who had actually been using the local product that decisions were made. I have looked at the minutes of this meeting and nowhere in these minutes did the National Drug Authority raise an objection to the use of this particular gauze. 

It, therefore, disturbs my mind, Mr Speaker and honourable members to see that the National Drug Authority in a letter written several years later raises issues related to this particular gauze- (Interruption)

MR SEMATIKO: Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member on the floor that in industrial manufacturing and pharmaceutical industry par say, clearance of any product is per batch. We can say, for example that National Drug Authority authorises Medical Products Ltd Uganda to produce gauze for use in Uganda but each batch is checked. What happened is that the products of Medical Products  Ltd were okayed for use in Uganda. Even the surgeons tried and checked and it was okay but this specific batch in question was bad. That is why I don’t agree with the committee to say that there was no financial loss because this particular batch could not meet the standards of good gauze. 

That is why it could not be used by the surgeons to absorb blood. Other batches were okay. That is why in other industries like the food industry if a batch is bad it is poured. They don’t put it on the market. National Drug Authority had cleared the gauze from Medical Products Ltd for use but this specific batch was bad. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my colleague who appears to be an expert in this area for that information. I would like to find out further whether the practice in his profession is that a product is used before it is tested. Because in the area of training that I come from, you test the product for its suitability for the use for which you are producing it before it is brought out on the market. I think this should remain a standard practice in the medical area, in the engineering area and in all the other fields that require manufactured products. (Interruption) 

MR MALLINGA: We slightly diverted from the issue of Dr Omaswa’s involvement. Initially, Dr Omaswa was the chief surgeon in the country, and it was his responsibility to advise National Medical Stores on the standard of gauze especially. If he said this gauze was good the other doctors backed him and they said the gauze was good. The question raised at Dr Kiyonga’s meeting, was absorption. 

I talked to the manufacturers including, Dr Kagonyera and Dr Muguma. They told me that after that they sent their engineer to Germany and they were given a chemical to add to the gauze to improve the absorption. Eventually, Dr Omaswa was surprised that NMS was refusing to purchase this gauze. This was because his duties as Director General of Medical Services included, among others, coordination with National Drug Authority and National Medical Stores to ensure that high quality of drugs and equipment of sundries are available in the country. That was Dr Omaswa’s responsibility.

Secondly, he had the responsibility of giving tender advice to the government on all health technical matters as the ultimate authority in the medical profession, and he was carrying out those duties. There was no one else qualified at the National Medical Stores, including the director, to render an opinion on this particular issue. So, I would say that our committee did a wonderful job, but at the end for them to interdict the director of medical Services and say he was over enthusiastic on the marketing of local- I don’t think so. He was doing his work. 

Secondly, our committee should have investigated a little bit closer what is going on concerning foreign products in competition with local products. The foreigners push their products a little bit far. That is a mild way of saying they pay bribes in order to over compete the local products. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should complete this debate.  

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much honourable minister. You almost said it all and it goes to support what I was trying to say. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to refer to a statement on page 5 of the smaller document, which attempts to portray Prof. Omaswa the person as somebody who easily yields to pressure. This statement is contained in the very first paragraph on the concluding statement contained in the addendum and it says, “With all this vital and clear submission, Prof. Omaswa found it difficult to stand in the way of government policy….   of supporting local investors as a technical affair in the ministry. I think this statement to say the list is unfair to Prof. Omaswa as a person. 

I know Prof. Omaswa, I regard him very highly, and I know he is professionally well-equipped; he is also a morally upright person.  I would like to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, you are spoiling your arguments because you seem subjective. I think what you can do is to comment about the assessment, because their conclusion depends on where they place the priority; should we support the local or we should go with – that is a question of judgment. As far as they are concerned, maybe local industries should be secondary to the others; that is a question of judgment.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for that guidance, Mr Speaker. Personally, having read all the documents, I believe that decision to utilise the locally produced gauze was based on consideration of the number of factories that were used and I do not believe that Prof. Omaswa, was operating under pressure other than on the basis of scientific facts and evidence for that matter.  

I would like, therefore, to plead with the committee that this particular paragraph be deleted. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, you have expressed views on this report. The report will have to be utilised by other stakeholders; there are views expressed by the committee and views expressed by you.  Therefore, when we adopt this report, we will be subject to these comments and whoever will be reading the report will also take into account what others have expressed other than the members of the committee.  

Is it not fair for me to put the question on the motion to adopt the report subject to other comments that have been made?

MR ODIT: I think there are areas, which need some response from the minister as well before a question is put –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but these will be policy - that will really be followed later, can we exhaust all the comments that are meant to be made on this report? No. 

MR ODIT: For me, what I would say is this, as a committee, which is responsible for accountability; our emphasis is on the procurement procedures. One may be a professional, you may give your opinion, but the concern is at the laws of the land; the law should be respected. There is no dispute about the opinions. 

So, the question - and most of our funds are getting lost through procurement procedure that is why we are emphasising that the law should take its course. I think that is the only area, which I would want to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you see, even in procurement, sometimes they may say, the highest bidder may not be the most successful, there are other considerations taken into account. 

So, I put the question honourable members. We definitely – you were right initially –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, arising from our report, we ask the Uganda Revenue Authority to carryout tax audit to the firm, which was engaged to collect some debts on behalf of National Medical Stores and they evaded taxes. 

URA has submitted their report of uncollected taxes from Mr Rugasira and Company Advocates from 1999 to 2004 amounting to Ugshs 189,115,959, and I would like to lay this on Table

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is their assessment, but it is subject to other rejoinders. But I think you are right, they have done that and the taxpayer may contest the assessment but we accept the document. 

So, honourable members, I put the question on this issue of adopting the report of the committee for which we thank the chairman and members of the committee, but as I have said, it is subject to the other comments that have been competently given.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Odit and members of the committee for the work well done. Prof. Anokbonggo raised a question that why did it take so long? We are clearing the backlog and the Eighth Parliament will really be up to date with these kinds of reports. Thank you very much.  

With this, we come to the end of today’s Business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, and you know the item, which I put on the agenda raised by hon. Kamya; that will be dealt with on Tuesday. The House is adjourned until then.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 6 March 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

