Tuesday, 9th March, 1999

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the 8th day of March is observed as the Commonwealth Day.  The Head of the Commonwealth, who is Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain, normally sends a message to member countries to mark the occasion. It is the practice in many Parliaments within the Commonwealth to have the Queen's message read to Members of Parliament on every 8th day of March, if Parliament happens to be sitting.

I have received the Commonwealth Day message from Her Majesty the Queen through the Secretary General of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. It should have been delivered yesterday but we could not, because yesterday was a Public Holiday, but even if it was not, we normally do not sit on Mondays.  I will therefore, proceed to read the message of the Queen as follows:

"A message for Commonwealth Day, 1999.
From: Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the Commonwealth.  

Music is the theme for Commonwealth Day this year. Throughout our 50 years, 54 Countries, people will be celebrating and making music in as many ways as that or more.  Of course, people of different generations and cultures tap their feet to choir to different beats, but for all of us - young and old - music is an essential part of life for parties and entertainment, for ceremonies and celebrations.  For music knows, no differences of language, no national boundaries, and because it has become such an important part of our cultural lives, it is a universal means of communicating with each other.  The variety of music illustrates our diversity - it is common tones and harmonies bringing us together just like the Commonwealth.

In 1999, we celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the modern Commonwealth.  50 years ago in 1949, India became the first Republic with its own Head of State to be a member of the Commonwealth.  That pave the way to membership for many other countries especially from Asia and Africa all sharing links of history, the belief in democracy and a will to work together.  

Today the Commonwealth includes over a quarter of the world's population - spurning differences in race, creed and language but sharing the same aspirations towards a better life.

This November, the leaders of the Commonwealth States will gather in South Africa for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.  I look forward to joining them there as they discuss the challenges of the new millennium as well as celebrating the Commonwealth achievements in its life so far.  Let us then, in this Anniversary year, look both backwards as well as forwards as we mark the Commonwealth Day.

While we continue to enjoy our favourite music either by making it or listening to it, let us celebrate the vigour and creativity that the next generation will bring to their music making.  That is just one of the bones that all the young people of the Commonwealth will share together on this special day.


Signed:	Elizabeth R.
		
Dated:    8th March, 1999"

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON SWITZERLAND INTERNATIONAL PROCUREMENT COMPANY CONTRACT WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA.

THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (MR. Ruzindana): Mr. Speaker, I wish to present the Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Procurement Contract between the Government of Uganda and SWIPCO, of Switzerland and the United States.

The Report is rather late, but there may be some advantages to its coming late because it has given us enough time for evaluation of the operations of the contract.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as a result of coming a bit late, there are new developments which could have necessitated a review, but the Report was already laid before the House and it had become  property of Parliament and therefore, the Public Accounts Committee could not review it before the Report was debated. I therefore present it in its original form. Whatever developments have taken place will be brought to the House by either the Minister of Finance or Government.  
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that PAC did not investigate the benefits of the contract but the process of procuring the services of SWIPCO. That is what we did pronounce ourselves on.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the new development I am aware of -(Interruption)

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, in this House we are referred to as honourables and we have to conduct ourselves as Gentlemen and Ladies.  We should be properly dressed before we come to this House.  Is the hon. Minister of Finance in order to have dressed in the way he is dressed?  

THE SPEAKER: I hope you have directed your mind to the Rule that talks about the very subject you are dealing with.  I think that Rule does not really, in my opinion, specify what type of attire one should have but it merely enjoins you to dress decently.  

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of November, the Public Accounts Committee started inquiries into the transparency of the process of awarding the contract for Procurement of goods, services and works, in the whole of Government and the Parastatal Sector, to a foreign Company called, SWIPCO.  

Inquiries started after the matter was brought before the House and after documents relating to the contract had been passed on to the Public Accounts Committee by a Member of Parliament while the Public Accounts Committee was in Session.

When the Public Accounts Committee started receiving evidence and testimony about the contract, some questions were raised as to whether Parliament should handle such an issue and if so, whether the Public Accounts Committee was the right Committee of Parliament to handle the matter.  However, there is no doubt that Parliament has the right to look into the manner the Executive performs its functions, including the way government awards its contracts.

Article 90, Sub-article 3 of the Constitution provides that the functions of the Standing Committee shall include, "to assess and 

