Wednesday, 6 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA BILL, 1995
     
(Debate continued.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support the Bill.  Before I give my contributions, allow me to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Minister for Information, particularly with regard to the opening of Arua FM Station.  Also I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the Minister for Animal Industry and Fisheries for having introduced the UHT milk. 

Mr Chairman, some time back, I rose here and complained about the shortage of milk in this country and the introduction of UHT milk has really solved a major problem, particularly those of us in Arua, where we do not have enough cows and children in the hospital have been suffering, as you know Arua Road is dusty and most of the passengers were just using this milk, I think to clear the dust.

Finally, also I would like to express my thanks to the Minister for Internal Affairs in anticipation, because, we have been raising the complaint of police station which got burnt long time ago and he promised that perhaps during this financial year, he will look into that.

Coming to the Bill, yesterday, I was a bit brief on what I had suggested.  Information serves many purposes; it is not only broadcasting, but the programmes on TV matter a lot.  Some back we used to see these cinemas which used to move around in counties, showing films of agriculture, health and other things.  Now, the people at the grassroots were aware of some of these activities.  So, I am suggesting that the video system should be introduced.  If you introduce this per county, definitely, the information will reach the grassroots; covers so many areas.  I can briefly mention what I had suggested.  

I propose the Video system should cover the following areas, agriculture, you can show farming including growing of coffee, coffee being recently introduced in Arua, it is really due to financial problem, it really should disseminate the information. But if we had this system, we would get these feelings from Coffee Development Authority, put in counties and people come and see.  Areas like fruit trees - pineapples, and other things for development - cotton. You know cotton declined a lot in the North.  Now, as cotton is coming, if we really go to counties and show these films, these people will just catch up easily.  Under political events, definitely, there are a lot of programmes which matter, for example, when there are international Conferences or the address of His Excellency, the President in a Press Conference, some of these messages are really very educative and definitely if we establish this system, people will just equal face to the use; now, the people who stay in the cities, they repeatedly see these things while the grassroots people are ignored about this. If they do not know how a President looks like.  So, this will cover areas like present our addresses both in national and in the international, various conferences and so on and if you come to education, -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for this House to continue debating this very, very important, Bill, when instead of being the required quorum, we are 37, is it in order, Mr Chairman?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  According to our Rules of Procedure here, the Chairman is satisfied that we can continue.  Please proceed. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, for example, with education, there are just so many activities, like sports, music and so on.  Coming to health, it could cover immunisation, the AIDS programmes and so on, because, in AIDS, there are a lot of contradictions.  For example, some people are advocating for condoms but in other religions, a condom is not recommended.  So, by showing these films how a person suffers, with time and dies and so on, I think this will really instil a message in the minds of the people.

Mr Chairman, coming to Section 19, the Council may invest money of the Council in securities, issued or guaranteed by Government or in any approved - this is a Council which will deal with regulating the operation of mass media electronic. Now, if we subject such Councils to investment, I think they are partly becoming commercial, but according to my experience, usually parastatals do not involve in any investment.  If they make a surplus, it goes to the Treasury, if you see parastatals invest; I need to be informed, which parastatal has invested successfully. So, I think this tendency should be avoided and I know who always raise this; these are mainly, who are professional accountants, because, accountants mostly deal with trade, with a business.

Licensing of TVs, Mr Chairman, I support the idea, but the Ministry should look first how many TV sets we have in the country and if we put the charge, will it really cover the cost of collection?  

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, to help the Member on the Floor and others who may be raising the same question, I would like to give them the information that as of our last imperial count of the sets in the country, there are about 200,000.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  As they are 200,000 and you put a charge of about 10,000 per TV.  Let me see you just collect about 2/= billion, but will that really cover the cost, because, Mr Chairman, my fear is that, we some times impose these taxes, when it comes to collection, -(Interruption) 

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, the project of TV expansion is progressive, we do not at any time envisage that the present set of the numbers available, will go and cover the TVs requirements throughout the country, it is progressive, even if we are able to access all corners of the country with audio Visual Signals, it does not guarantee that in each and every corner of the country, such signals will be received, because, the buying of TVs is an individual matter, the power for running such TVs does not fall within the responsibility of the Ministry of Information and I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, with this information that progressively, starting with US$million or with UShs 2 billion, is a good step if all the money, at least most of it from those sets could be secured and if he recalls, furthermore, I made a statement to the House some time last year, I do not quite remember the date, but it was sometime in October, to the effect that we were under going a project with a South African Company with regard to disseminating TV services throughout the country.  That again, envisages progressive stages, on non-impact basis.  So, I would like to assure him, depending on which part of Uganda he comes from, I know he comes from Arua, - Arua is very much on top of our priorities with regard to accessibility of audio visual signals.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, for the information, Mr Chairman.  Finally, I would like the Minister really to try to take what he has said, at least choose about two counties particularly, the Kilak county, because, hon. Elyau seem to understand what I am talking about; perhaps we try to experiment on that, and see the result.  I think it will really serve the purpose.  With these few words, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR NTIMBA  (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill and I would like to congratulate the Minister for eventually bringing this Bill to the House.  One of the reasons why the Minister wanted this to be passed to the House, was that, it has been necessary that we re-introduce the licence fees which is very necessary in as far as earning revenue for the Ministry is concerned.  Now, many people tend to get scared or get put off at the idea of the re-introduction of licence fees, but I hope the hon. Members, in the process of mobilising constituencies, may be able to explain to the people that the fees realised from the licences is meant to improve the TV services in the county.  

As a member of the Sectoral Committee concerned with information among other things, me and other members of the Committee were impressed at a detailed briefing by the Minister for Information recently and this briefing was accompanied by film slides, showing a comprehensive programme on the expected expansion of the UTV services throughout the country and I wish other members of this House who are not in the Committee had the opportunity to see that, so as to be in a better position to sensitise their masses on the importance of paying the licence fees, so that the services could be improved.  May be it is not too late for the hon. Minister to arrange for the Members of the whole House to see these films strips and slides concerning the programme of the expected expansion of the TV services in the country.  

Having said that Mr Chairman, I would like to go on to Clause 20 which talks about the Financial year of the Council.  I notice that the financial year of the Council starts on the lst January and ends 31st December each year.  I was one of the people who were participating in the discussion of that, but since we discussed this long time ago; since that time, new ideas have developed and I was wondering as to whether it would not be better for us to synchronise the financial year of the Council with the traditional Government financial year, which starts on the 1st day of July and ends the following June.  But may be the Minister has special reasons why the Council here has got to start in January, I do not know whether this is meant to synchronise the licensing year, which I believe will be in the first day of January to December.  

However, I hope the Minister will be able to throw some light on that when replying to our discussions.  I would like to talk about the importance of regulating Video and Cinema vis-à-vis the morals of our young generation in this country.  I think hon. Members, Mr Chairman, will agree with me, that over the last 20 or so years, our children have been born and brought up in an era of violence and it is my sincere hope that with the increased television services, we will be able to ensure that we do not encourage things like violence, sex and things of the kind on our television sets.

Finally, Mr Chairman, I want us to look at the lst Schedule on page 16 of the Bill.  Here, it talks about the minimum broadcasting standards and it is expected that a broadcaster or video operator should ensure that the programmes broadcast are not contrary to public morality, they do not promote cultural violence, et cetera and they are, in the case of news broadcast, they are free from distortions of facts; they are not likely to create insecurity or violence or free from political partiality.  

Now, on second thought, after we had discussed this in the Sectoral Committee, an idea came to my mind and this was a result of having listened to a radio programme by one of the private radio stations.  Here was a panel of people discussing about the behaviour of a certain Head of State, which State is friendly to us here, they were talking about how that Head of State had beaten up his Vice President and they had a programme which was meant to high light the best Minister, the worst Minister of the year, the best Head of State and so forth and so on and speaking as a veteran diplomat, myself, I was a little bit taken aback to see some Ugandans and non-Ugandans on that private radio tearing two African Heads of State to pieces.  Those Heads of State may have done something that may be abominable bad, but it is really our business to interfere into the internal affairs of those countries and I have a fear that if we are not careful with our TV and Video programmes on this national TV, we could engage in acts that may provoke diplomatic protests from friendly countries -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my Friend hon. Ntimba that in a democratically free world, a lot of talk shows are aired on radios and even on Television.  So, it is not a very big surprise what the so called Gang on that FM Station pulled up; the Presidents you are talking about, it is a simple matter of freedom of expression and freedom of speech which I think should be viewed from that angle rather from the other which you are talking about.  Thank you.

MR NTIMBA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his useful information.  So, to really cut a long story short, I would have been happier within the Schedule if we had included something to say to the effect that this broadcasting, video and TV programmes should be such that, they will not bring about misunderstanding between Uganda and the rest of the world.  I do not know whether this is covered in some Clause (e) which talks about quote,’Is free from political impartiality’ or not, but maybe the Minister himself, being also another veteran diplomat, might want to give some thought about it and help us cover that aspect.

With these few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill and I again congratulate the Minister for bringing the Bill to the House.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to thank the Minister for information for bringing up this Bill, which I believe will enable the Minister to operate outside what many people call Kampala.  If you are up country, radio reception in most areas is extremely faint and I hope after this Bill has been put in place, many people will receive radio Uganda and hopefully, Uganda Television.  I have a few specific comments to make on the Bill.  The first is on Section 3 sub-section (ii) which talks about the Council shall before issuing a licence under this Section, take into account the following:

 (a) That the applicant in case of an individual is a citizen of Uganda.  I do agree with one or two people who have questioned this, because, we have an Investment Code which says, people are free to invest in any business venture and if you put this limitation, then you will have contravened the spirit of the Investment Code.  I do believe this must have been an over sight, Mr Minister and probably against the Constitution.

MR ETIANG:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank the member for giving in for the information I would like to offer him in this regard.  The same question was raised yesterday by the hon. Abu Mayanja with regard to this provision. I would like Members to look at that sub-section (ii) as generally intending to effect that whichever licensee is given a broadcasting licence, will be subjected to Uganda law; that is in respect of 2 (a) (i), (ii) and (iii), that all those are brought under the Uganda law.  Now, to the best of my recollection, when the Committee was deliberating on this, they thought that they would give an added advantage to Ugandans over the other applicants in respect of these applications, but here is an opportunity for Ugandans to participate most effectively in this area of electronics which is generally foreign to us in terms of manufacture of component parts and what have and if somebody wanted to use our territory for the practice of these electronic media, that there should be a special encouragement to Uganda citizens to be given that advantage, without in any way prejudicing the Uganda Investment Act.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much for that information, Mr Minister.  My thinking was, that if we are going to give preferential treatment, it may be in form of taxation rather than registration, that was my thinking.  

The second point, Mr Chairman, I was going to talk about is sub-section (v) which is on page 5 which says, a person who contravenes Section 3 commits an offense and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than Ushs 10 million and not more than Ushs 30 million and to imprisonment for a period of not less than 2 years and not more than 5 years or both and the question I am putting on Ushs 30 million.  While we are legislating here, we must not cause inflation ourselves, Ushs 30 million as a fine is not one of those easy things that can easily be reached; I do not know how many people will raise a fine of Ushs 30 million.  Anybody in that venture is likely to face imprisonment, meaning you are not giving an alternative.  

Mr Chairman, the other sub-section I would like to talk about is, they are saying, the Media Council shall not register any station, apparatus under sub-section (i) unless the proprietor of the Station for apparatus has supplied the Media Council with the following particulars relating to the person who is to be the producer in charge of the station or apparatus.  What I have in mind here, is, part (a), which says his name and address.  Now, my understanding of how these stations work is that one day, you have a producer and for some reason, when you do not agree, he quits.  Do you close the station, go looking for a producer, first go and register, furnish the names and then the Council agrees, yes, this is the right person to do production and then come out after month on air?  I am looking at this as an inconvenient way of doing business.  

Recently, the Monitor had producers, reporters and so on, they disagreed amongst themselves and people went off.  I think in my view, that was healthy and that looking for other reporters and producers and editors should be immediate, sot hat the public can be informed.  So, in this case, -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that this sort of Clause is not rare; the spirit of the Clause is to ensure there is expertise as far as the electronic media is concerned.  In the Pharmacy business, you cannot run a Pharmacy, unless you have a pharmacist.  This does not mean that if your a Pharmacist absconded or decided to leave you, you close the Pharmacy; you look for another and begin producing.  Thank you.

MR ETIANG:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in addition to what the hon. Luyombya has given the hon. Member on the Floor, I would like to draw his attention to the fact that - that Clause he is referring to should be read together with Clause No. 6 where it is proposed that whoever is a producer, must not be less than 18 years old, must not be of unsound mind, or a person who is not ordinarily resident in Uganda.  So, it is very imperative appointing a producer that the proprietor of the station must submit all those particulars to the Council for that purpose.  Incidentally, for producer in the electronic media, read Editor in the Press Media and I do not anticipate a situation, Mr Chairman, where a Producer or otherwise, an Editor is appointed today and leaves tomorrow, I think it takes a little bit longer than that.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the Minister for that information, but what I am thinking about is, initially, for registration purposes, may be that will be applicable, but subsequently, nothing is mentioned as to how one will operate, because, if the first Producer leaves, then it appears you have to go back afresh when the Station is closed.  This is what I read from the provisions of this Article.  The other part that I have a question about is Section 5 which states that a proprietor or a producer of a broadcasting station or disseminating apparatus shall:

    (a) Ensure that what is broadcast is not contrary to public morality and I have a big question. What are the boundaries that we shall observe to say this is morally upright, this is morally unacceptable to this public.  I do believe the Minister will appreciate this question and that there should be provisions to indicate the boundaries that should be observed in producing films and plays and so, because, this is going to apply in our own theatres, how much thigh can one expose, for example, without embarrassing an audience, how much of the body can one expose and that is in films. So, the boundaries this public morality should be clearly defined for producers not to find themselves fighting Government or the law for that matter; and lastly, Mr Chairman, Section 6, talks about a person not to be appointed a producer of a station if, he does not possess the requisite qualifications prescribed by the Media Council. Are these requisite qualifications, because, if I remember the Journalists Bill that we had, did not have these qualifications for electronic media, they were not there.  Are they going to be prescribed now before anybody operates a station or are they going to say these requisite qualifications are not adequate and therefore, be used as a flimsy excuse somebody to have his Station registered.

With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I wish to thank you.

MR S. SEKITOLEKO  (Bungangaizi County, Kibale):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I wish to thank the Minister for bringing up this Bill. My main concern in this Bill is mainly taxation.  Taxation is too much on some of the items, for instance, we have taxation on those shops operating video tapes and films, we have taxation on TV repairs and so on and probably, they left out also taxation on radio tapes; it is too much.  One must know journalism though mainly it is a service profession, it has a very big duty to inform the people on behalf of the Government, it has a very big duty to educate the public, it has also a very big duty, recently, to mobilise, to use the usual the recent now to mobilise the public and finally to entertain.  Now, we should everything possible to make sure we minimise our taxes.  If these taxes go up, people will be discouraged to venture into these undertaking.  

Moreso, we have a very big system of collecting our taxes.  The system I am thinking of, that in normal cases, it is not that a certain tax is levied on something, say licence that you go and pay immediately, there are certain corners, you have to go and fill papers and so on and be told that you better go back; you are not going to pay for your taxes.  For instance, to buy a licence for a car in this country, you have got to pass about 16 stages. So, Mr Chairman, this section on taxes on radio shops and video shops and so on, should be scrapped. 

Mr Chairman, I want also to comment -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I wanted to inform the hon. Member on the Floor through you, Mr Chairman, that broadcasting and buying equipment for broadcasting is a very expensive and up dating affair and therefore, people who want to enjoy these plays and television, must pay for them in order to get the best producers and the best plays and films in line and therefore, for him to suggest that the financial provisions which seek to raise fees should be scrapped, does not seem to be very realistic in light of what the services we expect from the people.  So, presumably, he might want to offer to the Minister what alternatives he would have in order to cost and finance these very expensive services.

MR S. SEKITOLEKO:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman, I did not really say scrapping, but I said, for instance, there is already a tax on a shop operating on videotapes; one has to pay a Trading Licence, that is enough.  What is special is there in selling videotapes?  He has also to pay duty, he has to pay so many other taxes, why add on another tax, is that necessary?  Four more, these video tapes probably the person is selling are helping to educate our people, they are about farming, why should you put another tax on -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, unless the Minister is very careful with taxes, we may find that some of the programmes are educational especially for the young generation.  So, these must be catered in the law, otherwise, those programmes which may be produced overseas may not be availed to our future generation.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to give information to the hon. Member on the Floor.  The payment of taxes or licences under this Act presupposes that we are paying for quality.  As of now, the present Uganda Television, the programmes which are aired are mediocre, the standards are very poor, I will give you an example, for instance, on Sundays, when people are relaxing, they are putting on a French film, how many people speak French in this country.  So, for the whole morning, you are watching, but you do not follow.  Then on another occasion, they will pick programmes which are boring or at 10.00 o’clock, at ll.00 o’clock, they put on football programmes, when it should be a programme which should send you to sleep.  What I am saying is that, to impose a tax, we must pay for value and as of now, the value is not there.

Lastly, the information, how many people view TV or how many people have got TV sets?  You have not yet popularised TV sets, you have not yet extended services to rural areas, now, you want to impose tax. Mr Chairman, a tax should be after providing TV sets for coverage of the whole country, then you can start thinking of imposing some tax, but as of now, it is premature and un called for.

MR S. SEKITOLEKO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I wish also to call on the Ministry of information to exploit other medias like the Cinemas and so on.  For a very long time, farmers in this country have been used to these cinemas and have done very, very wonderful work in the villages, especially ‘twogeddemu’ on the new crops and so on.  But of late, our Ministry seems to have very much neglected this media, the sooner it comes in the better for us.  I wish also to note with some disappointment on the areas -(Interruption)

MR ETIANG: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I share the views expressed by the Member on the Floor, but the rural areas particularly schools should be availed with the Movies, such as are educational and here, I listened to the Member, he appears to be answering the question he raised earlier about taxation.  For his information, my Ministry has film Vans which are in the compound up to this minute when I am speaking here.  It is because we do not have money, it is because, we cannot make do with the budget that we have that these Film Vans are in the Ministry at Nakasero, rather than up country and I would like the hon. Member, actually, perhaps to take up the invitation put by Prof. Kanyeihamba as to how else we should finance these services without taxation.

MR S. SEKITOLEKO:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman, I was saying Sir, that I often get disappointed at the way we use our time on radio.  This one concerns both commercial on our Government radio, but let me concentrate on our Government radio.  If you take the whole total of our airtime on radio, it is mainly entertainment - entertainment in tribal languages, entertainment in what, and one wonders what exactly we are promoting.  In this country, we have quite a number of problems, we have problems in agriculture, and we have problems in our education systems.  

Most schools in the remote areas could be easily reached through radios, even some Primary schools, pupils who are going to sit for examinations and so on, could also get a chance to hear a certain test which was given to a certain best school on the radio; these sort of programmes, but none of them.  When they are done, they are done in the wrong time, you find a farmer’s Programme being put on radio at 7.00 a.m. in the morning or at 9.00 a.m. the farmer is already on the farm, you do not expect that farmer to go with a radio on the farm.  The farmer has the best time when you can put on radio, for instance, in the evening when he has already come back from the farm, why do you not do that?   

So, these sort of problems are big, we have got to see that we assist our people, we educate our people, we use the radio to educate our people, not only to entertain; an advise to the commercial radios, it is becoming too much.  You tune on a commercial radio from morning up to the evening, it is only entertainment.  They should also do a service since they are nationals of this country, they should also come in to assist together, to work with us in the development of this country, by also participating, putting on some programmes of educating the people of this country.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO  (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr Chairman, I rise to support this Bill but MrChairman, before I do so, there is a message which I got from my constituency, which I would like to deliver. Mr Chairman, five days ago, the Katikiro of Buganda, went to attend the last funeral rites of a relative on Bugala Island, where he originates.  

You might recall Mr Chairman, that Katikiro Ssemogerere comes from Bugala Island, that is where his roots are as indeed is Paul Kawanga Semogerere and the gentleman on my left.

It is a very sad situation, because, when the Katikiro arrived on the shores of the Lake on the main land, the shore he happened to be on the opposite side of the channel, just some seven miles away.  The Katikiro was told after waiting that he would return, then later, he was told that it lacked fuel, he produced some money and fuel was brought and sent over I believe by canoe to the ferry, then he waited.  Still, the ferry did not turn up.  Eventually, he got information that it had other official duties to do.  It plies only between two points and it has no other direction to go to.      

Finally, when the day was worn out, he was informed that he was not desired to visit the Island. Not only that; the people who had come with him as normally would be the case, as the person of that importance had gone as an advance party, and those ones were already on the Island. The Islanders tell me that even those were prevented from even meeting the people who had gathered to see the Katikiro, not only that, they were even prevented from eating a meal which people from several Islands had contributed to prepare for this important party.

Mr Chairman, the language in which they told me to condemn this act, would upset this House and in my own vocabulary, I even have a shortage of how to express the indignation of the people of the people of Sese Islands on the act.  They told me to declare, that it was by Ugandans that NRM came into being, it is for Ugandans that it has flourished and it is the Ugandans that will declare its end.

These are people who have suffered many different things ever since Independence; neglect being the greatest of those things.  We were agog here for a whole month last month over the affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups.  It is a pity that the people who made the Constitution, it never occurred to them to include among marginalised groups, whole Districts.  These are the words that I have been told to deliver as a message. 

Mr Chairman, I said, I stood up to support the Bill.  This Bill comes towards the end of this House.  This House has been described as being the most enlightened ever since the British LEGICO folded business and handed it over to us in 1962.

Mr Chairman, this House has been described as being probably the most enlightened since Independence and as such, I would be unhappy to see that absurd laws emanate from this House.  Accordingly, Mr Chairman, I apply the stretch of imagination to the Bill we are debating and I will mention some of the things which brought up my curiosity.  

First of all, looking at Clause No. 3, which requires that for one to operate, to install a Broadcasting Station, that is, a radio, or TV Broadcasting Station or any other apparatus, one needs a licence.  So, the first question was, what then is broadcasting?  I looked in the Clause No.2 which explains what broadcasting is; looking at it carefully, one will realise that it talks of sending, communicating and sending signals for the public by electronic apparatus.  It is not by a big stretch of imagination that one would include that these traffic lights on the roads actually send signals by electronic means to inform the public go or do not go.  So, under this definition of broadcasting, the traffic lights would be included. The electronic gadgets in the car which you switch on to indicate you are going to turn right are not gadgets which inform the public that you intend to turn right or to turn left.  Those under this definition will also qualify under Electronic Media.  

Mr Chairman, shall I conclude on -(Interruption)

MR GASATURA:  Point of information.   Mr Chairman, I just wanted to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the whole House, that there is a definite distinction between electrical and electronic apparatus. The traffic lights, the indicators on his car are clearly electrical.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, electronics I believe, my Friend here who is more enlightened in that area than I am, is only an extension from electricity.  I do not know -(Laughter)- whether he seriously believes that you would have an electronic gadget working without electricity.  

Mr Chairman, I was enumerating the other things.  When in future our train stations get these directional lights which are again electronically controlled, those two, will qualify as electronic media as indeed, as the neon lamps, these neon lamps you see them blinking on the walls of building, advertising lamps, buy Bata shoes, they are best for school kids.  Those under this definition all are forms of broadcasting; it is only necessary that the Minister finds a way of limiting what he actually intends to say.  Now, in order to set up those stations Mr Chairman, you need a licence, that is 3 (i).  But while the Council is considering granting a Licence, there are things it must take into consideration.  

Hon. Rutaro here, mentioned a few; I will not repeat the question on the citizenship; let me go a little further down on the question of whether the applicant has adequate, technical ability and has adequate technical apparatus to be able I believe, to broadcast.  What business do we have to tamper with this investor who has used his money to buy the apparatus and we are saying, is it adequate; what do we care for?  It is his money, whether he buys our licence and then he finds that his gadgets cannot work, it is his business, we should be concerned with something else - has he paid the fees for the licence and if he has, or well and good!  This where we should be concerned.

The next, which is (c) down the line, is the Council should consider the location as well as the geographical area which will be reached by the Broadcasting Station.  I am saying, okay, fine, today, I come around and I apply for a licence to set up a radio station on Bokasa Island and I declare to the Council that it is my intention to broadcast to the Islands around here.  On that basis, having also been satisfied that the apparatus is good and everything else which they want, may grant a licence, I proceed to set up the Broadcasting Station, a few months later, the people to whom I am broadcasting, mainly the fishermen, tell me, that when they sail a little towards Kisumu area, for whatever purpose, they do not get the signals so well.  So, I get some more money, take it to my station and boost the broadcast by some degree, so that it will reach, consequently, it stretches all the way from Kalangala to Kabarole, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  By way of point of information, I would like to inform hon. Mayengo that coming from what he has just said, the American Government at present is in a big row with the Cuban Government, because of what he has just been talking about or something similar effect, because of a radio station which is stationed in Miami being owned by exiled Cubans staying in Miami, and spreading propaganda in the main line Cuba. If he is intending to put a radio station in Tsetse Islands, he may well carry on with it, but putting to account what I have just said.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  I do not know what to say, may be I should quote a diplomat who was talking about Mexico in relation to the United States.  He said, “poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the United States”.  Mr Chairman, the point I was drawing is that, unless you license the television or the radio stations and put a limit to the powers going to use to broadcast, it is no use talking about the geographical area; as indeed, when one who already holds a licence increases the capacity of his broadcasting - the broadcasts will easily go beyond the area beyond the area that one talked about and probably without need for an extra licence.

Mr Chairman, let me now look at the Clause which I detest most.  I expressed my feelings when it first appeared and I am going to say the last about it this time.  This is Clause 24 - licensing of TV sets.  I sat down and as I said, I applied my imagination; I came up with more than 20 different questions on this business of licensing TV sets.  They range from the minor to the significant.  Mr Chairman, the television sets being licensed, how are we going to do it exactly?  

While going through the airport in Kigali, I admired a little television set and I buy it, I fly and bring it with me.  At the airport, if taxes or duties are demanded I pay those and proceed to my home; it is mine.  A neighbour comes and says, oh, what a nice little T.V. you have!  And I say, my friend, I got this for my wife to watch while she is in the kitchen.  He says, no, since you travel more than I do, why do you not sell it to me and you will get another one.  I say, fine Ushs 50,000.  He pays and he takes it.  According to Section 24, 1 - because he did not have the viewer licence in order to be able to sell it that already is a cry.  Mr Chairman, when do you get the viewer’s licence therefore?  You get it from the Media Council.  Is the Council going to establish an office in Kalangala, Koboko, so that these ones keep on issuing these licenses?  If such offices are established, is it that the office in Koboko will licence a T.V. set?  What then do we have to grantee that the same T.V. will not appear in Kitgum for licensing by the branch office of the media council?  What method do we have for the Council to use to determine the mysterious method the T.V. formerly licensed in Koboko crossed over to Kitgum.

After I have acquired a licence, and I have the T.V. set in the House, how am I supposed to display the licence?  Suppose an officer of the Council walks by my house, he hears some noise inside, walks in and he sees my children watching TV so, he asks the children, has Mzee got a licence for this TV set?  The children say, we do not know.  What he is supposed to do - leave a note to the children that Mzee comes to the Police Station on the Media Council tomorrow morning to explain whether he has a licence or not?  Or are we going to hang the licences in the sittingroom or wherever the TV set is in the same way the shops do their licences?  Or, is it that we have the type of licence stickers that the motor - car use because a motorcar has a sticker which you put on the windscreen.  Should we put these stickers on TV Screen so that when an officer comes up he sees immediately that this TV set was licensed? In any case, how does he walk into my house?  Was he a Peeping Tom?

Article 27 of our Constitution ensures the right to undisturbed peace in one’s home; undisturbed the right of free from interference in the privacy of one’s home communication, correspondence and other property.  If this guy just walks into my house to find out whether my television was licensed or not, is he contravening one of my basic rights?  Is he engaged in an act of invention of privacy?  Or, is he going to plead that since Clause 27 of this Bill absolves him from any offenses both civil and criminal as long as he does those in the official course of his business?  Is he going to say I was on official business?   Where is my right for privacy in relation to this Peeping Tom from the Media Council?  

Mr Chairman, Members have talked about what value do we have in T.V.?  Entertainment, they have mentioned; information, is well known; education as well.  Now if education can be obtained from the T.V set, and Mr Chairman, we do not forget that the shortest article in our Constitution is number 30; only seven words.  ‘All persons have a right to education’. Probably another short one is number 7, which says, ‘Uganda shall not adopt a state religion’.  Now, if all persons have a right to education, as hon. Members have been saying here, and if television sets can educate me, now, by imposing this licensing, are you not contravening my right to education?  One could easily say, all people have a right to freedom of movement.  Motorcars help people to move around.  Should motorcars not be licensed because that will contravene their right to movement?  No, the purpose of licensing motorcars is not so much intended for that; it is intended for the safety of these gadgets called the ‘Motor cars’.  In the case of TV sets it is not the case.  

So, I still think that this business of requiring a licence for the TV set is one way of contravening a basic right Ugandans have.  I do not exactly know how - one Member there said, that it was a means of raising money.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Minister for Finance is here.  I believe he could have some other ways of raising money and in any case, how many TV sets are around here that really produce enough money to out weigh the interests and rights that I have talked about?  I remember the last couple of years, some people on the Island of Lamba approached me and said, the World Cap is going to be played.  Will you be able to give us a TV set - a small one, so that we watch the World Cap?  I said, fine.  We went to Sembule and bought one T.V. set.  We plagued the battery out of my car and they sailed to the Island to watch the World Cap.  It was a day’s notice.  Where would they have obtained the licence for viewing?  But then on the other hand, if after they had viewed it and the whole community; by viewing it without licence, shall we take all of them as being criminals?  Or who indeed shall we take?  The RC V Chairman?

While a TV set is in my house and I am enjoying it, the neighbour says, since you are going away to the main land, why do I not borrow it for a week?  And he borrows it.  If he is found watching it, although I had a licence to watch it, he does not, is he not a criminal, under Clause 24?  

Mr Chairman, I would like to plead to the Members of this House, let us not make Laws which will turn half of Ugandans who have television sets into criminals because everybody who will not obtain a licence will be a criminal unless he just keeps the TV set.  Mr Chairman, I am afraid.  I find it very difficult to reconcile myself with Clause 24, with the need for licence.  Mr Chairman, I support this Bill minus Clause 24.  Thank you.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, I would like to start off by trying to put some record right.  I did not want to give my Colleague from Kyamuswa a point of information or order; I wanted him to finish the deliberation.  I am glad, Mr Chairman, that you have given me chance to speak soon after him.  

I would like to put the issue of the Katikiro’s visit to Sese Islands in a proper perspective because I was also equally disturbed when I saw the Ngabo Report on Monday.  I would have brought this issue to the House even yesterday, but I had sought the indulgence of Mengo to get the facts from the Katikiro who came to the Islands in my Constituency. 

It will be very good if the newspapers who normally come here and who normally visit areas to give factual reporting.  When I read the News Paper, it referred to a Ngabo Reporter with no name.  So, I could not follow up who gave the information.  But Mr Chairman, when I was given a rumour that the Prime Minister of Buganda was Coming to Sese Islands on the 1st of March.  I thought I would have got a Programme as a Representative of this Constituency.  But when I contacted Mengo on the Friday, which was a day before, and requested whether it was not pertinent for me to have been officially notified of the Katikiro’s visit in my Constituency, they took it up and said, that that was a mistake.  But all the same, I asked them what was the programme.  I was informed, Mr Chairman, that on that Friday, a delegation which was supposed to go with the Katikiro was leaving on Friday.  But the Katikiro was already in Sese Islands on Thursday.  So, I left Kampala on Friday and went to Bukakata, arrived there in the evening and found the Katikiro’s group entourage at Bukakata, looking for the Katikiro.  I was told that the Katikiro left for the funeral rites on Thursday, with hon. Paul Sewanga Semogerere and they were to come back and because he did not find the entourage at Bukakata, he had gone back to Masaka.  This group which arrived in Bukakata before me, had gone to look for the Katikiro so that he could meet them and they go to address the seminar on the 2nd of March.  But it was so disturbing to see a message in Ngabo saying that the Ferry did not come to pick the Katikiro, but when the Minister of State arrived they sent the Ferry to collect him.  I found the Ferry at Bukakata waiting for the group which had gone to Masaka to look for the Katikiro who had come back from the funeral rites, but was waiting for his officials with whom he was supposed to go and address a seminar on Saturday.  But erroneously, the Ngabo Newspaper said the Ferry did not come to pick the Katikiro but was sent deliberately to collect the Minister.  

I come from Sese Islands, and I almost go every weekend, and I rarely use the Ferry because of the inconveniences I get out of it.  How come somebody in the newspapers assume that they could not come to pick the Katikiro, but they came to pick me up when I normally use my own small boats?  I would like to put one thing clear, Mr Chairman.  I am glad that hon. Mayengo was not in Sese Islands though we were expecting him.  Hon. Namugenyi was there, the RDC was there, Chairman RC V was there, the whole Executive was expecting the Katikiro.  I went there to receive the Katikiro.  The Katikiro would not come.  The letter of the Katikiro to the RCD was that, I am coming for the funeral rites, from there, I will come to Kalangala Headquarters and address the seminar the following day.  

Mr Chairman, I wish the Report hon. Mayengo was giving could have given us the facts of exactly what happened.  The Katikiro’s vehicle crossed to Sese Islands and it was supposed to go to collect him from a place called, Malanga.  But the vehicle went to collect him as organised because he went by boat.  It is easier to reach that place where he went by boat than go by road.  The vehicle found trees had already fallen across the roads.  By the time they finished cutting the trees, the Katikiro had given up that the vehicle was coming.  So, he had gone back to Bukakata by boat.  The vehicle was shown that that boat you see in the middle of the Lake is taking back the Katikiro to Bukakata because he was not sure that the vehicle was coming.  But instead of giving us facts, the whole issue has been made into a saga and the reporting has been so long.  Mr Chairman, I was just waiting to talk to the Katikiro so that we could rectify this anomaly.  I thank you very much.

Let me go to the Bill.  Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about Article 5 (a), which is about, Public Morality and Exposure of the outside Cultures.  
Public Morality which has been expressed in Article 5, today in Uganda is going to be a very difficult to judge.  We have been exposed to so many things here and many people who assume they have been to school, they see and judge aspects of morality differently.  

I happen to go to some country to represent this country and after a one-week’s seminar, the organisers thought they will take the African Ministers to an entertainment place.  To them it was an entertainment place, but to us it was of sin.  So, it depends on how you look at it.  The Minister of Information knows very well that in this country they have been showing a programme called, ‘Riviera’ on UTV.  And I used to hear that some of the grown up children, even used to escape from school to come back to see the programme of Riviera.  The interest of our population today especially the young generation is very different.  We have had instances at the tax park where there have been immoral acts and people turn to immoral acts for entertainment.  I do not know what immorality is going to imply in this Bill.  

I would like to talk about the producer - Article 6.  Here in this country we have got people who have got talents.  People who leave a senior secondary and start programmes and when you talk of ‘the person shall not be appointed producer of the station if he is less than 18 years of age’ most of these talents could be below this.  But when you look at the explanation or the definition of the producer, I do not see how you can prevent a talent of 16 years to give a programme on broadcasting because of his age.  He has got to sit on his age until the age of 18 to be allowed to produce; to be a producer.  

I would like to go to Article 22 and Schedule 1, Part 1.  I am glad the Minister has brought up this issue about the standards at licensing of the video as well as areas where they show cinemas.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, if you move around Kampala, which I have done during my urban tours and urban development schedules; you find so many video halls, cymograph exhibitions in all sorts of funny structures, and I am sure Members have read catastrophes that -(Interruption)- China with entertainment places where they collapse and so many people die.  But here in Kampala and around, if you go and look at the video places which the City Council should have demolished, where there are no sanitary facilities, where they have put amidst residential areas and there are inconveniences but they are operating, I think if this Law comes to be, let us have these facilities put licensed where they are not going to be un- inconvenienced so that we do not find all sorts of structures where our own children go to be demoralised, allowed to be operational centres.  

Mr Chairman, one time I remember the City Council was trying to demolish and abolish most of these video cinema halls, but the upper hand over run them and these video centres have remained.  Let me hope the hon. Minister of Information will manage to curtail the catastrophe that this country is likely to face.  

Mr Chairman, let me wind up by the word about licensing which my Brother hon. Mayengo talked about.  I remember way back in the 1970s when I came back here with my TV, as soon as I came they said there is licensing for TVs. and I failed to know insult to pay for that licence.  Whoever had a TV set knew it was  obligatory to have a licence to view your Television.  Even if you said that this thing is coming back, many of us used to pay, know why you are paying.  Unfortunately, somebody will watch a T.V. like we are watching CNN without paying.  But those who are looking at the Multi-Choice have paid for the service.  When shall we realise that if you want something good, you have got to have it and pay it?  If we are going to improve on our service, how shall we improve on them without paying a penny?  

I hope those who are against paying for licences to watch a T.V. set, one time the services will go down the drain because you want everything free.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR HAJI SSERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, this Bill came in a right time when Government had already liberalised some businesses.  I want to thank the Government for having done so as far as T.V., Radio Stations, Industry are concerned.  I want to have this information passed on to the Minister.  I do not know whether he is aware that he is going out of business very soon.  

When you sit in room in the evening, and you view the programmes on our TV you really wonder where we are.  Other programmes on TV and Radio Stations of the Commercial Agencies in this Country are far much better than ours.   For this reason, I want to support this Bill so that at least we are in a position to collect money and have our T.V. and Radio Programmes put in order so that Ugandans enjoy the facilities of our Radio and TV Stations.

A Radio and Television of Uganda, you find a programme which can come almost weekly and sincerely it is disgrace to see such a programme coming on every now and then.  At 11.30 p.m. yesterday, hon. Mayengo mentioned, ‘Mind Your Language.’  This programme comes in every day, and we are wondering, are we getting this Programme free as a donation?  Do we have to pay some money in order to get some programmes?  If yes, why do we go on for second hand programmes which are already dated?  Please, Mr Minister, Ugandans are fed up with programmes on the Radio.  

Secondly, when you tune your radio, someone comes with the news, he goes on giving you LC elections which are normally taking place all over Uganda and it is more-or-less a personal announcement; they are not actually news.  I am asking the Minister now, if you can revive the methods of getting better information, please do so because the service we are getting from you Ministry is outdated and people do not enjoy the services at all. 
 
Mr Chairman, I now go on that we are supposed to have programmes which are educative and informative.  But I am asking the Minister, through his director of information, what sort of programmes does he give us; those which are educative to our people?  We have children who are under aged and they are supposed to listen to the radio to get the information and learn something from the programme.  But when you look at the programme and do not have anything to educate the children.  

I now go to up-country viewers and listeners.  Quite often Members of this House have raised the issue that most of their up country stations do not get the signals from Radio Uganda.  I am just trying to find out with the Minister when are we going to send signals to upcountry stations so that our people we represent do enjoy?  The people in Kampala are the only people getting the signals from the Radio Station, TV.  What programme do you have so that at least people upcountry do enjoy the programmes on our TV and Radio?

I go to Broadcasting Council.  Government is informed that many hon. Members of this House have not been able to get to sit on different appointment ever since they came here.  You find some others sitting from five to six different boards.  I am asking the Minister what criteria do you have so that so and so is appointed on the Committee?  Because many of our Friends here have never been appointed on any Council at all since we came.  Now the House is almost getting to an end.  Now, I am asking the Minister, if you can have the names of our Friends who have not been able to be appointed on any Council so that you appoint them on this Council.  It does not matter whether they work for three or four months and then we go.  But at least they should have the chance to serve their nation on this Council.  The entire country is wondering whether we have special people to be appointed on these Councils.

On the appointment of Members, Article 10 (g) says, ‘a Member from Ministry of Culture should be there’.  That is true and I fully support that because when you look at the video and radio stations, we should have someone from the Ministry of Culture who knows what actually prevails the country to guide the censorship board if it is at all there to assist in getting proper video and TV programmes.  

Finally, I want to find out what was the purpose of getting one Member to sit on the Council from Uganda Revenue Authority.  I do not see the purpose because if tape comes in, they charge the duty and they are assessed.  Why should we have someone from Uganda Revenue Authority to sit on the Board. We should at least have someone from the T.V. and Radio operators who are having different sessions instead of getting someone from Revenue Authority; I do not see the purpose.

Mr Chairman, TV licences - this I fully support it.  I have already mentioned that it is only because we do not have enough funds in the Ministry of Information, is the reason why we are getting sub-standard services.  If we charge the T.V licences, possibly we might be able to get some good programmes being purchased by our Ministry.  What we have to do to advise the Minister, is methodology of collecting revenue.  But at least it is better that we allow him to collect revenue so that we get up to date programmes so that they are aired and viewed on our programmes.

Finally, I want to find out Mr Minister, what is happening at his Headquarters, because whenever I go there, I find that the area is bushy.  Why do you not have your area cleared?  

With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MARK TIVU: Mr Chairman, I support the Bill and add my voice in congratulating and thanking the Minister for having established the F.M. Station in the North Western part of Uganda.  I request him to implement more of his Budget proposals and other parts of Northern Uganda especially Karamoja because Karamoja is very unique and they need to have special problems from the Karimojong.  I request that things should be more autonomous other than depending on the programmes from the centre because most of the people may not be listening to programmes which have been held in other languages.  

The Bill really is in aid to the growing people.  I have a story whereby a boy went to school and never reached the school.  The father went and checked in the school whether the boy was there, and discovered that he did not go.  So, in the afternoon, when he came, and asked the child whether he went to school.  The child said, yes.  He said, be serious whether you went.  The boy was still trying to lie.  The man gave the boy a slap for having lied.  But this boy jumped on the table and wardrobe and landed on the man’s neck, and told the father that this is exactly what I learnt today.  That one he learnt from the video place.  So, I do not know whether that one is education or what.  

MR MAYENGO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to get clarification from the Member on the Floor as to whether he is certain the kid did not learn that from mchaka mchaka.

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, I am a graduate of Kyakwanzi and we were not taught to do that kind of bad habits.  But the boy said that that is exactly what he learnt today when he went to the video show, which is a manifestation of the kind of learning our youths are getting from the video places.  So, in relation to that Mr Chairman, I think the Bill is appropriate and it will help to improve the kind of source we shall have to our public so that it is a kind of learning and good entertainment for the development of society.  

The culture in our videos, as many Members have see, is really totally killing the culture of Uganda.  I know Uganda lives in different cultures in diversity. But now, the foreign culture especially, the Zairian music - there was a time I went to the field with my brothers; we were trying to clean under our fields, but I noticed when the boys were handling the hoes, there were digging as well as dancing.  So, I was wondering what kind of growing is this.  You are digging as well as dancing simultaneously.  Which means you are not serious with working and your mind is somewhere on entertainment.  So, I think in this relation, the Bill is very important to ensure that our children should learn the appropriate things to help the community.  

However, Mr Chairman, the Bill assumes that privatisation is already encouraging wild establishment of broadcasting and other gadgets in all parts of the country.  I think the Minister very well knows the state of our infrastructure especially in the rural areas.  So, this Council, I presume we are establishing it to help Kampala and maybe other nearby towns.  Otherwise, what pertains in the rural areas, the Bill may not be applicable, and I see not correlation and coordination between the Council and the local authorities. How will the Council liaise with the local authorities to ensure proper monitoring of those, especially the TV operators.  Maybe after he has been given the licence, how are you going to ensure that the man is putting on a correct thing which is lawful.  What about if he changes.  You know, it is going to be the market forces that determines what is going to be screened on his video or so.  Because if he puts something dull, he may not get customers.  Therefore, she maybe for the sake of getting money to put some of those things which she feels can attract to get money.  I think there is need for the Minister in future to take deliberate policy in promoting local cultures and also spreading more of these gadgets by Government.  I still feel that we should have a mixed economy other than emphasizing so much on privatisation because some of these private entrepreneurs will not go to places which have not the basic economic infrastructure like power and developed routes.

Much as the Council is good, and is going to assist I think there is a general trend in Government coming up with the culture.  I know it is the democratisation of management process; that we want to democratise the management process.  But I have the feeling that we are going to put in place amorphous bodies which maybe like parastatal bodies and which will consume the meagre resources that the country has, which could alternatively be used for other developments.  I feel these Councils are going to deliberately put in silence Government Departments which used to perform certain activities which this Council is going to perform.  

Therefore, I am forced to ask, what will be the roll of some of these Government Departments whose rolls are now being performed by the Councils.  So, I think there is need for Government to review whether really Councils should be everywhere and at all times.   Because they are equally expensive, at times they are amorphous, and at times they exist in name.  At times their sitting is not there.  For instance, I sit in a Council or a Board and for the last five minutes we have been in the Board it is amazing to note that you sit, the Manager of the Council will tell you, our problem is finance.  The first Agenda is always finance.  Now, I am questioning, why do we go and set very many Councils which we are not able to sustain and finance as a country.  Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to support this Bill.  I would like also to express preservation regarding the demand for individuals who are going to invest in this field to necessary have to be Ugandans especially at this time when we are busy trying to entice investors to come to Uganda and I would imagine this is one of the areas which would be quite attractive to investors, and will put a bar against their coming in.  I will not say much, I think the Minister has listened to other Members who contributed.  I believe he will explain to the House the need for this one.

On the question of public morality I believe there must be a definition elsewhere in the Laws.  If there is not, I think it is important that this is properly defined to guide people who are going to be involved in this business to know how far they can go on this question of public morality.  I am wondering, perhaps the Minister will explain when he comes to answer; whether by passing this Bill we shall be in a position to control some of these dancers.  Some of these dances I think go a bit too far.  I hope the question of public morality can be applied in controlling some of the people who are coming to Uganda often and put up dances which are totally foreign to our culture here as Uganda.  

Again talking about morality, I do not know some of these adverts.  I think much as we may need these adverts which are very open when we are fighting the AIDS.  But I think there are some adverts which could do a bit of harm to the population.  Hon. Members may know that advert where a young man has an argument with his girlfriend and is telling the girlfriend that the rest of his friends always have sex with their girlfriends except him.  At the end of the day, the message which is being delivered is that you should not have sex before marriage.  But I am not sure whether the argument by the boy cannot really persuade young people to have sex.  

So, when we have adverts of this kind, I think we must not simply look at the final message.  We should also look at the contents of the message so that it is not conveying message to some parts of the community.  So, some of these things, I believe, when we come to implementing the Bill, the Council will have to reconsider some of these matters.

The broadcasting council, I see that the Minister is including one distinguished Lawyer, I do not know why. I have nothing against Lawyers; why not a distinguished anybody else?  A Church man for that matter, or an engineer or anybody else?  So, I did not quite understand why particularly this distinguished Lawyer was necessary under (e).  So, I think the Minister will have to explain a bit on that one.

In section 16, the Minister is saying that ‘the staff referred to under this section shall be seconded from the Public Service after the Minister has consulted the Minister responsible for Public Service.’  I should think that this Council should have the powers to appoint the staff on merit from wherever.  I do not see any good reason for the Minister having to second staff to serve in the Council.

Section 18, I think is a little bit ambiguous.  The Council may borrow money for the performance of its functions on terms that maybe agreed upon by Government.  Now, Government is big, who in Government?

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, arising out of what the Member has just raised, I would like to find out the status of the Council.  Is it a Corporate Body?  What is it?  Because I do not seem to see it in this Bill so that it has got the capacity to borrow money in its own right and also to employ. Can I get some clarification from either the hon. Member on the Floor or the Minister.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I am sure the Minister will give clarification when his time comes.  

Mr Chairman, let me turn to the First Schedule.  These are the minimum broadcasting standards and it reads, ‘a broadcaster or video operator shall ensure - (a) that any programme which is broadcast ... (that one already has been raised).  Then (b), ‘…does not promote the culture of violence and ethnical prejudice among the public especially the children and the youth’. 

I do not know, whether some of the programmes which we receive by way of sate light, by way of CNN and so on, how this particular provision will be applicable in those circumstances.  Or in case of News Broadcast is free from distortion of facts.  I think here again that any programme which is broadcast in case of news broadcast is free from distortion of facts.  Of course distortion of facts is a matter for argument; the person giving the facts may not say that he is distorting them.  Those are the facts which he has.  I think people who have to enforce these standards will have problems of trying to define these things.

The next one is not likely to create insecurity or violence, but free from political partiality.  Now, this one already has been raised.  But I think this is another one which the Minister will have to explain.  Basically I do not have any violent objections to the Bill. 

One of the issues is these newscasts.  The news casts sometimes not really news; it is a more-or-less a report or reports - a catalogue of things various people in the Government have done.  It seems as if as far as radio and TV are concerned, other people do not make news other than people in the Government.  To me I think this is a matter which the Minister should take seriously because more and more people are switching over to private radios and TVs because the information or news which is supposed to come out is more-or-less things which people are going to find in Papers anywhere, and you do not really get news other than to tell you of certain things that have been done.  Of course they always start with the President, then Vice President and then the Prime Minister, and so on and so forth, before they think of anybody else who has done anything of interest.  Mr Chairman, this to me makes it a bit not interesting because once one particular person is mentioned, you can almost tell who is going to be mentioned next in the News Cast.  I do not know whether the Minister get to these instructions.  But I think this is the matter which he should attend to.  

Mr Chairman, also these people who read the news, it is interesting; they do not appear to have taken seriously the lessons they had in school about summary.  You know, if he giving news, he will give almost word by word.  What the Minister of such and such has said, and he said this and that.  It takes almost five minutes listening to one particular Government Official regarding that particular occasion.  I think a lot of that could be summarised and much more news can be incorporated in the news cast rather than giving extremely boring lengthy statement of what has been said all the time.  I think this has got to be looked into and be corrected.  

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you and the hon. Member on the Floor for giving way.  I want to give him information to advance his point that last night’s news, there was an item involving Her Excellency the Vice President who happens also to be Minister of Gender, and one item they mentioned her name properly and they said she was Vice President, she was also Minister of bla bla bla...  Then the second item, she was also involved in the same story and they said Her Excellency hon. Specioza Kazibwe who happens also to be the Minister. As if they were two people they were talking about.  Is there reason why once they have introduced her in the same news, they do not go ahead and say, Her Excellency or the Vice President without having to recite all her various titles, every item that appears in the same evening in the same news.  

That really is a very important point being made by hon. Mwandha that some of our news readers seem to be just parrots.  Obviously these stories are compiled by different reporters and they are brought to the News Room, and when they get there nobody seems to look through and say, I do not have to repeat this, I do not have to say this, I have already said it.  Can we not have people with minds of their own to be news readers?

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to further inform the hon. Member on the Floor that sometimes these reporters and the news readers have a problem.  This problem has been in this country for quite a time except that they are just getting liberated.  The various officials, Minister alike and the rest, used to harass the reporters and news readers as to why they were not given enough coverage and to the extend that poor men and women were being threatened to lose their jobs if enough coverage of a particular official was not broadcast or given.  Thank you.

MRS OKER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform you and the entire House that we in the Sectoral Committee on Social Services for the last three years, we have been emphasizing this point and it is in our recommendation about this particular news readers where you find the same thing is repeated 24 hours.  This if you look in our report, you will find that it is clearly spelt out and it is surprising that this thing keeps on just coming back as if the Minister is not aware and he does not present his policy statement to us and we give him the report.  Thank you very much.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to confirm or deny this.  On inquiry I have been told by the News Readers that whenever they have received the text for reading, they are not supposed even to correct a mistake.  They are supposed to read the text as presented.

MR OKWERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to say exactly what hon. Rwakakooko has said.  Sometimes Government officials when they have a function, they rush with their text to the news readers have got no time to acquaint himself with all text before he goes to the News Room.  He reads as it is presented to him there and then and he is under the instruction - read it three times.  The man has no time to go through it.  If you look at the people who read News on Sanyu or Capital Radio, it is well summarised because they do not work under pressure.  These people work under pressure and I do not want them to be blamed.  It is authority who put the man under pressure who should be blamed and he should correct the way of behaving.

MR ETIANG: Mr Chairman, I would like to give certain information following the genuine concerns that my Colleagues have expressed about this matter regarding News Readers.  Do I give instructions?  I think that was a question rightly put forward by hon. Mwandha.  No.  Mr Chairman, I stand to be corrected by my Colleagues presently in the Ministry and those who are close to it, that I have never at any time, on any day, in respect of any event given instructions as to how News should be prioritised, read or delivered.  

What has happened, Mr Chairman, since I have been there, is that I have instituted a daily Board.  This Board meets at 3.00 p.m. as I explained to the Social Affairs Committee, regardless of a public holiday.  The purpose for such a meeting is first of all to look back at to what has happened in the last 24 hours which needs to be improved and also to prioritise news such as is available to us at that particular point.  Of course the incident about the dullness of the news.  We have very limited sources of the news, and I think this is very well known to the Members of Social Affairs Committee.  Writers who used to be connected to us now have got to depend on the courtesies of New Vision, which although it is a parastatal, but it is also in competition with radio and TV.  Now, the facilities themselves in either TV studios or in the Radio are appalling.  Mr Chairman, I have had to invite Members of the Committee to tour these studios.  Even the First Lady has toured these studios to the extent that she was so shocked that she actually gave us some assistance in terms of furnishing.  

I have tried to argue a case for enhancing the Budget for the Ministry time and again, as hon. Mary Oker realises with not effect.  I have left it in their hands, they have made recommendations, they have come into this House, they have not had the effect on their demands on that.  Now, news readers are not part and parcel of established staff.  News Readers are freelance and incidentally even any Member of the House would like to participate in news reading.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to tell us whether Uganda is the only country where newscasters and news readers are not professional journalists.  Occasionally, we have had news readers being out casts when reading news and in that case it has rendered their news almost useless and probably that is what Members are complaining about.  Of late Sanyu TV, for example, has come out with very nice news readers and news casters.  They do not even look in their text.  They just have their story, they read their story while looking at the camera and everything comes.

MR ETIANG: Mr Chairman, I do not have the competence to judge Uganda as being the only country in which as the hon. Member has said, that news readers are not professional journalists. The issue of professionalism and journalism has been debated in this House at length I will not go back to that. But I am aware in the many stations such as I know that news reading is a freelance business. You may have one person who reads more often than others, but that does not make that somebody a professional or a dedicated or a fully time employee in regarding to news reading. 

Mr Chairman, I think hon. Rwakakooko raised a question as to the texts that are given before the news reader to read, that he must not change a word or so.  It is not correct that he should read even mis-spelt words.  But he should read exactly as it is.  It is the content of the news that a news reader may not change, and this is on the instruction not of the Minister, but of the board, it is the content.  Now, if that has been carried out to say, it means also not changing the commas or dotting (Is) and the rest of it, I think it is an exaggeration, hon. Rwakakooko and in fact, I would like to encourage some of you to visit us during news time reading. 

A point has just been made here about reading news while looking at the camera.  A short while ago, I was saying that we are limited on equipment.  We have got a tele-Prompter problem Sanyu has. Now you have got to come to the Studio to understand and see what a tele-Prompter is. Even you can read newspapers once you have a tele-Prompter, we do not have in UTV. Now what would you expect; and I think I would like to invite my hon. Friend to come and visit us and just see the conditions on which we work so that you can actually better appreciate.  Because when we talk here about limitations in the logistics and other things, a point is given that perhaps we are exaggerating -(Interruption)

 The news readers not being able to summarise news is also on the basis perhaps of the longevity of the news that we have.  It is true,and this the point that has been made about the privatisation of news, the President first, the Vice President down blind**.  But this is a public Media.  This is the only Radio and TV station.  What would you expect to do on the behalf of people. That privatised news items are about; what has the government done today?  Now, what is the government?  The government is the President, the Vice President down and the Members of National Assembly. Who for the time are NRC Members. That is why UTV and others are called government departments or institutions.  

MR KIRUNDA KIVEIJINJA: I would like just to re-enforce the information given by my Colleague as a former Minister of that Ministry.  That  every organ has got it different parts that perform different functions; and as a government, the mouth piece of government is the Ministry of Information; and the performers of the government are the Ministers and Presidents, and the government and the country pays for them to do that job.  So it is not out of point for the country to be told what the people who were put in those places are doing.

MR ETIANG: Thank you very much indeed.  May be I can sense a problem among some of the Colleagues making this contribution.  That is to say, if you judge the performance of UTV or Radio Uganda or the Ministry of Information, strictly on the basis of the news hour or the half hour news, then you will have got us all wrong. Believe me we have got Parliamentary hours, we have got extended news where this House is given full coverage so that you really get out of monotony  which might have given you the impression of finding the news to the Presidency or the Vice Presidency and various Ministers.  I can assure you that a lot comes out about this House for example and further down below in other programmes, and I would like to encourage you to watch not only news at 10.00 O’Clock or 8.00 O’clock but also the news hour in its extended form.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Members who gave me information.  I particularly, I thank hon. Dr Kanyeihamba for the information he gave which was going to be my next point but that indicated very clearly that, since we went to the same classes, and did English together, he read my mind and knew what I was going to talk about. But, Mr Chairman, I do appreciate that the Ministry of Information has problems so has everybody including other Ministries.  But I think some of these are small basic things which could be put right.  I cannot understand even where there is no news, for news to be created.  You get a situation for instance some foreign envoy goes to see a President and somebody says, a Foreign envoy came from a particular country and delivered a message to the President in Rwakitura and the contents of the message were not disclosed, and then he says those Presidents were so and so and so and so.  I do not know what the newsman is trying to convey to the public if the contents of the message were not disclosed, I do not know whether he is trying to say that the President should have actually disclosed what the contents were.  

GASATURA: Point of information. I hope I am not reading hon. Mwandha’s mind.  But the most perhaps nauseating item is when somebody comes from the USA or Europe and delivers 400 dollars to the First Lady or some other dignitary or the President. Just for that two or 300 dollars or even 40,000 dollars to go on the news item as this having been donated to the people of Uganda.

MRS KALEMA: Further information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Much as I agree with the trailing of the debate from hon. Mwandha about emphasizing what is not necessary to be emphasized on the National Radio and Television, I would like hon. Gasatura to really mention when First Lady ever received 400 dollars and this went on the TV and Radio, 400 dollars, I cannot remember that.  I think that is an exaggeration. Thank you.

MR ETIANG: I thought, Mr Chairman, since this is about news broadcasting rather than the Bill which I will have the opportunity to reply. This particular question is really outside the context of the Bill, and that is why - you may excuse me if I stand at the gate to guide. A question indeed has been raised which Members may take seriously that what is the point of saying that a message from a such and such a country was delivered to the President at such and such place contents were not disclosed.  

Mr Chairman, it is strictly within International protocol, you never disclose a message given to the Head of State.  That state matter which as likely, is come from another Head of State or Government; and it is not common for this to be to be made news.  In newspapers they respect even what is in the message or it may be about a neighbouring country or it may be about a certain regional or bilateral matter. That is as much as a hot item relating to such delivery is made. 

I would also like to get to the point that was made about repeating the news or why should it have been made that the President is reported up on.  It is important for people to know their President has done something today.  The mere fact of receiving an envoy from Over-Seas tells more than the story does. First of all, it tells that the President is somewhere doing something, Secondly we are in touch with outside world on state matters.  These are things which are very important you may not appreciate it as such, but it is absolutely important that the country is informed as to the functions of the Presidency.  I wish I could tell you something about what goes on Vietnam Palace with regard to that institution in Britain related to this.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I once again appreciate the information given.  But you know, this matter is just in our neighbouring country, even Mukapa got so disgusted with the way these people were writing about him.  He had to call them to order, and I think some of these things which appear with a bit of an intention could be cleaned out of our news.  For instance, why is it necessary that when they refer to our President they should always mention all his names; Yoweri Kaguta Museveni each time and you will see this repeated in the news about six times as if, having said it once, the person who is listening is so stupid that he will not remember the other two names; and I do not know how the Minister would feel if every time we refer to him we say, Paul Orono Etiang each time we refer to him.  Many people have more than one name.  But I think let us have some clean way of presenting information so that it does not look so ridiculous.  Because foreigner coming here and listening to the name of the President repeated in one news item six times and 3 names, he will wonder what is going on.  So, these are some of the things which I thought should be cleaned.  I think with these comments, I would like to support the Bill, and thank you for giving me the opportunity.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, there is one issue which was raised which has not been responded to by the hon. Member and if was not able then the Minister. I asked a fundamental question.  What is the status of the council being proposed.  Is it a cooperate body, is it a department of the Ministry of Information, so that it should have the capacity or not have the capacity to borrow money? Or to engage directly the staff or to get seconded officers? I want the status of the council.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think since the Minister is not yet to wind up, he will have to do that during the time of winding up.

DR LUYOMBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I also stand to support this Bill.  This Bill is another manifestation of the fundamental change the NRM Government has brought to this country.  Mr Chairman, I am saying this because, I happen to be the commissioner on the Human Rights Commission, and while investigating a case involving a Director of Television, Late James Gogi, and looking into the reasons why he could have run into problems with Amin’s government. 

Something was suggested that, at one time he tried with some friends to set up a Broad casting station. At that time, government thought this was a monopoly of government, and it would be criminal for anybody else or any other organisation to involve itself with Broadcasting.  So this Bill is a break away from that sort of thinking. (Applause) 

It was also common knowledge in Uganda that, for any new group to take over government violently, the only proof was to capture the capital, capture the Post Office and capture Radio Uganda.  Because Post Office and Radio Uganda were the custodian of information. In the modern world it is not quite so.  

Mr Chairman, this Bill is in conjunction and conformity with the liberalisation policy. That people are free or organisations are free to invest anywhere.  Dissemination of information being one sector, and competition is healthy.  I have listened; Members have been talking about the monotony about programmes on National TV and Radio. I swear with the same sentiments, you hear a piece of news being read over the Radio over two days and yet it is still called news. But once you have many other stations, where you can turn to for the gesture of the news and then you turn to something else, people will have a chance to have variety; and this Bill is bringing that.  

So for that matter, I would like to congratulate the Minister upon having brought up this Bill. However, I would like to caution that, the council should understand and know that, technology in many fields is changing very rapidly, and they have to catch up with these changes. Sometimes if the legislation is too rigid, it may not give a leeway for flexibility. 

Once we have various bodies investing and engaging in broadcasting, it will be a survival of the fittest.  They will be fighting for the market share definitely; and therefore if you look at the first Schedule part 11 where it says that a broadcaster or video operator shall ensure that the programmes that are broadcast are balanced to ensure harmony in such programmes.  I think this is not really a minimum standard or concerning ethics.  It is a matter of economics; we do not need to legislate for such. If somebody’s programmes are not balanced, you lose out. 

Let me talk briefly on the taxation and licensing. It is a pity that there was a breake. When Uganda Television was introduced in this country, importation of television sets was a monopoly of the Uganda TV sales, and it was easy to monitor the TV sets and know which and, therefore, to whom they were sold; and therefore you could follow the licensing and collection dues.  But over the years, lots of Television sets have come in as mixed cargo and in all sorts of ways, and it is going to be an up hill task for the council to monitor and register.  Because if you to licence you will have to compile a register. They are going to have an up hill task for this.  In some homes you may find that there is a set almost in every room.  In other areas you may find so many sets in a community centre.  

I would like to advise that probably the council should take this matter cautiously. In Kenya people are taxed for Radios and Television sets.  But this is done once at the time of purchasing. Whoever deals with Television of Radios has an obligation to add a certain tax at the time he is selling that set and remits it to government.

MRS KALEMA: Point of information. I would like hon. Luyombya to add to his information that in 1960s when Television was introduced to this country, and government tried giving licences to television owners again it failed.  Because by and by more people were able to television sets, and the post office could not continue to follow up.  The point here is the implementation, and I am just wondering whether really this licence is going to be implemented.  How can it be implemented?

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Further information.  Mr Chairman, we seem to be having a bit of a problem here.  We have people who are supposed to pay taxes, and they do not pay taxes-I mean the government cannot get everybody who is supposed to pay taxes to pay taxes, but that does not mean that we have got to scrap collecting taxes as such. So let us have the licensing there, the government will get anybody they can put their hand on, and that will be it.

DR LUYOMBYA: Nobody has said that government should not try.  All I am saying is that, I will not envy the council or being a member of the council because I know it is going to be an up hill task to have the already existing sets in the country registered, and taxed. But I do not say that they should not try, that is all what I am saying. 

Mr Chairman, in support of taxes, it is not only in this country where people pay air space or sound and what not. In Zimbabwe they pay for sound.  Whether you own a Radio whether you own a TV set, you pay for that service.  

Mr Chairman, I thank you for having given me this opportunity to air up a few observations on this Bill. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 March 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)



