
Thursday 4th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa) Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Financial Institutions Bill, 1993 be read the First Time.

THE BANK OF UGANDA BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa) Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bank of Uganda Bill, 1993, be read a First Time.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have no quorum and, therefore, we adjourn for ten minutes. 

(Quorum formed).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

 THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE, COOPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr. R. Kaijuka) Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a brief statement on the position of cotton marketing.  In a press release I issue on the 30th December, 1992, I announced an indicative producer price for cotton of Shs.300/= per kilogram for 1992/93 cotton season.  I explained on that occasion that the price payable to the farmer would be determined by a number of factors, including the trend of international prices, the terms of payment and the cost of transport.  This announcement was in line with Government decision taken in March, 1992, to abandon the setting of minimum producer prices and we had good reasons: (a) Because of the liberalisation of the marketing of produce and (b) because Government lacks the financial resources for subsidising minimum producer prices in the pace of declining commodity prices on international market.  Indeed a major factor in the current problem of finding adequate crop finance for 1992/93 cotton crop is attributed to the minimum producer price of Shs.340/= per kilogram which was announced for the 1991/92 cotton season.  This minimum producer price was based on anticipated price of US. dollars 1.50 per kilogram on international market.  In the event, Lint Marketing Board raised an average of only one dollar 20 cents per kilogram and in the process incurred a loss of 1.2 billion, a fact which has been confirmed by the Auditor General following a specific audit of Lint Marketing Board operation carried out at my request.  It will be recalled that in my press release of 15th April, 1992, I announced that arrangements had been concluded for the provision of crop finance for both 1991/92 and 1992/93 season.  This was after agreement had been reached to utilize 3.8 billion shillings from public funds as a revolving fund for cotton crop finance. This money would have been available to Lint Marketing Board for only lending to unions for the purchase of cotton from farmers at the beginning of cotton buying season.  However, the loss already described, lack of adequate ginning capacity in some unions as well as the failure by NYTIL to repay 500 million shillings advanced to the company to purchase lint directly from Busoga Union, have effectively reduced the money available in the revolving fund which has in turn led to a slow start to cotton buying this season.  It is worthy noting, for example, that Lango Co-operative Union store are still full of 1991/92 cotton because of the union’s extremely low ginning capacity.  It is also worth noting that all efforts by the Ministry to introduce joint venture arrangements to the union which would have resulted in improved ginning capacity as well as management, have unfortunately been declined by the union.  For example, an offer by Lint Marketing Board to lease one of the union’s ginneries, repair it and gin cotton was turned down in spite of the fact that the Board is owed over 500 million by the union.  Because of the European Economic Community reluctance to authorise the release of funds to Lint Marketing Board from the revolving fund until audit operations were carried out, Government agreed that cotton crop finance amounting to 2.2 billion from the public funds be channeled through the Uganda Co-operative Alliance to avoid any further delays in the buying of cotton from the farmers.  The first tranche of funds amounting to 800 million has already been availed and is being used to buy cotton. Further more, Lint Marketing Board has secured about one billion shillings that is already being utilized to boy cotton and efforts are being made to secure additional funds from some sources.  In November 1991, government decided to liberalise the marketing of cotton both internally and externally.  Arising out of this decision, legislation has been drafted and will soon be tabled in the National Resistance Council.  Under the liberalized marketing of cotton, Lint Marketing Board will be transformed into a trading company which will compete with other serious players in the cotton industry. Lint Marketing Board will undergo a similar transformation to the one already undergone by the former Coffee Marketing Board.  It is, therefore, wrong for anyone to speculate on the future of Lint Marketing Board.  The Board will undoubtedly undergo major restructuring aimed at making it more efficient and competitive in a liberalized marketing environment.  It is gratifying to note that Lint Marketing Board is already tuning itself to its future role as a trading company.  It has been able to lease a ginnery from North Bukedi Co-operative Union and is currently involved in the direct purchase and ginning of cotton.  In line with Government policy and with the objectives of achieving more efficiency in the marketing of cotton through competition, a number of cotton export licences have been issued.  Nyakatonzi, Bunyoro Growers, Busoga, South Bukedi and Lango Co-operative Unions have been licensed to export lint directly. One private company has also been licensed to export lint directly.  This is in line with the undertaking I made in my press release of 30th December, 1992, namely, that I was prepared to authorise the licensing of serious players in the private sector not only to buy seed cotton but also export lint provided that satisfactory arrangements could be worked out for leasing ginning capacity.  All licence exporters will be charged a fee for the dressing distribution of cottonseeds free of charge to the farmer, a role that continues to be played by Lint Marketing Board until Cotton regulatory body is created.  It is disappointing to note, however, that a number of serious players have received negative reaction.....one page is missing.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Under rule 24, Mr. Chairman, I just want to ask the Minister so that I get something clear.  I am only concerned about the seeds.  We have two types of seed, SATU and BP.  Now if actors are allowed, as the Minister said, to buy the seed, what measures has he put in place to ensure that the different types of seed are not taken from one area to another? Second, I would like to know from the Minister, if as a private buyer of cotton and I buy my cotton seek, am I not still free to export the seed to anywhere or to crush it.  I would like to know what arrangements are in place in regards to seed for planting?

MR. ELYAU: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is very sad for us farmers to hear that the price has been bent upon. For example, in Teso now, they are buying at Shs.250/= a kilogram.  We want the farmer to be protected so that at least we are not the losers, otherwise we shall resign from cotton completely.  Secondly, the ginning capacity is there.  Like in Teso we have got nine ginneries.  Maybe the negotiations have been done correctly, otherwise as of now, we are ready.  I have my own cotton, why can I not gin it and then export it, because it is mine?  Can the Minister clarify? If I can gin and export, does he charge me?

MR. KAIJUKA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to allay hon. Kanyomizi’s fears first of all by saying that if he listened carefully, I did mention that the question of seeds remains a monopoly of Lint Marketing Board. It is with a very good reason.  It has been so historically for good reasons essentially because of the very good reason he explained that we do not want to end up mixing seeds as it happened in the past where certain BP ended up being mixed.  In one case in Lango we ended up with a third category that could not be sold internationally.  In other words, his worries are very well taken care of even when we allow him to get into cotton ginning or even export of lint, we do not give him the right to touch the seeds.  In other words, his second question that he asked whether an export is not free to crash whatever seeds he ends up with.  He has no right to do that and in fact as we give licenses for people to export cotton, that provision is clearly spelt out that you are ginning and getting your lint, but the question of seeds remains with us so that we can indeed do proper dressing and distribution so that the mixing that he is talking about does not take place.

If I may turn to the last question that was raised, I have already mentioned that we are extremely concerned about the fate of farmers and hon. Member is right in being concerned about the indicative price.  But again if he listened carefully, that was the reason why I made a statement so that Members can clarify this position to farmers and the population at large upcountry.  The point is that we cannot sustain a minimum price of what we used to pay of 340/=.  That is why I came up with indicative price.  The whole idea is that you can only indicate, because there are many factors at play and the fact that Government has no financial resources to underwrite and guarantee that minimum cotton price make imperative for us to be business like and approach this issue along the way we have done. And the most critical point, is that framers are really badly off because they are not getting cash paid.  That is the critical issue.  Even if the indicative price is 300/=, if a farmer can get 290/= or 310/= or whatever, the demand and supply price may be, the issue is can you pay cash, and I am praying that I can get more serious players who want to involve in cotton.  By next year this will not an issue.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MOTION

DR. D. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. In accordance with the Interim Rules 28 and 30 (c) of Procedure of the National Resistance Council of Uganda, I propose to move the adjournment of this Council for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move that this House discusses the definite matter under the following Motion:

	That the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala
	on the 4th March, 1993, suspends all activities of the 
	so-called public enterprises reform and divestiture 
	forthwith.  The suspension must be in force until the
	relevant policy or Bill has been enacted by this august
	House.

	Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

In the Ministry of Finance there has been established a Public Enterprises Secretariat.  This Secretariat has been undertaking activities related to public enterprises reform and divestiture.  I am moving a Motion now that the activities of that Secretariat be suspended. But before I go to the main discussion, I would like to make it absolutely clear that the Motion is not discussing the pros and cons of privatisation.  The Motion seeks to suspend the activities of PERD simply because we have not been able, as Representatives of the people of Uganda, to give guidance in way of policy and law to enforce privatisation. We must first discuss the guidelines and modal of privatisation.  (Applause) Mr. Chairman, a lot has been done in way of divestiture of Nile Breweries, East African Distilleries, Lake Victoria Bottling Company, just to mention a few.  I would be calling upon the Minister responsible to enlighten this august House if there are any more companies that have been divested so that we should know the actual number of enterprises divested to date.  It also common knowledge that Tororo Cement Factory, Nile Hotel and Lake Victoria Hotel are being negotiated for divesture.  As custodians of the assets of Uganda, we are accountable to the people of Uganda to say what has happened to their assets; of what benefit is the divesture programme to Ugandans. That is a matter to be handled when we discuss the Policy Statement.  We have made our pleas to Government to avoid getting to this position today.  We have asked Government to suspend the operations.  What is the hurry for before you get the law in place? (Applause) Why do you put the cart before the horse that pulls it? Already some of the Directors of the companies that have been divested have instituted court proceedings against Government. Shareholders of East African Bottling Company are suing Uganda Government and there is no law in place.  NRM is known for proper method of work and democratic governance. NRM is law-abiding and nobody should be seen to be operating above the law.  (Applause) That is why, Mr. Chairman, I really get perturbed.  Uganda has got a very able Attorney General.  What is he doing? (Laughter) I was so shocked when I heard his answer in a Press Conference in Entebbe about this divesture.  I felt very humiliated, because he seemed to be answering as if he did not know the law in force.  We are not talking about boarding off a lorry belonging to a Government department.  We are talking about industries which are the backbone of the economy of this country and unless this exercise is done properly, generations to come will condemn us and, maybe, those properties will be nationalised again, that is, repossessed by Government.   I cannot accept the position that because of bad management of these enterprises we should not get the law or the policy passed through Parliament before divestiture takes place. It is indispensable to assume, that because we are dealing in hotels per se we cannot manage holes per se, you can group Lake Victoria Hotel and Nile Hotel together and sell them at prices that are ridiculously law, who is going to pay the defending gap that was created when you borrowed money to rehabilitate these institutions?  I think, and unless this policy is brought in this House, and it is properly discussed, and to be seen to be transparent, we are rushing to get to nowhere, and soon we shall be asked to account for our decisions.  I therefore, call upon this august House to rise up to the challenge.  It is not personal, it is not partisan, it is simply a Ugandans interest.  it is nationalistic. NRC must try to enforce that proper methods of work are followed by all Ugandans, more so by Government, I beg to move.

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr. Chairman, I am grateful that you should allow me to second this Motion.  Let me start with quotation from a recent visitor to Uganda. You might have had of an American Investor who visited us last year, his name was Allan-Kay, he was accompanied by an Arab millionaire called Fat.  This millionaire owns about 30 huge hotels in France and in the Middle East.  At a dinner organised by the Uganda Investment Consortium this Arab was asked to make a speech.  He stood up - I would like to imitate the way he put it. As he started, he said, “here is a country that has everything and nothing.” That exactly was our reaction at the dinner.  Government acts through its Ministries, which of the Ministries is supposed to help Ugandans to achieve something out of everything that we have? Among the many ministries, I think the Ministry of Finance should be number one to channel the way.  They country has many resources, this we have known over again, that the population resources ratio which we have in this country is far better than that of most countries in United Nations. Imagine, if I would give one example, let us take a country in Europe let us take Holland, 75 per cent of the land is below the sea level the climate is harrow, there is no land mass, natural resources are not there, the population 18 million, they even had a war which lasted 8 years with Spain if you would like to recall, how is their success tremendous, add to that Japan, Taiwan, Hong-Kong, South Korea, all these ones have natural resources which are even below Uganda natural resources, but the Ministry of Finance has not been able to give us the proper channel through which we might be able to gain something out of our natural resources.  The way they are trying to do it, if you were to gauge by the activities of PERD you will be mismanaged.  In my area, if you are to repair a car and spend Shs.10,000 on it and then you turn around and sell the canon for Shs.2,000, people would think that you are craze, you would only do that under the Auctioneer’s harmer, but other than that, it just could not be done.  If the Ministry of Finance, which is the business, arm of this nation goes on doing business like that, what chance do we stand ever to get out of the economic quagmire. Let me leave that aside a little bit, but the even if I leave that, sometimes I am tempted to wonder, is it that the Ministry is reluctant to let Ugandans share in these activities? Could the Ministry be following the Bible? Because the Bible, if I recall in Matthew, somewhere chapter, I think, 19, I even remember the verse 23, Jesus was talking about pearls, he said; “do to give pearls to pigs, they may trample under their fit and then turn around and tare you to pieces,” is it that the Ministry is worried? But if you gave a chance to Ugandans to run this pearls, Ugandans, might trample them under their fit, especially after the little example of what happened with Indians property that we might turn around after all that and tare the Government into pieces? I even doubt that because Jesus who said this one even supported wealth.  If I may again re-quote from Matthew chapter 5, where he went to the mountain and preached the nine famous multitudes, the very first one in the third line where he said; “blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs in the Kingdom of Heaven,” he did not say the poor physically he said the poor in spirits.  I have liked the Bible quite a bit today.  Going further down, he talked about the ‘parable of talents’ where a man left his servants talents to one, he left five talents, to the other, he left two and to other he left only one, when he returned from the journey, the one who had taken five, had multiplied to 10, the one who had two talents had four but one who had kept one talent, still had it, he had just buried this and produced it as it was, Jesus said to these ones who will produced give even more.  Those ones should be entrusted with even more and they will even share in my happiness. But to the one who had just buried the talent, Jesus said this man is silly, he should be pushed out into darkness, and what he has should be given to those who have, and those who have more will be given.  Is it the same line that the foreigners who have a lot are now being given even the little that we had?  Imagine that these things which are being dished out, I am saying dish-out are being given to those who are already have almost following the line that Jesus was recommending.  I do not think that the Ministry and this arm PERD should actually do this.  The question is what should they do? In this House, we have talked of what could be done, first, it is agreed the divestiture is necessary, we all agreed on that one, almost anonymously.  We also agreed foreign investment is necessary, there was no argument about that, but what we are saying in divesting these properties, what should be the method? Where should we put our priority?  I would like to quote a man who went to Mozambique in July to assist Mozambique set up a stock exchange.  This man had just set up the stock exchange of Jamaica, when he went there. His first advice was that the priority should be like this Mozambiqueans first, joint ventures next, foreign investment last, I would like us to follow the same order, Ugandans first, joint ventures next, and foreign investment last.  The question of course is, who among Ugandans will buy the Nile Hotel, or the Lake Victoria Hotels?  We agreed here, that it is not necessary, that the hotels and all these units are offered as whole, we said let us sell them by the shares, the immediate question, of course, one would have, is where is the stock exchange? 

It was the Minister himself of Finance and Economic Planning, who said last year, that by March this year, the stock exchange will be functional. Of course it is not functional.  Do not blame him for saying that matter of fact, if I were again to quote from the Bible, one of the proverbs says; “where there is no vision people perish’. (Laughter) He has vision, although he may lack the ability to know the exactly what it is.  That must be on the round before the stock exchange takes place. I still recommend that he vigorously supports the idea.  When the stock exchange takes place, then we should be able to divest more carefully.  Ugandans will be invited to subscribe to buy this shares one by one, slowly by slowly and even the foreigners will also be invited to do the same thing and be somehow restricted so that they do not buy the whole thing off.  This, we have to do as a matter of national interest.  

I see you are looking at your watch.  Let me conclude, by saying that the act of PERD at the moment even undermines the principle of representative Government.  When we all agreed in this House, and the Government goes out and do the opposite, then where is the world in the principle of representative Government? Mr. Chairman, supporting this Motion, is a national duty.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The principle of free Enterprise and Private Property has always been accepted in this country and will always be here and will always be practised. But the principle of sale of the property by an owner when the going is bad, is also accepted and it is actually a good business decision is that when a sell decision is being taken, the benefits that a accrue after the sell or to the seller should be more than the losses by keeping or retaining the property.  Put differently, the loss that one incurs when he sells the property should be less than the losses that one sustains when he retains the property.   It is also generally accepted, and studies have been done all over the world to show that in broad terms private enterprises tend to make higher financial profits than public enterprises and this general trend may be as a result of many factors but one glaring factor among them is the factor that in the management of private enterprises, the Manager has stake in the business and yet in the public sector or in the public enterprises, the manager has no stake in the business and, therefore, it becomes everybody’s business which ends up being nobody’s business. The determination to sell enterprises, therefore, and have them privatized is an attempt to make them more or have a higher profitability, and therefore, a higher return on capital employed. In other words, to privatize business we are looking at financial profitability.  It is really that we must stress that public enterprises although they normally have a lower financial profit, they normally have a higher social benefit, and therefore, they contribute to the public good thus, although they have a lower financial profitability and sometimes they make loss, but their social value is much higher and more profitable to society both in the short and long run than sometimes the private enterprises. Hence, a financial loss of the public enterprises does not necessarily mean that there is a social loss to society; in fact if anything, if you sum up all the social benefits of public enterprises, they end up by crating a high social infrastructure for development of the private enterprises, because private enterprises only survive when public enterprise are doing very well and are creating the necessary environment for them to exist, in other words, for you to have a private sector that is profitable and is doing very well you need a public sector that is doing very well by providing the social benefit.  

If these promises, therefore, are true, then what are the problems?  Why is it that we are selling? Why is it that we are divesting from public enterprises?  If we are considering that we need to increase the financial profitability, certainly, we must sell very quickly, and probably we are selling public enterprises because we know that Government is a bad entrepreneur and therefore, Government is not being involved in private enterprise, but should only concentrate on providing social benefits or putting it differently, Government has no business in business, and therefore, should concentrate on the social infrastructure and I am sure this is the guiding factor why probably Government in Uganda now is trying to divest from public enterprises and passing them on to the private sector.  However, if this is the case, privatization is coming after very many years of having owned public enterprises in this country.  Some of these public enterprises were owned deliberately like UDC, UEB, CMB, Post Office and others.  Others were owned by the defaults especially after the 1971/1972 expulsion of the Asians.  But the question is have we distinguished which one we want to have and keep in the public sector to provide a social good, and have we also distinguished those that we want to put in the private sector, so that they can be profitable?  If you read the report, yes, the other question is, are we following that report strictly? May be not because over time we have changed from what we thought were going to be the public enterprises and we have now made them to be sold, and I think that is what is raising the worry. If we are not going to be consistent and sell those that actually are of private nature and we start looking at those which are of a social nature, when everybody questions that whether we are very serious and concerned about the welfare of the people.  Why are so many people so concerned that the Government is not transparent and fair? It is because we lack information, and it is this lack of information that is giving way to bringing a resolution of this nature.  Why should the need to sale be a secret to the few?  If they are being sold why be known by few.  If there was a lot of information available, there would not been a problem, because I think we all are agreed as hon. Mayengo was saying, we all agree that Government should get out of business and let businessmen do the business.  I think we all agree that we cannot keep a public sector of 160 parastatals, almost 40 of which are actually on the book and almost 120 of which make a loss every year, financial loss, and we have only less than 30 parastatals of the social nature like UEB like Posts.  We agree they should be sold. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I will be very fast.  They should be sold, they should be sold with information to the owners and owners are the public and this public should be consulted when they are being sold. I am convinced that if the Bill had come earlier, and we had discussed and had an input, there would not have been a Problem.  But, I am also made to learn that probably the Bill is around the corner.  The Prime Minister told us the other time that it had been repaired, but the question is why can it not be brought to this House so that we all participate that everybody puts an input and see how they can be solved.  Before I end, let me first emphasize one thing.  You do not even need a stock exchange for you to sell properties by shares, if you read yesterday’s New Vision, it was very clear that even in 1950, Pepsi Cola had as many as 700 owners all owning small shares and, it is therefore, possible to ask all to have small shares in most of these organisations, because once you have sold to one individual, how will you make him sell to us? Because these are private properties and, therefore, it is important that we revisit the methodology of sell and have properties be collectively owned by the Ugandans, because in the long run if they are not owned by Ugandans now, we may have a problem in future if we get somebody who wants to bring them back to be owned by Ugandans; the methodology may not be as good as if we had used a better method of making them be owned collectively.  
Therefore, I believe that there is still time for us to revisit and have these properties be properly owned, and have the interests of Ugandans considered and taken into account and these companies, like for instance, CMB Limited when it was being divested from by Government and made the private company it was declared as a company with 7 million shares and shs.1 million per share, because, the idea was that after one year, the Board of Directors of CMB Limited would now float the shares to the willing buyer in the coffee sub-sector, and I am sure a year is about to end and they are going to declare that these shares, 7 million shares -(interjection) I think, while I agree, we should give Government some chance, if they can give us commitment that they are going -(Interruption)

MR. WASUGIRYA (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to inform the House, particularly on this particular subject, that actually the Government of Uganda today we have got co-operations like Sheraton Hotel, Kampala, which has demonstrated to the rest of these organisations that it can make some profit, and as I speak now, Sheraton Hotel, Kampala has applied to manage Lake Victoria Hotel.  If only Sheraton Hotel could be given an opportunity to manage that, maybe, the Government of Uganda could have a lot to benefit.  I am saying this because as we are aware the Government of Uganda entered into contract with Sheraton International, whose headquarters is in America, in the city known as Boston, and the contract was signed way back in 1987 and as I speak, we have already celebrated the 5th anniversary of the success of Sheraton International here in Uganda.  I am only advising that when we are on this subject, we should look around and we see what we can do instead of just divesting these corporations or organisations.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Mr. G.K. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, first and foremost, allow me to give some information to the hon. Members of the House. Since yesterday, many Members have been concerned what they read on the papers to the effect that even the animals in the Zoo at Entebbe had no water to bath.  Now, this matter has been viewed as a grave matter and we have made sure that the water was reconnected to the Zoo immediately and then accountability including payment by the accounting officer should be handled by the human being not the animals, so that one is done.  

Secondly, with due respect to the House, I noted with concern a resolution which is moved by hon. Dr. Magezi supported by my Colleague Mayengo in Kalangala, I only note that this important issue is coming during the Second Reading of yet another crucial issue which the nation has been waiting for a long time.  This is however, not to undermine the urgency of their proposal.  In as far as Government is concerned, I want to propose the meeting so that we know.  The few hon. Members who spoke did not say they are opposed to the divestiture.  They also did say that what is lacking, is actually the flow of basic information and transparency. As far as transparency, policy, and representation in the Bill is concerned, I will be prepared.  The Bill regarding PERD is already in Cabinet.  Had it not been because of the business of the House now, they would have passed it yesterday but we had to postpone in June this year because we are deliberating important national issues. However, this Bill is coming for your scrutiny, for your reference, for your recommendation, for your input in less than two weeks from now.  In as representation is concerned, government did take the following steps.  Government made a Cabinet paper that was discussed by Cabinet and did recommend that this House be represented in PERD with immediate effect.  Yesterday evening, Cabinet did confirm the minutes and two hon. Members of this House will be taking effective part in as far as deliberations of the divestiture process is concerned.

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no.

MR. ADYEBO:  That is to say, the hon. Member who is the chairman of the committee is going to be a member of policy review and working group which actually is a think-tank of the PERD system altogether.  Not only that, another hon. Member in the capacity of the chairman of the sub-committee of parastatals will be another Member of the PERD.  This will therefore ensure representation of the House and also will ensure representation of the people.  While we are waiting for that Bill, for your endorsement - (Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of procedure.   Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the issue is not representation. The issue is that we have not known the policy guidelines and the modalities for selling our property.  That is all. That is the issue and the representation is secondary.  That is modalities representation.  

MR. ADYEBO: With due respect Mr. Chairman, this Bill - because we are having financial problems to maintain the draft mainly, otherwise, the Bill is now ready for the Members to consider.  I will, therefore, plead with hon. Members, that let discussions go on because the proposal they are making today, if we all agree to effect it, it will help effect on the economy.  for example, you will agree with me later on hon. Members that at the moment, we are having colossal dynamic constructions going on in the country which need certain building inputs like cement.  For example, we are talking about the construction of the sports complex at Namboole.  Sooner or later, we shall be embarking on the rehabilitation of second phase of UEB at Owen Falls Dam.  this will need millions of kilos of cement.  And if you block this divestiture system going on which we like to address also the problem of rehabilitation of the cement industry including that of Tororo and Hima, then you are instead saying the task force formed maybe to siphon all the millions of dollars we are borrowing to Kenya for their cement.  

So, hon. Members, I have taken with a lot of concern, your concern, is my concern, is the concern of the people we are representing.  I am also talking as a representative of a country.  I was also an elected Member, I am with you, you have been with me and it is high time we had -(Laughter)- I urge you as you know hon. Members, I will not take you for a ride.  You are the legislature of the country; you are the highest organ of law in the country.  I do not take any of you in the country.  As a result I always stick to the word I say.  Last week, I did make a commitment of government to you, I did satisfy that. I am therefore, in the same principle saying that gives me two weeks. The Bill will be here and you can do anything with the Bill.  I thank you very much for listening to me.   

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman and hon. Members. I beg to ask the Mover and Seconder of this Motion to reflect on terms of the resolution.  The terms of this resolution defeat the purpose to which all of you Members want to get the information the law, the transparency and everything. Why? Because PERD is the Secretariat of public enterprises, the secretariat set up by government; it was to have a group of qualified Ugandans to examine the government policy as far as public enterprises are concerned.  First of all, this pubic enterprise has first established whether an organisation is actually a public enterprise, whether that organisation is lawfully owned by government.  They have to research in the registrar of companies to find out whether a particular company which is thought to be a public enterprise is really a public enterprise.  That is the work of the secretariat.  The secretariat must employ competent people to analyze the financial nature of that enterprise if it is a public enterprise.  (Interjections) Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I will beg that - because you say this is a very serious matter.  So the enterprise whose activities you want to stop; the secretariat is the one which informs government whether that company, the government owns shares in is functioning in a business-like manner and whether it is worth government continuing with that body the way it is.  It is also called a reform structural secretariat.  It has to recommend to government that this company, everything is alright but the management.  If the management is not available to be restructured locally, we can maybe, hire management like we did for Sheraton.  This is the secretariat. This secretariat, its work we want to stop is the one -(Interruptions)  Excuse me, let me make the case.  Do not pre-judge me please.  I have listened also carefully to your views. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, what is the problem?  PERD is the Secretariat that gathers all this information that now is not available to be made available to government before government makes a decision either to retain, to structure the management or to disposal of the property.  If you stop the exercise of this secretariat and you want to get information about your parastatals, who will the information be available? (Interruptions) I am just informing please. PERD did not sell any property of government. There is the resolution Gentlemen.  Are we not debating the resolution? 

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance to continue labouring on an issue which is not tying with what this august House decided in its budget session namely: One; these were recommendations which were adopted by this Council where everybody was present.  The Minister should take all the policy and details of the divestiture programme to NRC for discussion.  That is one.  Number two: the government should charge whoever was responsible for keeping the cheque and causing loss of revenue to government as a result of that Nile Breweries fiasco. Three; The Government should streamline the procedures of handling funds from the divestiture programme to avoid future mistakes.  We are talking about these areas.  

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, with due respect, honestly Gentlemen and Ladies -(Laughter)- I did not know that when you become honourable, you stop being a gentleman.  There is on the Floor a resolution.  It is not fair of my Friend hon. Rwakakooko to say I would debate anything short of a resolution. This resolution calls upon the suspension of the activities of PERD. 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes, yes.  

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Yes, and Members have debated and I have said that the way you can get information about this exercise is not to stop the Secretariat because the secretariat is the arm of Government that gathers the information that government has to bring to you. That is one point.  Secondly, there are three matters involved.  The first matter is the law.  I would like hon. Members to address the law as exists viz-a-viz the disposal of government assets.  I want you to read that law. About policy, the past two budgets which have policy statements of government by the Minister for Finance that is the person entrusted to hold public investments took policy statements as being divestiture and the budget reflects clearly government refusal to vote any more money in a number of enterprises because of government policy to divest itself from investments. These have been policy statements and there has been policy budget debate on these matters.  Now Government using PERD after gathering all the information, it has realised that there are legal complications in the exercise of divestiture. As an experience of gathering all this information, government has found there are legal complications and therefore has decided that if must build a legal framework in which to handle this exercise and I am glad the Prime Minister has given you the latest development towards that area.  Now moving towards this sector, this Bill to be made, the experiences to be learnt into this Bill have been due to the information gathered by PERD. Therefore, since you want information, since you want to be involved, we cannot stop the activities of the arm that brings all information to guide not only government but also all of us as a nation about the nature because - I will clarify if you wait - because as you may have also realised, where advertisements have been made for the exercise, people have turned out to say, we are legal owners, we are this, we are this.  So, the exercise now needs a legal framework that cannot be done without you but the servicing of information where all of you will go when you are debating to get this information on these companies, is PERD. Therefore, I beg to -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I know when PERD was established and under what law because as far as I remember Mr. Chairman, PERD’s existence has never been brought before this august House.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I want to inform or clarify that when government as an executive arm is executing its duties to get information to put up a secretariat, to put up a department, to put up a sector really it does not seek Parliamentary legal provision.  In any case, in the Budget passed by this House, there is provision under the Ministry of Finance to finance the activities of this Secretariat.  It was passed by you.  Therefore, you cannot say that you are not aware about.  But I appeal to hon. Magezi that the wishes which you want to be informed, for government to bring matters to you, to be a source of information, this work is the responsibility in government to supply this information by PERD.  Therefore, I request you to allow PERD to continue because even if we start debating in the air, when we do not have information on the enterprises we are talking about, whether actually they are ours or they are not, whether actually they were nationalised or they were not nationalised, then we shall be in the error.  Therefore, I appeal to your very good judgement as a Mover of the resolution that in order to service your wishes, it is in the interest of this exercise for this PERD to continue its activities.  But to use all this information by government to towards informing you regularly towards creating a legal framework which government has undertaken before you.  This is the best way and it is in light of this one that I want you please to accept that these activities go on. The Prime Minister has told you when the law will be before us and during debate, I can advise you, you will all find it very nice that the information at PERD will enlighten you because this PERD has discovered many, many infirmations on what we had thought to be straight forward public enterprises; just to find that there are many complications which will need you to address in the legal framework being tabled by the government.  With these remarks, Mr. Chairman, I conclude that the resolution kills the wishes of the Mover.

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Because the information you seek, wait until it comes and it is difficult to get if PERD does not work.  I am not opposing, I am saying I have taken the concern that you must be informed but the information I can give you is by this secretariat.  It is in that light that I beg to accept that the secretariat continues its work.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara) Mr. Chairman, I stand to say that the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance has raised in my view a very important matter that I would like Members, especially the Movers, to look at very carefully.  The intention of the Motion is to stop the sales.  That is the intention, and I think that the felling of backbenchers.  It is not to suspend research but the Motion is, suspend research and information and work; it is therefore, not the intention really of the Movers; what I think -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  But it is not too late to have the intention brought in the Motion for an Amendment to stop the sale.  However, the question, really before us in this House  -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the story told that PERD is just collecting information and passing on is a blatant lie.  I have with me here, a letter from the Public Enterprises Secretariat, Ministry of Finance of which hon. Abbey Kafumbe Mukasa is the Deputy Minister.  This letter reads: “Invitation to negotiations.” As you are aware two of Uganda hotels limited units, Lake Victoria Hotel, and Mweya Safari Lodge plus the Nile Hotel Complex including the Conference Centre, are being divested under the PERD programme of the government.  Bills for these hotels were received by PERD secretariat and they have been analyzed by PERD this is not collecting information.  The policy review working group is due to commence negotiations while the short listed bidders starting on Monday the 8th March, 1993 at 10 a.m. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

DR. MAGEZI: This is not collecting information.  The purpose of this letter is to invite you to participate in the negotiations on the government side. You should be ready to attend all the negotiations which will stretch over approximately two days to sell all these complexes.” The negotiations will take place in PERD Secretariat Board Room, Sixth Floor IPS Building along Parliamentary Avenue; you are expected to keep time.” (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, order please.

DR. MAGEZI: Please advise under signature of your availability.  I, by this letter on the Table. The letter is not talking about collecting information; it is talking about selling.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members you all really know who is government, you cannot say that government sits at IPS Building, that is Secretariat or PERD. They can find all the information they want.  They can sell to all people who want to buy properties; the decisions to sell a property is under executive decision and it is done if at all, by a committee chaired by the Prime Minister.  So, you cannot say that, that is a sale.  Only let us be honest ourselves  -(Interjections) - secondly -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Second information. In the terms of your resolution gentlemen, you cannot say; and ladies, gentlemen, you cannot say; Government - really let me see what can be done what cannot be done, you cannot say government cannot have a method of collecting information it needs to make a decision; let it be practical you cannot say that the executive can function when you are saying, it must not be informed; and PERD I have informed you is a secretariat which informs and gathers information on Government Policy, on public enterprises.  That is another information.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether I can accept honourable.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I give you only two minutes. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Now, Mr. Chairman, I think this Motion is a very important Motion.  I want to look at it a little bit wider than it actually states; For sometime and I am glad that the Leader of Government Business is here for sometime this House has been laying out to Government Ministers and tell them bring the Bills so that we can clear but it seems that government has a position that is a business - this is technical business government owns the companies government can sell them or do whatever they want, and there as a big feeling in Front Bench of many Ministers thinking that we had nothing to do with this business.  Now Members -(Interjections)- yes but government  - and I am saying this in good faith, yes, but now time has come and this has been going on, it is a question of whether we have power in this House to call government to order?  This is the message this Motion is delivering to the government, and it is very important that we take note of where the power to call government to order lies.  Is it in the representative Parliament? Yes, and the answer is positively yes.  The President one time while opening this Session said that it is the duty of you Members, the back Benchers to take the power which you are charged with in your hands; and that we were not even suggesting our own private Bills, this is now at the cross roads we are!  The Prime Minister has told us clearly that he realises that this Parliament is where the power is: that is he says that in two weeks the Bill will be presented -(Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

 MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, that is what he said you cannot say that he did not say that.  This is what the Prime Minister said and that is a very big concession to us.  However, we can still marry the two and say, yes. Now that the government has committed itself in -please - (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague from Nyabushozi that the power of Parliament to guard and control the things of State is paramount; and that we are a Constitutional Government by virtue of the existing republican constitution of 1962, chapter 14 to 149, for another.  We are the sole House we cannot be diverted we have been in government we have ...by small boys or young men that we have no power here -(Laughter)- we are here in Parliament.  Parliament has its power to control the State matters and policies respecting finances.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, two wrongs cannot make a right.  Government made a mistake; let us not try to correct it by ourselves taking a wrong line.  I object in the strongest terms at my age of 55 for somebody to imagine that I am still a youth winger he saw in 1962 that I am still a boy because I belong to government. Mr. Chairman, I think that language is unparliamentary, let us argue our case and I would request that the hon. hon. Member withdraws that statement (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you withdraw, please?

MR. OBWEANGOR:  I did not say that; as the parliamentary language has no defensive whatsoever (Laughter) 

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I am requesting for a ruling from the Chair.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please withdrawal, hon. Members, these are not boys, withdrawal that statement.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I accept the ruling, but which one? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Withdraw, please. 

MR. OBWANGOR:  I stated, we cannot be made as small boys as if we do not understand.... under a Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not what he said -(Interjections)- withdrawal, please.

HON. MEMBERS:  Withdrawal.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, which one have I got to withdrawal?
Mentioning -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The word boys, these are two boys. 

MR. OBWANGOR:  We cannot be small men -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  You either withdraw or you go out.

MR. OBWANGOR: I can go out, yes I can go out.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Go out.

MR. OBWANGOR:  I am not going to do that. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

 MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wait until he moves out, order please.  Proceed please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appeal to Members to cool down so that we can proceed with the business.  We have now as far as I am concerned, and now as far as I am concerned, and now speaking for myself, I am now convinced that the Leader of Government Business together with his Colleagues are squeezed with full of knowledge that they know that this Motion is moved in good faith -(Applause)- and that when we move this Motion, we do not move it just for the sake of it, or for acting for cheap propaganda, we are doing it because the public is yawning that this be done.  (Applause)
In a recent seminar which was addressed by non other than the head of PERD, Robert Rutaagi; and in opposition was the new Chairman and Managing Director of Uganda Commercial Bank, Dr. Sulaiman, the matter came up for debate in public places this seminar was very well attended.  The argument advanced by Dr. Sulaiman then was that Parliament should decide the affairs of this country as far as divestiture is concerned.  This was the majority position of the public.  When last time the move of this Motion addressed himself to this question he was a bit violent and a bit cheated and vehement in his approach, he was in fact, almost personally addressing himself to the Prime Minister asking that this thing should stop; and I am sure and I have heard that cabinet and other people have been discussing bringing this Bill, I have also been told that the Bill was shown to my Brother Tiberondwa this morning -(Interjection)- yes…

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and to inform the whole House that what he has said is not actually correct.  What I have told him is this, that two weeks ago I intended to move the same Motion in this House and after presenting this to the Clerk the Prime Minister in his capacity as leader of Government Business, as well as Minister of Finance and his Deputy talked to me, they said in the interest of this country, give us a very short time we shall present this Bill to the House; and it was out of respect for the Prime Minister, for the Minister for Finance and his Deputy that I and hon. Kigyagi decided to withhold the Motion.  That two weeks ago, and it is not today, it is two weeks ago.  If I had not been advised like that, I would definitely have gone ahead.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I am very grateful to hon. Tiberondwa’s further amplification of the issue of which I am appealing to hon. Members to address themselves.  It is not a question of us pushing issues further than we can push them; it is not a question any more now of saying that the Government is refusing to bring the Bill.  It is now of - now if, it is a question of when; and that is where if we can address our minds to the question of when, then it is necessary that we should say; if the time the Prime Minister has promised that of two weeks and we have precedent about that, he had already in one case, and a Seconder of the Motion where I was asking and taking government’s task to suspend the Constituent Assembly Debate.

MR. MARWAS: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform hon. Karuhanga that as we discuss the Motion the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation is being discussed by a Company called Atlantic Tele network with the Ministry of Finance as we sit now.  Already meeting are under way between Uganda Government and IPN officials, particularly the Minister for Finance and his Permanent Secretary of Justice and that one of Posts to hammer down the agreement, I do not know whether this is -(Interruption)	

MR. MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that he made reference to the promise which the Rt. hon. Minister gave this House that the report of the Constitutional Commission will be given to us; “The word report to me and get the final report.”  The report that we have is an interim report and that interim report may not be the final report.  So, really the report that the Prime Minister referred to, is yet to be given to the House. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like first of all to make a small comment on the information I got from hon. Marwas; and I think that was good information, and it is really backing the intentions of Members who moved this Motion; that things are happening and are happening... -(Laughter)- and yes, and it is good that things are happening but the question is, how are they happening, are we with them?

MR. KARUHANGA: Now, that is where the whole purpose - that is where the debate focuses, that is where the debate focuses.  So, I am very grateful to hon. Marwas’ information on that.  Then when it comes to hon., my Brother Mwandha, when he says that the report, the actual report has not been delivered to us but instead we have got the interim report, he is also right except that now there is semantics what was promised to us was it the interim report, or was it the whole report?  Because I remember having been a very active participant in that debate that the Prime Minister made it very clear that the report is voluminous which would cost so much money but that he was going to give us an interim report and those who have read the interim report are satisfied that they can make a useful contribution in the Constituent Assembly Debate.  However, as you know, I have not made a contribution on Constituent Assembly report Bill because  I have been doing a lot of research because I wanted to see that other reports - the big one and fortunately, I am going to get hold of it this evening. (Laughter) However, now if I can just continue with my - I would like Members to focus on the question of when? Because this is good if we stop it now and we say, freeze government activity on this subject, and let Rutaagyi and his organisation retire on home leave; everybody just freeze.  

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR. KARUHANGA: Freeze any letters, do not open letters to with the subject just freeze-suspend until we hear you.  We are exercising our legitimate right to do so.  but are we exercising it in the best interests of this country? (Interjections)  Wait, please, if we are exercising it in the best interests of this country, and in the voluminous department which has had international claim and it is this House which passed the Investments Code to invite investors to come; should we really freeze them?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR. KARUHANGA: Therefore let us look -(Interjections)

 THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. KARUHANGA: Therefore, let us look at what the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business has promised us in two weeks. Now it is very important that while Members want to enforce their legitimate rights and power they exercise that power diligently and efficiently, and judiciously taking into account circumstance that surround our poverty and our country. I am appealing - (Interruption.)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, we are not questioning nor are we trying to stop routine work by PERD;  we are asking for policy and the Bill, because we are having a problem and I will give examples, as a way of information.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister after the report of the committee on the economy on cost-sharing, he came here and said this is going to stop, we have not known whether it has stopped, I will give him enough time.  Last week or two weeks ago when the hon. Tiberondwa wanted to move a Motion we were told very soon.  Now, it is two weeks.  Furthermore, the Custodian Board to which we spend money and our Members were working day and night, submitting a report and we were told very soon, it will be debated it is now coming to two years.  Now our assets are being sold, let us look at PERD.  PERD has given away Lake Victoria Battling Company.  They have done so; we have read it in the papers and there is no dispute about it. We are saying the distillery is already - the very waragi is already gone (Laughter)  We are saying, those items which hinge on sale and negotiations are stopping.  The routine work or gathering information can continue and after all, what is two weeks?  Two weeks is two weeks if it is coming in two weeks, let us have the Bill. But meanwhile those negotiations stop. (Applause)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Now, Mr. Chairman, so really the point - if the Members could stop interrupting so that I could make my point. The point I am making is this -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Before us are two important decisions to make; the Prime Minister says, in two weeks you will have the Bill; Members are saying no, we suspend and freeze everything, when you-excuse me, I can read the English language, both in Law and in literature, the statement says that you suspend that the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on the 4th of March 1993, suspends all activities of the - yes, I am appealing to the Movers of the Motion for whom I am hundred per cent on all fours agreed that we make the statement as follows:  That, the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on 4th March, 1993, having had a commitment from the Prime Minister -(Interjections)- suspends please.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Suspends selling of public enterprises - no, suspends because there are people who have been invited - you cannot say including negotiation you say selling until the time the Bill is received in this House and debated and passed.  Now, that is what I am appealing the Movers to have, but if we leave it like this, now really the intention and our responsibility will be negated and I do not think we need to do that. 

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  I think, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the Government is fully aware that this august House is not trying to cripple or to just rub off the existence of PERD, it is, I think we are trying to avoid a situation where PERD while it has stopped selling, it is still inviting bids.  Because all those matters must be contained within the policy which must come here.  Secondly, I think I would like to inform the hon. Member that what is even behind this resolution is a fact that the government is now incurring very high propensity for mistakes in paper work.  I give an additional example.  In one week or less, another resolution is going to come here, to stop the operation of illegal government bodies.  May I say which? You have NEC, you have Uganda Air Cargo, you have Namalele farming, you have Civil Aviation, you have -(Laughter)

 THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Now, Mr. Chairman, may I suggest seriously that matters addressed seriously and we stop the question of semantics here; I think what comes first must come first. (Applause)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, it is really - while I am satisfied that the head of Government Business is here, I am always unhappy that the attorney General is never with us many times in the House; because it is this type of - oh, I beg your pardon, my apologies -(Interjections)- even the Ag. Attorney General is here by coincidence -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please. 

MR. KARUHANGA: What we have engaged in this afternoon Mr. Chairman, has cost a country a lot of money and this should not have come up if the Bill on PERD had   been presented to us as they should have been, yes, but I am saying that we amend this Motion and stop the selling of properties, and give opportunity to government and the Prime Minister present his Bill.  As you know presenting a Bill is not a thing you go and write in you office in the evening, and bring it is the morning. 

HON. MEMBERS:  But it was done in 1989.

MR. KARUHANGA: So, I think two weeks is reasonable time.  So, let us suspend the selling, Mr. Chairman. I appeal to Members let us suspend the selling but not freeze.

HON. MEMBERS: And negotiations.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Let us suspend the selling until we get the Bill. Thank you.
 
MR. E. KATEGAYA (Historical Member): Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to have little contribution on the Debate on the Motion before the House.  I have been listening to - very carefully to the contributions both formal and informal of the Members in this House.  First of all, I do not know whether I am wrong but I hope I am; I would not like to have an impression that the august House does not include Front Benches. The august House does not include the - what they call front Benchers because I thought were part of it, and I think that is good.  I have said, I hope I am wrong.  I am also very glad that we hear voices demanding for efficiency in performance of public duties and I hope you are not preaching without practising what we believe in.  There are some questions which were raised which I do not know why they are raised - the reason behind it.  One I heard Mr. Magezi saying, this is a matter of National importance you must - as if we at the Front Bench - the Prime Minister is not aware of the National interests.  I usually say I do not mind whether you have agreed or not that is not the issue, and as if I am coming to campaign here for my personal office.  Because if somebody is suggesting that the National interests are at stake, it means, the government is not looking after the National interests that is the implication or insinuation.  Secondly, Dr. Magezi was saying if we do not do anything, they are going to be accountable to the country for what we do.  I very much doubt because that calls for credentials of everybody and a truck record if you are saying this government is not accountable to what it does, I do not know what is all about, me I think this government is accountable; definitely whether we want it or not, because somewhere people are going to judge what we did.  So, the accountability is not on to the Back Benchers alone, but also to the government, in fact more to the public opinion, it does not want to be accountable to what it is doing, we are accountable and we are sensitive right? Also hon. Karuhanga says, we are supreme organ yes, we know that, we have brought Bills here they have been defeated or accepted.  So, even the question of saying the House is supreme - I do not know why there is cause for that type of preaching and if I may use rousing mob, we are not well organised, otherwise how do we come here, we sit, we leave things, we bring the Bills here you throw the mouth you will accept them, so even the question of supremacy, I do not see how it rises, the supremacy, I do not see how it rises.  The supremacy of NRC - If we in the business of NRC would not be coming here, there have been governments here which have ignored Parliament and just forget about them.  But we are coming we listen, we explain. So, as much as I hear the statements of the House that - and these statements maybe some of us do not operate as some other people operate because some of these statements have been raised absolutely - even the Prime Minister himself.  In a meeting raising this question of how we should come here with a law and everything is very clear.  So -(Interruption)

MR. KATEGAYA: I do not know whether you were in that meeting. (Laughter) Because Mr. Chairman, I have a problem with information, I will accept it but I have a problem - and information that are brought here, sometimes it is an argument. I will take it. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, that last year, the same hon. Deputy Prime Minister stood in this House and told us about a meeting similar to the one he is talking about, where the government had decided that, all parliamentary questions which have been submitted to the Clerk would be answered.  He made an undertaking in this House that those questions will be answered.  Up to now, those questions together with the questions that followed have never been answered.  So, it is difficult for us now to continue accepting the undertaking by some of the Government Leaders. (Laughter)

MR. KATEGAYA: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to engage in a Debate of credibility between me and my teacher hon. Dr. Tiberondwa I will leave it to him but on that particular question, I am sure there are Members of this House who received a copy of my letter to the Minister concerned forwarding the question of the Members to the Ministers.  I can easily bring the record.  I wrote to each Minister that there is a question from so and so please answer it and I gave a copy to each Member of the House. So to say that I am not faithful, I made my promise, I wrote to the Minister and gave copies -(Interjection) I said I do not want to get into a Debate of credibility between me and my elder teacher, the public can judge that one.

I was saying that these sentiments the House is expressing have been expressed somewhere else and I have said that the Prime Minister has raised the question and that is why this pushing of the Bill is coming up and as he said yesterday it was on the Agenda, this is even disclosing cabinet secrecy by saying it was on the agenda yesterday but we never finished the business.  But what I want to point out is that me I think we should work not in a confrontational way.  I do not believe it myself.  I do not believe in confrontation and you know, although a little young, I have been in these politics for some time.  I remember our NCC in 1979, confrontation between the Government and the Back Benchers and eventually we just got into a problem.  Now, there was a question, Mr. Mayengo was saying that there is no direct vision therefore no direction.  I do not know in the vision of Mr. Mayengo which has a lot of it, whether we should have suspended finishing our debate on the Constituent Assembly and divert the House to this Motion.  Me, I do not know which is national importance as far as I am concerned.  Right, so  -(Interjection)  

MR. MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the vision I was talking about was when the Minister said that there will be a stock exchange and I said it is good that he has the vision and it is where I quoted Proverb No.23 in Chapter 19 stating that, “where there is no vision people perish.”

MR. KATEGAYA: Mr. Chairman, I am coming to the wording of this Motion.  Because the wording says; “The National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on 4th March, 1993, suspend all activities of the so called Public Enterprises Reform and Divesture forthwith.” Now, I think we have problem, Dr. Magezi, with the wording of this Motion because this so called Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Department is a Department of the government and, therefore, if we are going to be effective we should say “we urge the Government to do that and other things” because from here as it is, I do not know whether the Government is bound as it is.  I am just giving you free advice disorganised as I am.  If you say suspend, then I think, “we urge the government to ...,” you are directing somebody - at this moment, the way as it is nobody is going to act.  I can assure you if you are going to be very smart, be smart completely.  Because if I was the Prime Minister I would say okay, pass the resolution and sit down.  Next time what are you going to do?  That is why I am saying it is only the government which can call suspension, the government is the one which can call suspension, the House can urge the government -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, gentlemen.

MR. KATEGAYA:  I think Members should be cool all the time may be because we have no air condition that is why we get a bit worked up but I think the Motion if you want it should be to urge the government to suspend otherwise here there is no agency who is going to cause the suspension you are talking about as the Motion as it is.  But after having this free advice I still urge that we should go by the promise of the Prime Minister, I think he is more credible than Kategaya according to Dr. Adoniya Tiberondwa and then we see if in two weeks time we find he has not come up with the Bill, then you take all the consequences.  I think hon. Karuhanga had some points because sometimes we come here and do things without the consequences - have you really looked at the consequences of this Motion? What does it mean in practice.  But I said I would urge the House to respect the Prime Minister that he will fulfill his promise in two weeks time for the Bill to come here and then receive the wisdom from the Back Benchers on how to run this place.  Thank you very much.

MR. KAYONDE (Historical Member): I think you, Mr. Chairman. You can turn a good government into a bad government because of bad methods of work.  You can turn a good policy into a bad policy because of poor method of work.  Some of us are concerned because there is a departure from the principles of the Movement.  The Movement stands for open method of work.  The Movement believes in consensus.  The problem of African governments is to operate without consensus and that is why it is a cardinal principle of this Movement that there must be consensus because if you do not have consensus then you run a risk of saying some things that will not be acceptable or long lasting.  So, with that, I think the government or the executive, is becoming ineffective to Parliament -(Applause)- which to me it is not necessary because I know these Members are genuine, some are genuine and some have good intentions because Uganda -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, the NRM Government committed itself to the rule of law and that is fundamental.  When you say the rule of law, you cannot work outside the law and there is also in the rule of law, there should be separation of power between the executive and the legislature.  The executive cannot do what is legislative and vice versa.  Therefore, we must separate what can the executive do and what should Parliament do.  In my view on some of these issues some are legislative.  I will give you an example. The Minister of Local government circulated a policy statement and promised that he was going to Table this, the Custodian Board there is a law on Expropriated Custodian Board Properties.  Now some of the things which we see are outside even the law so that is why this Parliament get concerned where even there is existing law and somebody does not follow.   So, I think what we need to do, in a broad based government, like this one, consensus is even paramount in my view and transparency.

On this issue these Members will only have resorted to this holding the government at ransom but that is the only method they have left.  (Laughter)  Yes, because - I am sorry. When a government is not sensitive to what Parliament demands, because I do not know how many times Members of Parliament or NRC have asked on these very issues that please bring this law, please bring this information and the government does not respond.  So, I think really there is a principle here to protect, let us share the responsibility, let us know what is legislative and let it come here and in the spirit of consensus let us discuss some of these broad policies.

Having said that I share the views of hon. Karuhanga and the views of the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister.  If we leave this resolution or the Motion as it stands, first of all this so called Public Enterprises is not a legal entity.  So, nobody is bound by law on an illegal or a Department of Government.  So, I think really as he said if you want to be smart be smart completely.  What is in my view, what is at stake, is that a Ugandan property should not be sold without involving this consensus and without backed by the law.  I think that is what most Members are asking.  Therefore, we can suspend sales and really negotiations because those are part of the sale exercise but as to this reformed, the department in the Ministry of Finance to continue giving us the research and what have you and publish information and even draft the law to come here, that is administrative in my view.  So, I think I wish to ask the Mover that if he can only narrow to the sale then the other activities will not be affected. 

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  I would like to give information in line with what hon. Kayonde is saying and I agree with him, I have drafted an Amendment which I want to move under order -(Interruption) - Under Rule 27, of our Rules of Procedure.  I intend to move an Amendment under that rule.  In line with what hon. Kayonde is saying and which Amendment does not materially alter any principle of the Motion by the hon. Magezi and is, therefore, relevant. 

Permit me, therefore, to formally make this Amendment, Mr. Chairman.  The Amendment I want to move reads as follows; That the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on 4th of March, 1993, directs the government to suspend the sale of public enterprises until the relevant policies or a Bill has been enacted by this august House. (Applause)

That Motion, in my opinion, caters for the views that have been expressed on this Floor.  We are simply putting the ball in the hands of the government.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said two weeks.  We are saying for us no time limit.  We are saying you can even bring it after tomorrow then the sales will continue.  So, in other words, we are putting now the pressure on the government itself rather government go -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. Proceed, please.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  We are telling the government that let it go ahead, formulate its policy or prepare the Bill the Prime Minister has said in two weeks time, well and good.  When you are ready bring it to us, so we are not tying you and also my Amendment takes into account the word of wisdom from the First Deputy Prime that the Motion as it stands may be evaded but now I am saying we are directing the government. So there is no ambiguity, once you pass it, it will bind the government. So, I think this Motion will not harm hon. Magezi, the Mover of this Motion because it suspends the sale not activities because we do not want even the administrative matter stopped.  All these can go on but no sale will tale place at all until the policy has been brought to this House or until the relevant Bill has been enacted by this House.  So, Mr. Chairman, I move.

THE RT.  HON. THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. Cosmas Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, to summarise the whole thing, I personally have listened, I have taken into consideration and with due respect I do not want to turn this House which has been together for years, which have made things, which has set Uganda into a better place than we found it, to be turned into a place of wrangling, of disputes. I do not wish that one.  As a result, with due respect, I have taken into consideration the resolution put to this House by hon. Dr. Magezi from Jinja to the effect that the government accepts to withhold the sale of the activities -(Applause)- as recommended by the majority of the House.  We are a broad based government, we listen from the top to the bottom and vice versa and, in my opinion, I only pledge that the Attorney General’s Chambers does the needful especially after we discuss this Bill next week so that within the time I have promised, that is two weeks, the Bill should be before this august House so that normal activities is resumed.  I thank you very much and I think that is the summary.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  (Applause)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as a matter of formality now that the Government has accepted, we are going to adopt and pass the Amendment as moved by the hon. Butagira that is the guiding principle.  I am sure the Mover of the original Motion do accept that and we then come proceed with this one.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you all accept that Amendment?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

DR. MAGEZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to wind up on this Motion.  Firstly, Sir, I would like to thank your good self, Sir, for allowing me to have moved this Motion.  Secondly, I would really thank all the Members who have been able to contribute to this Motion and more particularly I would like to thank the Committee on Economy and the Chairman of the Sectoral Committees with whom we have been working on this particular Motion.

I will try not to put too much detail on the contributions made, but really I would like to first thank you very much the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for your very wonderful exposition on this Motion.  I do however have one reservation that in your suggestion that to accept a policy you have found it necessary to put two Members of this House on the policy organ, to me I think that should not be the issue.  In fact, I would be happier if no Member of this House was a Member of Parliament just for purposes of being a true watchdog on the operations of parliament.  Secondly, hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, Minister, I find it very difficult to realise any merit in your contribution on this way. (Laughter) You are saying everything is alright, there is a law in place -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order. You are winding up, please.   Wind up.

DR. MAGEZI: Mr. Chairman, I think I can only say this that this Motion is without prejudice to the existing law of this country and it would have been very important for the Minister to give us the terms of reference of PERD when they were setting up this secretariat.  I would like to say that there is a lot of low sense in what the First Deputy Prime Minister and I will be proposing an amendment to this Motions but it is very important to note that what while rally we are talking about suspending all the activities you hear this matter of the Atlantic Tele-Network Corporation trying to sell the Telecommunications Department of our UP & TC, and the Leader of the Government Business is silent on this?  Does he mean that actually it is taking place or it is not taking place?  That is why I would like to add that negotiations, advertising for these sales and sales must not take place.  I think those three are the factors that I would like to put together to make sure and after all this is a temporary measure here and we are saying you put the House in order, the House is not in order.  Let the Ministers responsible do the work they should have done two years ago, they come here and until we pass a law, we suspend advertising because that is a policy matter we are going to discuss how do you advertise for these sales, we suspend negotiations because we want to tell them how should we negotiate and we suspend sales because we want to tell them how to sell. To me that is important.  What worries me is, what if the present system as it is sells Uganda Electricity Board and the House in its wisdom says no, you should not have sold the Uganda Electricity Board.  Who is going to bear the blame and the cost? And how are you going to account for it?  That is why I urge that those three will be put in the Motion as an Amendment but allow me to say this, it is important to be transparent and accountable for the citizens of Uganda, that is my national condition, Mr. First Deputy Prime Minister so that any suspicion that PERD is a hoax and has grossly undervalued national assets to the benefits of few individuals are dispelled.  Any privatisation of major economic institutions that have been part of the back for all our economy is fundamental to the present and future Uganda.  Therefore, it must be subjected to a thorough debate by this House before implementation.  The whole process has to be seen to be legitimate, just and to be the national interest.  I would like finally to quote to you a statement made by the Chairman/Managing Director of UCB, which I totally agree with and it is for the benefit of the Members just before we vote on this Motion.  It says “In every society a person perceive some objects, events, situations and so forth as intrinsically right or wrong, as morally intelligible or not, as legitimate or not. This anxiety is not totally imaginary in the current privatisation drive yet it is crucial for the future that when the future generations look back on the country’s economic history they should be satisfied that the method by which wealth passed from public to private hands were transparent and fair.  For if they are not convinced that that was the case they will not be obliged to accept the resulting distribution of wealth.” Revolution rather than democracy will be the outcome of such convictions.  Therefore, when we advocate that privatisation not only be seen to be but actually become democratic we are aiming to protect the private sector, the beneficiaries and the society at large, today and tomorrow.  With that I beg to move that The National Resistance Council Sitting in Kampala on the 4th of March, 1993 directs the government to suspend advertising, negotiating and selling of properties by the so called Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture -(Interruption)- all activities by PERD, the suspension must be in force until the relevant policy or Bill has been enacted in this august House.  I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question but before putting the question I would like hon. Butagira to repeat the Motion as it was amended, which was on the Floor.

MR. BUTAGIRA: I thought procedurally there was my Amendment which we should have disposed of.  Now, this reads like this; “That the National Resistance Council Sitting in Kampala on 4th March, 1993 directs the government to suspend the sale of Public Enterprises until the relevant policy or Bill has been enacted by this august House.” Mr. Chairman, you recall the Prime Minister accepted that.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to stand up and second the Motion moved by hon. Butagira on the following grounds.  One, the hon. Butagira’s Motion is dealing with suspension and stopping there, it does not speak of anything, it does not suspend negotiations -(Interruptions)- wait.  It allows the government to continue working as they see fit.  If the government -(Interruption)- it is up to you to reject it or not but I am seconding this Motion using this reasoning.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform this august House that a few weeks ago some students came to my office making certain demands with menace and they told me that their demands must be made there and then in terms drawn by themselves and I told these students that this is not the way public affairs and democracy works.  If you want to see it come to Parliament and see how people compromise and make a consensus.  I would like to inform this august House now that from what I have seen I am surprised whether these students will have to take me seriously or this House seriously either.  My concern is that when a Member is making a contribution, part of democracy is that you listen to others even when you do not agree with their point of view and when you have a better point to make you rise coolly and intelligently and put your point of view. But throughout this afternoon I have been rather taken back that whenever a Member say something they do not like they shout him down and some of us who are busy trying to make notes get lost in the process.  I will have to go back now and apologise to the students and say that it seems you are part and parcel of the same process but I do not think I should be right that way.  So, to me, Mr. Chairman, the Prime Minister has already made a good concession. But the Butagira’s Amendment, the government - a day to win it is a day to save the nation and the consensus has been our method of work.  So, I would like to appeal to my Colleagues that part of democracy is listening to another point of view even when you do not agree with it, because you will be give an opportunity to say why.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. KARUHANGA:  The point I would like to raise is that this question of negotiation, please, Members do not tie yourself on it because in effect the word ‘negotiation’ really is meaningless in law; negotiation is non-committal, it is not a final decision - when you are negotiating with anybody - you know you must remember that there are two words which are very important in law in matter of sell or contract.  The two words are ‘offer’ and ‘acceptance.’  When there is an offer and there is an acceptance when you have had an agreement, then you can sign and sell; but when somebody comes and says ‘I want to buy Parliament House’ and you say; ‘oh, you want to buy a Parliament House, everything has a price, give us 100 billion dollars which can build as ten of very good ones’ the man has made an offer, that is negotiation! Now, what are you stopping when you say we want to stop negotiations, what are you stopping?  So, the word ‘negotiation’ therefore is not relevant.  So, I support that we support Butagira’s Amendment, it is clear and it is obvious.  The Prime Minister has already accepted, we are getting what we wanted. I do not see why we are wasting time on this Bill any more.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, I wish to support the Amendment by hon. Butagira, but I wish to, also, add that, actually, while in law sale is offer and acceptance, in business sale begins when you make the terms, and therefore, we should take the words ‘suspend sales’ is to suspend negotiations, because you cannot negotiate unless you want to sell or to buy.  We should accept the Amendment but knowing that the implication of suspension of sales includes the process of sell.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I accept that you include the word ‘negotiations’ so it should read, ‘stop negotiations and sell’, because to me the final result is the same.  We have stopped the sell, you can continue negotiating, but you cannot sell. 

MR. KATEGAYA:  Mr. Chairman, I think we should take all the constraints we are talking about; because first of all, everybody has said that there is argument about divesture, there is no argument on privatisation.  I think what is crucial is what do we get out of that exercise as a country? Now, to me the Amendment by hon. Butagira is enough, because it is saying that nothing passes to anybody until we have come back here.  Even if there are negotiations, some people can drink tea and the rest, that will be not useful until we have come back here.  Even if there are negotiations, some people can drink tea and the rest, that will be not useful until we have come here; the conclusion is the same, the passing of the property, and I would not like us to send signals that this project is paralysed, it is not good for this country.  Because it is good to say that you are very big, but when nothing is behind you that is empty rhetoric.  Because we have had experience with this type of situation, where people say nothing moves and then the consequences are even adverse to the economy as a whole. So, to me it is enough to say no sell is concluded until we come here, but meanwhile we can talk to these fellows who come around. You keep talking, you drink tea, tomorrow you take them for a beer, and meanwhile the Prime Minister is coming here.  But if you say do not come, I think the signals are not good. 

So, I will urge the House to really think of the country as a whole; what will be the adverse effect of saying no negotiations, no advertising, no sell.  I think that will be - these gentlemen who are coming around the  -(inaudible)- of hon. Mayengo, you leave them, let them come and have coffee, but they do not pass anything. I think the Amendment is correct. (Interjections) So, I would support the original Amendment by hon. Butagira.

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you much, Mr. Chairman. Let me just look a little bit at the history, how I came to know about PERD? It was by an advertisement in a British paper called the Guardian; and this where lists of certain companies were classified and advertise.  I am yet to be reminded that this list ever appeared in the local press in Uganda.  For me it is for that particular reason that we need to have a policy guideline or even on the advertising of the sells of these assets.  I appreciate the sentiments expressed by the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, but if you are going to negotiate with me and you have no authority to sell, why do you waste my time? I want you to call me to negotiate knowing very well you can sell to tomorrow.  So, it would appear to me that unless the Members are throwing out this whole Motion, negotiations advertising and sells have to be together.  For that reason I oppose the Amendment.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I think let us just be realistic, I think anybody who knows that we have said no sell, would be wasting his time to come and negotiate, and we hope also Government will not advertise when they have not given us a policy guideline.  So, I am wondering whether we are really slogging the dead horse.  I would have -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I do agree with most Members that we should get to the end of this particular debate; but at the same time, I wanted to inform the hon. Member that valuation and under valuation do occur during negotiations, and it is this negotiation that worries us. During that period a lot of things change hands; and I would like to say that whilst they are refusing negotiations the word ‘sell’ is hammer, the real thing is in the negotiation.  The real thing is not on sell, on sell is a day you walk in, you sign and that is the end of it, but the negotiation that is where you can even convince each other whether to undervalue or value the property.

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform this hon. House through you, sir, that in law a contract is concluded after an offer, an acceptance and passing of consideration. Mr. Chairman points of advertisement and negotiations could be termed in legal matters as mere invitation to treat; that means you can talk and it does not mean -(Interjections)- I seek your protection, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.


MR. KANYOMOZI: The Amendment has been put forward by hon. Butagira including the words ‘negotiations’ and ‘sell the invitation’ - to use hon. Amanya’s expressions - of looking at your daughter even if she is not ready to be married, becomes a problem - people will know as long as we do not go in the negotiations and also in sells, I think that should accommodate everybody’s fears, because Government is not now going to negotiate, people can admire our assets, they can know them that they are ready for sale, but nobody is going to go in negotiations and commit us before the Bill is tabled here and is debated.  

So, I am saying, that helps us and I think it accommodates even hon. Magezi’s feelings and all the Members.  the Government is being directed not to negotiate or sell assets until the Bill and policy guidelines have been discussed by this House, I think that covers all of us, it leaves the Government to do the routine work, to do research, to gather information so that when the Bill gets through - immediately the Bill gets through they will have the information at hand and they can start negotiating and hammer the deal. I hope this can be accepted by hon. Members under your guidance.  Thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, as I told the hon. House earlier, we are very committed in fulfilling what we say.  I have deliberately given you two weeks because I know it is within capacity of government to present that Bill here.  But I will plead with the hon. Members - you remember from the Shakespeare’s book, Shylock, the merchant who was just insisting on the pound of flesh from nearest the heart. But we are pleading, and please be reminded that you are representing about 17 million Ugandans, and they are depending on the economy, some sectors of the economy must move.  I told you about the importance of rehabilitation of the cement industries both at Tororo and Hima. Cement is one of the most important input of rehabilitation in the country! I did tell you that; but if you are now going to say Government must not even be seen to be talking about how much Hima should be costed, about how much Tororo should be rehabilitated until we bring the Bill, please you are taking Government too  much at ransom, and not only government but the 17 million Ugandans, and the rehabilitation which has been taking place here has made possible because of your policies, you as the legislature of Uganda, plus the listening, plus the concern of the international communities who are also aware, the other time it was the Custodian Board and you know how you handled it, I am glad we have got out of it up to about 80 per cent.  This privatisation is an internationally accepted process, Uganda is one of the countries undergoing privatisation, and to some countries it is a must, but if you are going to send wrong signal tonight that in Uganda nothing now can move, not even talking, you are going to send a very negative sign.  Whereas you are right, I would plead with you that you give Government two weeks to present this Bill meanwhile we stop the sell; but to say not even negotiations, not even proposals should be make, I think we are going too far! Hon. Members you have the responsibility to take care of 17 million Ugandans, but we are depending also on the good will of international bodies, it is not just a matter of putting a stringent law here and think all is well; we must look at both sides of the coin.  We are aware of your concern, this is why I have taken Government to have a contract with you for two weeks. I plead with you that we remain with the Amendment - the earlier Amendment by hon. Butagira who is a known lawyer, after all, you know him, not only that but he is also concerned, he is also one of us, I told you I am also one of you, we are part and parcel of the House, but please, hon. Members, let us stop from being derailed from the cause of action we have been undergoing together.  I now note with a lot of concern that if we do not sit back and revert to what we have been doing together for the last four years or so, these remaining few years may be misdirected.  Because every time we are coming here there is a resolution, we started last week with a resolution and now there are many more resolutions coming, but my question is, where were you all this time with the resolutions? So, hon. Members, with due respect I plead with you that you make these laws as human beings, you are representing 17 million humans, I do respect you, I do take your words and we are going to act on your proposal after two weeks, but that you remain with the Amendment of Butagira.  I thank you very much. 

DR. MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, I take it that hon. Butagira’s Amendment includes negotiations and sells.  I would like really to than what the hon. Rt. Prime Minister has just said.  To me it appears that definitely there is too much external pressure for divesture, from reading between lines; and I am saying what does that stand vis-a-vis the democracy we are trying to usher in through the National Resistance Movement? I, therefore, must say I am not in the least convinced that Government cannot bring this Bill here. be debated, passed into  law while these two conditions are there! We have to defend the 17 million people the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is talking about. I, therefore, Sir, will go along with hon. Butagira’s Amendment including ‘negotiations and sells.’

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I am not standing here to sort of oppose or whatever the case may be, but just to clarify a small thing, maybe, illustrating that the word ‘negotiations’ may be much - about nothing.  By passing the directive here that so sell will be made from now on, it does include all those agreements that were to be signed tomorrow whose negotiations had already been done. But - you see, Mr. Chairman  -(Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS: No, no.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: If it is not then it would mean that since negotiations have already been made and agreement finalised, then - which means really that all what we are saying, that whether negotiations have been carried on or not and so sell has been done there should be no sell. (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Yes, no sell.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Is that what you mean?

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes,

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Whether you continue negotiating or not, there must be no sells -(Interjections) So, Mr. Chairman, negotiation or no negotiation there must not be sells, and I hope that is what Government understands.  All I wanted to say is that even for those where we have already done negotiations there will be sells.  I agree with you there will be no sells. Therefore, the negotiations have been -(Interruption)

DR. LUYOMBYA: Is the hon. Minister of Local Government in order to take us back when his boss the Prime Minister has already accepted and given an undertaking; is he in order?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, he is quite in order; proceed please.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I made it clear that all what I am trying to point out is, perhaps, equivalent to what the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister pointed out, and all what I am saying is that if we emphasise negotiations and in some cases negotiations have already been done, it could imply that since negotiations have already been done - but I am pointing out - yes, I am agreeing with you that the directive not to sell is regardless of whether negotiations have gone on, go on or do not go on, we shall not sell - this is all that I am trying to say! So, the word ‘negotiations’ is really irrelevant.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Butagira please, read your Amendment so that the people are clear about it.  Read the first Amendment.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, let me read the Amendment for the sake of clarity, it reads:  “That the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on 4th March, 1993, directs the Government to suspend the negotiations and sells of public enterprises until the relevant policy or Bill has been enacted by the august House.”

DR. MAGEZI: Mr. Chairman, I accept the Amendment in totality, Sir, 

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The information I have is this question of enact, enacting the law includes the time when it is signed.  So, when you are talking of the period now, you better think of that period, it includes the signing; and the period, therefore, may be longer than some of us think.

MR. KATEGAYA: Mr. Chairman, I had a belief that we were coming to s consensus, but it seems every time we seem to come to a conclusion we go back.  Therefore, I was proposing that we keep the original Motion.

HON. MEMBERS: No, no.

MR. KATEGAYA: Can I be protected, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please; proceed please.

MR. KATEGAYA:  Because I thought that the original Motion was generating less hit and controversy, so I am suggesting that we keep it as it is and we pass it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the National Resistance Council sitting in Kampala on 4th March, 1993 directs Government to suspend the negotiations and sell of public enterprises until the relevant police or Bill has been enacted by this august House.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued).

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  I wish to inform you that those who are moving out will not be given any other chance to debate on this Constituent Assembly Bill.

MR. KAFURA (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, to allow me to contribute on this Bill that I support after this controversial debate for the Resolution.  The national Constitution of Uganda  indeed is the basic law that the most people of Uganda - majority of them have been yearning for.  People in my county have been asking me that we are having many previous Constitutions, why do we want to have another one? But I have tried my best to tell them that the old Constitutions did not get the support and contributions of the people of Uganda; and  - hence they indeed support the Bill and I do.

The establishment of a new body to debate the Constitution is indeed a government step that we support, but I wish to ask about the composition of that body.  When you read on the first Schedule on page 19 of the Bill, they talk about the different bodies to be represented in this Constituent Assembly.  It is my support that the women of Uganda should be one delegate, that is, per district representation. Reasons are that the women of Uganda form the majority of the population and most of them, over 60 per cent are illiterate, they do not know the laws that govern them.  So, if we can have wide representation, maybe, we can have the same delegates to go and explain the women what the constitution is about.  

On the NRA, I also support that it should be represented as a special interest group, taking into consideration the role they played when they ushered in the democracy we are enjoying today.  On No. 3, the NRC, in my views and those of my constituents are that the NRC as a body should not take part in the elections of the directly elected delegates.  But NRC could join the elected delegates so that the House should be big enough.  You have seen this afternoon where a few Members of the Executive have been doing a lot of unfair play with our Ugandan property, and now a bigger voice has been saying ‘no, we ant to participate.’ Now, I ask myself, why can’t the NRC as a whole body be part to the delegates from the counties so that we can discuss our Constitution in a large number, so that it can be long lasting, it can be widely fed with some relevant and well searched information.  So, I intend to say that we should not have NRC being represented with ten Members but instead, we should pull out from the elections;  so that other delegates, members elected in the counties - but the present NRC be seconded to that new body so that we can also put in our views.  I support that the workers of Uganda should be represented and maybe the number ‘two’ to me is small, because the workers here - we have got those who work in industries, those working in the Civil Service and those who are working on their own, perhaps, we should increase the number to 5 delegates representing the workers.

My people in Buhweju ask me about political parties: what special connotation do we have on political parties, are party supporters not part of Ugandans.  If a member was a DP supporter, UPC supporter or any party supporter.  He or she can go and stand in a county and then be elected to come and represent the views as a Ugandan.  Some people were saying in Buhweju that even they understand NRC is a broad based Government body where most supporters of parties exist.  So, if the whole body of NRC were to join the Constituent Assembly then the political parties would very well be represented there.  So, they did not see why we should have these two people to represent political parties. After all, how do we elect?  

On the youth, we are saying in Buhweju that the youth like the women of Uganda should also be well represented and, therefore, every district should put in a youth.  Mr. Chairman, I want to be brief.  On the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, I and the people of Buhweju support that the President should appoint the Chairman, for the following reasons; one, the Constitution is the brain child of NRM, as hon. Bidandi Ssali put it, the Minister for Local Government, that if the members of the Constituent Assembly elect their own Chairman or Chairperson, perhaps that person may be of a certain political party and, therefore, other members may not freely contribute and may doubt his or here impartiality.  Hence the Office of the President with the advice of the Cabinet could appoint somebody to chair the Assembly.

We support that the county should be the electoral area as proposed in the Bill.  The county of Buhweju is unique in its location vis-a-vis the other counties in Bushenyi district; we are indeed in the remotest areas and with a lot of hardships in terms of transport and other facilities.  So, we are saying that at a county level the NRM thought very well and we support that a county should be the best electoral area. 

About the municipality; I think, the municipalities as represented here in the House should remain a single entity, they should not be amalgamated to the neighbouring counties as proposed in the Bill; this would bring a lot of confusion, Mr. Chairman.  The urban area -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR. KAFURA:  Okay, Mr. Chairman.  I therefore, support that municipalities should be represented as they exist in the House.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.

MR. OKIA (Bukedeya County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This Bill is really setting a turning point in the history of the Members of this House and also in the history of this country.  It demands some sacrifice that you have to leave a seat and go and contest for a seat; but for the good of this country, people in Bukedeya are saying it would be good for Members to go and seek a fresh mandate and be elected directly to debate the Constitution.  They know it is a sacrifice, given the fact that you already have their mandate, but because of what has been going on in this country, what you hear in the villages, what the people say, it is better that the Members seek a fresh mandate and be elected directly.  Another possibility to some people of - but if you have two groups, the other group directly elected and indirectly elected,  Members let us be sincere, there is somebody who has more power than you have.  Because he has been elected directly.   Now, for you who has been elected indirectly you look an inferior material - okay, that is to me anyway, if you do not believe it but those are the facts.  So, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. member holding the Floor that once you have these two people elected, one directly and one indirectly you will automatically create two camps within a county.

DR.TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the information that has just been given is really irrelevant, because in this House we have got many categories of people and yet we are going together.  So, I do not think that one can stop us from working together.

MR. OKIA: Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for that information, but remember this is a special task, the assignment is a special one which is a Constitution of this country, which is very important, because the Constitution of this country - I would like Members to consider themselves that they have an achievement, the achievement you have is that you are the founding fathers; if you go to USA and speak of politics and you are not speaking about the founding fathers you are not considered serious, but we have scored something, we are already laying our bricks as founding fathers; can you not be proud of being a founding father? Even if I lost an election I would be proud, definitely if I lost, I would go back home and be counted as a founding father, I will be very happy about that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that even right now in the House we are three categories of Members?  The elected Members, the Historical Members and the nominated, and we are doing very well.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that even the coming Constituency Assembly avoiding the creation of camps is inevitable, because we shall have even the nominated members coming to join it.  I do not know whether that one is not a special category, and that is a special camp also.  Thank you.

MR. OKIA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, now I would like to go to seriously what the people of Bukedeya said on the appointment of a Chairman.  They said the Members who are directly elected should elect the Chairman.  They can even elect the chairman outside the Assembly itself, it does not mean necessarily - if the members agree that they see somebody who really qualified to be a chairman, even if he is outside; Bukedea people did not agree on the appointment of the Chairman, by the President, because the history of this country, people think definitely that - it should not be repeated, that if he has an interest he will try to represent in the appointment of a Chairman, and here we are saying that we must start seriously, that is why the Members also sacrifice to go and contest for these seats.  Therefore, the President should also be able to sacrifice -(Interjections) So, I believe that the President should sacrifice that the members of the Constituent Assembly they elect their Chairman, whether he comes from out or within, he should be elected by the Members themselves. On the groups of the - say, the historical, they are realising the role the historical have played and they say okay, let us just give them this time so that the next time they should no longer be called historical, they should go to the people.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.

MR. OKIA: Now, Mr. Chairman, on the issue of the parties they say the parties that are there should be represented proportionally in that they do not see a sense of a party which one see or not seeing it at all having the same   Members like a party which worn a big majority.  So they thought that, the UPC should take four, that DP should take four, the CP should take one and the rest one, and on the issue of the youth, hon. Members the youth are very serious group and they are very adventurous since we intend to bring them.  The members in my county say let us have a youth from every district so the same goes to women.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, East Jinja) Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise in support of the Motion.  I have just a few observations that I hope the Minister for Constitutional Affairs will have to clarify.  The first one concern the two Assemblies, I quite agree with the consensus so far that maybe the National Resistance Council as constituted is not the best forum to debate the Constitution.  However, if we are going to remain in office until 1994, sometime after the Constitution has possibly even been enacted into Law and there arises a Constitutional issue, will the NRC be in a position to resolve or amend the Constitution prior to the expiry of the interim period of the administration of the National Resistance Council?  If not, then I think we should review the whole question of our life as a legislature (NRC) of this country.  Now, the second point, is about distances voters will have to travel to go and vote.  I think the main point is that voting will be at parish levels unless it is hazardous, but this depends sometimes on the decision of the Secretariat.  I would urge the Minister to be clearer on this issue, since we had election at RC.1 through out the country so that people can have easy access in voting.  I know it is expensive, but if we are trying to get big turn out of voters you have got to make it convenient to them.  I think you could find that instead of getting 70 per cent turn up you will get 35 per cent and for purposes of credibility, I think, we need to facilitate as much people as possible.  In Municipalities it may be a bit acceptable but in the counties that constitute more than 90 percent of our countryside, I think what I am asking for should be a matter that can seriously be looked into.  What worries me about the people who will make up the Constituent Assembly is one; that if I want to go and contest to be a Member of the Constituent Assembly, I will endeavour to make my line known through out my election on certain key issues in the constitution.  If I am a supporter of my party, I will say well you have to elect me if you want me to go and advocate multi-parties.  If I am a movement man I will say, I stand for the National Resistance Movement, if I am for Kingship I will do the same.  Now, these people come to this House with properly defined lines or positions, and I am getting a bit worried that even before the Members are sworn in the verdict on our Constitution will be far well known before we go to the conclusion.  I hear some whispers that already on the ground some interested groups have already started coming up.  I wonder whether really the Constituent Assembly per say should be the only forum to finally rule on the Constitution.  I have for example; the District Council, these District Councils were elected sometime last year, the issue or position at that time was still vague and maybe, it is a forum which you can look at as a more neutral Assembly if you are looking at neutrality per say.  Because, I will be very disappointed if people in groups will decide the outcome of the results alone.  Some groups could consider their participation in the Constitution making irrelevant because they know they will never muscle the two thirds majority, and what about the majority of Ugandans? an issue which is in contradiction with what the 2/3 of the Constituent Assembly have?  It is easy to get the 2/3 through this method of campaigning and getting positions to be known.  So, the matter will not be courteous, and it will not go for a national referendum, what will happen in such a situation?  

In the Municipalities, we have a problem in the morning at 7.00 O’clock we have many workers and dwellers who come and do their businesses and their earn livelihood in the Municipality.  At 10.00 O’clock in the morning, if these people know Magezi is coming to talk, may be they are 200,000 people waiting to hear what I have to tell them.  But at night if I call the rally, then maybe less than 10,000 will turn up.  For all purposes and intentions, therefore, Mr. Chairman, I represent far more people than what the House hold census produced as a result of population and which is, therefore, forming the basis of representation in the Constituent Assembly. And that is why I would urge the hon. Minister responsible to re-examine this particular matter.  Many people were told to go home and be counted in their villages where they come from.  There was no work on that census day, it was a public holiday, so there was no way they could have been counted in places where they work.  Jinja is where they live and earn their livelihood and yet they were not counted from there. The burden of representing more than 200,000 people may fall only on one delegate in the Constituent Assembly.  I am advocating that at least Jinja if it is big enough to enjoy two people to represent it in the Parliament, it surely deserves more than just one delegate. In fact, you are disfranchising some people by grouping two constituencies together for this one delegate.  Equally so for other municipalities which are being tied to counties, they are again disfranchising the municipalities not the people in the county.  Those people in the county still have their one man, one vote, but for the people in town it is going to be made 50 per cent.  I beg to support the Motion, Sir, and I hope to move several amendments when we are in a Committee Stage.  Thank you, Sir. 

MR. OLUM (Moyo County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill. I support the formation of the Constitutional Assembly, but many Members have already advanced reasons why this is necessary and I am not going to go over what they have already said.  I would like to make comments on a few points in the Bill.  On page 10, the Minister proposes that the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman should not belong to any political party especially if they are members of the National Executive Committee of those parties.  The underlined principle of this Bill is to elect Members on a none partisan basis, and we are all going to be elected on a none partisan basis.  This is very well agreed and it is a good principle.  But I think on the other hand to go out and fish out the political party leaders and discriminate against them I think that counter the spirit of reconciliation and working together.  Even our present Constitution Article 18; subsection 1 (g); guarantees the formation of political parties you are free to belong to a political party and to operate a political party in this country.  I think under this Section the Constitution stipulates that Government or Parliament can only regulate the operation of politic parties, and control the formation of political parties, but they cannot regulate to obstruct the operation of political parties.  To pass this particular section on this Bill as it is, tantamount to discrimination and unconstitutional behaviour against certain section of the people of Uganda.  I would ask the hon. Minister to see if he can remove that particular restriction so that all Ugandans are taken as equal and they can also have a chance to become chairman or Vice Chairman of this august Body which is going to be created. (Applause)  

I would like to talk briefly about the appointment of registration and returning officers. These are very important appointment in the conduct of elections.  The 1980 elections were greatly affected by the way these officers were appointed.  There was wide spread complaints against some of the registration/returning officers and most of the mismanagement and rigging of the elections were carried out by these officers.  Even the military commission chairman, the vice President of Uganda hon. Paul Muwanga had to dismiss 15 of them mid-way through the election because he was also dissatisfied with the way some of them were performing their duty.  I think this House cannot take this matter very lightly and I would like to agree with hon. Omara Atubo who said we should appoint civil servants who are not bias.  I will explain why I said that; these are people already who have declared their positions.  We have got the D.A. who does not know the position of the D.A. as regards political parties.  We know the position at the NRM Secretariat for the last 7 years.  They have been preaching nothing but scorn and hatred for political parties.  You can imagine if these are the people who are going to be returning officers, what do you expect they will do to the people who profess to belong to a political party.  I think, Mr. Minister you should take these matters very seriously and I intend to support the amendment to be brought by hon. Omara  Atubo that we should not involve people who  have been directly involved in political campaigns especially the DAs and NRM Secretariat.  These are already known people and I think it will be wrong for us to pretend that they do not have sides they support.

I want now to talk about political campaigns or the election campaign.  Election campaign should be as free as possible, the candidates meeting is a good idea but it should not be the only method of campaign, Members should be free to organise themselves, to organise public meetings and to continue to be in touch with the people so that they can tell their point of view.  So, the idea of restricting the campaigns to one members meeting in a parish is a point that is really denying the people their right to be heard and to explain their position. I think, if we could put down some regulations; like that the Police must be in uniformed, a programme must be put in place in time and adequate information to be put out, I think we can control the campaign and let everybody have a chance to reach out and to be heard.  

I would like now to mention some of the nasty things that happened in 1980. Those campaigns in some areas were manned by violence, stone throwing and disruption, and sometime these disruptions were done in the presence of the Police, the Army and the Law enforcement officers.  In other wards these disruption and violence were actually condoned by the people in authority.  I hope that during this 1993 we do not have an occurrence of this nature.  We should show that we are matured enough to be able to use our law enforcement authorities to be fair to all to ensure that nobody breaks the Law.  Mr. Chairman, on this note, I would like to mention here some very sad incidents which have occurred recently at Makerere University.  (Interruption)

MR. OLUBO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor on the point that he said that we are mature enough.  Through his county up to this time, Mr. Chairman, some of us are still being convoyed; does that show maturity?

MR. OLUM: Chairman, I think that is an issue that can be raised to the relevant authority.  I would like further to point out that, because of the shortage of time, we have read the newspapers about the guild presidential election that took place last weekend.  Two students were abducted, and when you read the stories these are very, very sad indeed.  One of them claimed that the cars having no number plates was used to take him up to Jinja, roughed him up. One of them comes from Gulu District I happened to talk to the boy, and the second one Bigirwa was missing for so long and today I was happy to see him back on Campus.  These are connected with election procedures, and I just pray and hope that we do not have this kind of occupancy again in our national election, which is going to take place.  Who is there to protect somebody in Kotido or in Nwoya County in the game park?  I would like to appeal to the Government and to the Minister to address themselves very seriously on this matter of election violence.  Because, some of these violence are actually state inspired while they may not be official policies but there are some individuals within the Government who deliberately go out to frustrate and to intimidate others.  What happened at Makerere is a clear sign of intimidation by some people within our system -(Interruption)

MR. TUWESIGYE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think there is more in kidnapping of Makerere students than meets the eye.  In fact, even in The New Vision story, ‘kidnapped student back to Makerere’, and when you read the story closely I think it is not safer at this point to state categorically that these students were kidnapped.  I think we need to do a little bit more investigations.

MR. OLUM: Mr. Chairman, that is exactly what I am saying; we need to investigate and I hope that these are not signs that our elections are going to take this form.  I am calling on the Government and the Minister who is going to organise this election to take this point very seriously, because these are pointers.  Some of us saw these things in 1980. In 1984 I was going to Nebbi with hon. Semwogerere.  When we reached Gulu our driver was kidnapped and up to now we have not seen the car.  But fortunately the driver after being beaten up was thrown in River Tochi but somehow he recovered and he is alive today.  So, this issue on election violence and the conduct of election should not be take lightly and I want just to sound a warning that Members should stand warned that we are going to this game which may be rough.  And it is upon Government to ensure that this game is made as smooth as possible and those in authority -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, with due respect I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor, that the duty to conduct a peaceful election is not only that of the preside of Government, but also of everybody involved, including opposition parties.  In this connection, I would like to bring to the notice of the hon. Member on the Floor, that I read in the Papers that recently at a DP/UPC press conference at Spoke Hotel a certain journalist asked a question and in the name of Democracy this journalist was nearly torn to pieces.  

MR. MULWANIRA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and my other Colleague, that when I was deliberating here yesterday, I said the hours to explain to the people the purpose of the coming Constituent Assembly is our job. If we have not done that job properly people are going to think in terms of politics during the next election, instead of thinking of the actually essence of their coming to the Constituent Assembly to discuss the Constitution, and these are the people who are going to cause a chaos and we may have wrong materials for the right purpose.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that this last weekend in Arua Town members of the Uganda Peoples Congress were holding consultations and the District Administrator in the name of the National Resistance Movement sent Police men who beat up and dispersed the meeting.

MR. OLUM: Well, Mr. Chairman, I have raised this matter as you can see it is a very -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up please.

MR. OLUM: It is a very important matter which I believe needs good discussion among us, to follow up on the line of the Professor I propose here that political parties and the Government should hold consultations and try to promote good conduct during the Constituent Assembly election.  I think this can really help and cool down tempers and to work out what we may call code of conduct between the different political forces.  I think, already the Democratic Party during the discussion with Government made proposals for code of conduct and we were able to convince the Government that by bringing a code of conduct  -(Interruption)  

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that Government of which I am a Member is made up of various leader of political parties including a leader -(Interjection)- thank you the top leader of which the Member on the Floor is a part.  Therefore, when he talks of Government he is really talking about leaders of political parties who are together in Government.  Thank you.

MR. OLUM:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this Bill, I intend to move an amendment and at least try to seek the Minister’s support not to discriminate against political parties for some posts in election for the Chairman and Vice Chairman and then also to be consistent and to remove any aspect where political parties are discriminated again.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity.  Thank you very much.

MR. BONGONYINGE (Oyam County, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to contribute. I support the Motion and I will seek myself to a narrow two points, that is whether the NRC should jointly work with elected Constituent Assembly Members or not and whether the President be allowed to nominate the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Assembly or not. I think this is a development.  We are trying to consider a Constituent Assembly exercise as a developmental - right from the scratch.  From the word ‘go,’ when the NRM Government came to power, there was more-less a problem the NRM Ten Point Programme and while encouragingly a policy in all that, there was the inclusion of all political parties and political background in the movement. So, when the Historical Members formed the body of this House, they thought of extending the National Assembly for the purpose of inclusion so that all Ugandans could be represented and work together for the purpose of attaining peace and rule of law.  Now, when the House was extended and in 1989, this House extended its history, extended interim life of the NRM for another five years.  Now this was done on reasons and the reasons were very well explained by the then Minister and Attorney General who gave a whole programme of what tasks were to be undertaken and all these tasks were to end up in what we are now starting on, the Nation - the Constituent Assembly exercise.  Now, this exercise again requires the enlargement of this House to include more of the people of Uganda and I think I should emphasise the point of including more.  Now, if it is necessary to include more, will it be necessary at this particular moment to also drop off the Members who have all along been working on the same programme for the lat year? At this juncture, the founder of the NRM who is supporting the extension of the House and the inclusion of more for a wider coverage of the population.  So, I do not think it is timely to suggest that, the old broom should be put away and only the new ones be brought, I think, a marriage of both could be more sensible.  Now, to me, as though we are - if we hope for bringing only new Members into the Constituent Assembly, I think, it would appear as if we are trying to avoid something - yes.  Now there was a question one time put here by the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister to this House; that was the time of the Extension Bill in November, 1989, he asked this House whether the extension with the approval of the people at large or without the people at large would have dissolved this House from any discredit that would arise from the decision of the House.  Now, I would therefore, ask a similar question.  If we actually move out and leave this House, largely or completely to new Members, if the Council discredit along with the decision made, or later on, are we going to be absorbed from the discredit? Or are we not willing to share the glory in case there is successful Constitution? So, when all this programme - within the extension period was being carried out, the NRM moved together in unity with consensus in the centre of NRM< there was His Excellency the President in the lead and guiding the Assembly.  Now, it is the right time to say that, His Excellency the President should not have ea say even despite the advice of the Executive Arm in the say of leadership or the Chairmanship of the Constituent Assembly.  Are we trying to save the President from the people or the people from the President? So, I think, a marriage of the old House, the Historical, the extended, should be combined to the newly elected Constituent Assembly Members. Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR. KIRYA GOLE (Budaka County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  When we extended the interim period of the NRM administration we had to carry out a post-mortem to the voters we had to explain why we had extended the interim period and one of the reasons we gave, the NRM Administration had embarked on developmental programmes, rehabilitation of infrastructures and establishing democratic institutions including the Constitution Making.  We the people of Budaka, and particularly in the East, we now being challenged that where are the developmental projects, where are the infrastructure which you did promise? One gearing example, which has been always showing in every Budget Speech is Iganga –Tirinyi - Mbale road - that every year they are going to tarmac this road, up to now we are going to say voters and this is not reality - we promised the people of any social contacts these days that we want to put in place such democratic institutions that will ensure peaceful transfer of state power to the rulers and we did explain why the old Constitutions were not gearing up to the time.  The 1962 Constitution, we had to explain to them why it was unsuitable.  We explained to the people that 1962 Constitution was very bad, unsuitable for Uganda of today because it did not promote unity, it created nations within a nation; it allowed some regions, districts, to tax federal or semi deferral status while the rest of the country enjoyed military form of Government.  They did accept this kind of explanation.  We went to 1966 Constitution; this was named as a pigeon-hole Constitution. The Members who made that Constitution - old Constituent Assembly of that time, had no opportunity of looking at the Constitution before really debating and enacting it.  So, one Member was on record probably from Busoga, he said that the Constitution was very good so long as he was brought forward by Obote, before he really -(Laughter)- so that was that.

When it came to 1967 Constitution, we did really explain to people why it was very, very unsuitable. Three major reasons were advanced.  They said or we said, that the Members of Parliament at that time who made that Constitution, their term of office had expired and therefore, they were not -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that apart from the fact that the current Draft Constitution does not have multi-parties in it, there is very little difference between it and the 1967 Constitution.

MR. KIRYA GOLE: Thank you for the information.  I was coming towards that. Mr. Chairman, we did explain that the 1967 Constitution was extremely bad, as it put so much power into the hands of the President.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. Let us concentrate on the Constitution Assembly Bill not the Constitution.

MR. KIRYA GOLE: Now, Mr. Chairman, having explained the background to the Constitution Making of our country and the Constituent Assembly of the past Constitutions made some grave political blunders.  Now, we are trying to move and create a Constitution for the new Constitution that will at first respect and legitimacy for a very long time.  When this Constituent Assembly Bill came into publication, it attracted a lot of concern everywhere, we had to conduct seminars in January 4th to 8th, we conducted a seminar in collaboration with the DAs and Deputy DAs of Pallisa and we had a lot of reactions from the people. Then on 9th, we had a district seminar, there we had people from different beliefs, different ethnicity, different walks of life and they reacted as follows.  They advised us Members of NRC that the most potential advice we should support the Bill. 

When it came to the issue of electoral area, the people were of the view that the preferential treatment of urban people, giving them a lower base of 50,000 inhabitants to have a delegate, was a bit unfair compared to rural communities with a higher base of 80,000 when they are exposed to a lot of problems. So, they were of the view that a county could form an electoral area with a lower base that of the urban areas.  So, they entertained their recommendation that, 50,000 should go to the rural counties and 80,000 to the urban areas.  On that issue, they said while we have got some areas, like Karamoja, they have got some other geographical problems; they have got their social problems, they are combining Matheniko, Upe and Piya counties to form one electoral area of 85,000 inhabitants you create a real problem. Those who have been to Karamoja you will find a beg expanse of land about a tenth of Uganda and you move, you waste time moving from one place to place in search of people to address.  So, they preferred a preferential treatment to be given to those areas that have got specific geographic problems and social problems. Geographical problems should also be extended, should cover also areas of Kapchorwa and Kalangala with 84 Islands scattered in the lake.

On the issue of nominations; Presidential nominations and election of - appointment of a Chairman for the Constituent Assembly.  The people of Budaka had to say this.  They said, if you intend to invent a fast moving machine, the best thing for public utility, the best thing to invent first, should be to breaks and control system.  So, they gave discretional powers to the President to nominate 15 Members and also appoint the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. KIRYA GOLE: Mr. Chairman, when it comes to women representatives, they said, one representative per district elected per universal suffrage, so are the youth.

So, when it came to political parties, they said proportional representation should be adopted.  There are some political parties that have registered; massive support countrywide and they cannot really have the same treatment with such political parties, which are confined to one region.  There are those parties, like CP. So, they suggested that UPC, DP, UPM/NRM should -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, wind up, please, wind up, please.

MR. KIRYA GOLE: Should have four delegates each and two delegates for CP. Mr. Chairman, when it comes to the issue of ballot papers, those who are familiar with visual aid and the number of photographs that are shown, it means each person will have his own ballot box.  It does not show that all the Members will have one common ballot box, each Member has got his own box with tan arrow and a name attached.  So, they wanted some clearance about that.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. TURYAHAWA (Kinkizi County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to also talk about this important Bill.  I wish to begin by thanking you for the way you have conducted this business in this House this afternoon, because you have allowed hon. Members to talk freely and truthfully and you have handled the business very, very diplomatically.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to also thank the Minister for State for Constitutional Affairs for the presentation of this Bill that the whole nation has been waiting for. (Applause) I only want to add my voice to what hon. Members have already said in support that we should have a new body of representative Members of Constituencies to debate this specific new Constitution as it is reported in the interim report of the Uganda Constitution Commission.  But the concern of people of Kinkizi when we explained the Bill to them, was, the quality of NRM.  We have said that the achievement NRM has got, is based on the quality of the broad based and we feel that if we go into elections as this Bill demands, we may start that bad, sectarian tendency and we shall over turn or dismantle this good quality of the broad based.  So, I also add my voice to those Members who have asked the hon. Minister to put in place, a very thorough method of making sure that the elections will not have these tricks that we have been reading about in Makerere which the sensitive editor of The New Vision has already condemned in his editorial today.  We should not really go back to the kind of politics.  Some of us in the rural Constituencies have experience, because the parties were started hurriedly in the up country Constituencies and the way we connect elections I think, is different from what is here in the City.  We tend to be violent and we tend to fight one another.  I wish that kind of bad campaign does not occur when we debate - when we start to institute this Assembly.  As far as people of Kinkizi are concerned, when we explained to them this Bill, they also accepted that the President should appoint the 15 delegates and that he should go on as the father of our democracy; and harmony and unity in Uganda, to also choose the Chairman of the Assembly; and even go on to choose the Commissioner and his Deputy Commissioner.

The rest of the Bill was agreeable and we support the Bill vehemently.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I feel very privileged that I have a chance to contribute to this Bill.  I would like to start off from a point of hon. Bidandi Ssali when he pointed out that history was watching us, we are part of it, and all of us who are here, are so privileged to be founders of a new force in Uganda politics.  I sometimes wonder what Ugandans need, or what Ugandans want or rather to be correct, what some Ugandans want! I have listened to prominent Ugandans talking about what they want to see.  A minute ago, I listened to hon. Olum, talking about 1980 and wondering whether the elections are going to be as 1980.  Yet, in the last seven years we have had elections without any problem. Why should be next one be the problem one? The simple point is that, if you go back to  parties, if you go back and tear parts, you will have problems. Certainly, I do not see why and I would like to be informed publicly, or even in this House what UPC is missing. What they had a chance to do and they did not do and they are now not doing? DP, what are they trying to do that they cannot do? I think UPC would be better one to complain because they had the time to misuse history, they misused opportunities and now they have been stopped from doing that, they have a way to complaining, they have a reason to complain because their usual ways are not being practised.  So, that one, they can complain. I, therefore, feel that while we are operating, a foundation - we are building a foundation, let us give ourselves the hindsight of the past.  Let those of us who have participated in the past, recognise that today, there are conditions of doing better and should not be in our interest - personal interests alone, but interests of the whole. We are talking of a Constitution that is going to be discussed.  Let anybody who participated in the past debates of the Constitution tell us that they had as much time as we have had, that they had much harmony as we are having now to discuss their future.  From that point of view, therefore, I feel the wisdom that was expressed to this House this morning, by a Friend of mine, Dr. Mushanga has relevance here.  He is lamenting for the death of his daughter.  He said human beings forget three things very easily; barrenness.  If a woman or a couple has had no children for long time, the moment they get children they forget there was that period of barrenness.  People forget very easily hunger.  When there is famine and you are sharing one banana, when the time of plenty comes you forget.  Poverty; people easily forget poverty.  The moment you become rich they start stepping on other people’s toes.  Now, Ugandans there is something else they easily forget.  They forget misery.  They think this peace we are enjoying, this harmony we are sharing, the debates we are having freely now for granted and yet as Zachary Olum honestly was saying that we may have a problem in future.  It means if the state is in the wrong hands, it can be misused and what guarantee do we yet have that if the state was in the wrong hands; give it to Cecilia Ogwal and see how it will work.  

DR. MAGEZI: Point of order. Is it in order to continue debating this very important Bill with a deputed, House, with no quorum? 

THE CHAIRMAN: I have not counted.  Have you counted yourself?

DR. MAGEZI: Yes, I have.  We are about 60.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, I was trying to finish up everybody but if you do not want it, then we adjourn until Wednesday next week at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10th March, 1993, at 2.30 p.m.)

