Tuesday, 5 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to lay on table the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda, for the year ended 30th June, 1994; together with the report therein by the Auditor General, which is in two Volumes; Volume 1 and Volume 2.  Thank you (Applause)


BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF WILD LIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Brig. Moses Ali):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, the Uganda Wild Life Bill, 1996 be read for the First Time (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman and hon. Members, government wishes to clarify that as at 31st December, 1995; government through the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, had disbursed 6.42 billion shillings, to all the 39 districts in the country.  The money was remitted to 214 counties, whereby each county received 30 million times the number of the Constituencies in it.  Whereas each county was allocated 30 million, the amount available for loans to the beneficiaries was about UShs 28,350,000; the other part shillings 1,650,000 catered for administrative and operational costs as follows.  Intermediary agency took four percent of the 30 million.  That is 1,200,000 shillings.  Counted journey Committees took one percent of 30 million; that is UShs 300,000; District Chairing Committees, took point five percent of 30 million which is UShs 150,000.  Deceased money to the beneficiaries which was actually disbursed was UShs 28,350,000; total of all UShs 30,000,000.  Overall therefore, disbursement of 6.42 billion as Entandikwa funds, was completed as follows; deceased money to all 214 counties or constituencies was UShs 6,607,000; all 214 intermediary agencies in 39 districts, took UShs 256,800,000 and all 214 county committees in 39 districts, took UShs 64,200,000/- million shillings and all 39 district committees in 39 districts, took UShs 32,100,000; total UShs 6,420,000,000.  The recovery of loans is already under way in counties of those districts which received Entandikwa Scheme Funds in July 1995.  The base repayment is slow, but progressively improving.  The recovery rate ranges from 32 percent to over 80 percent in various counties.  For example, the overall recovery rate in Rakai District is over 70 percent.  Whereas for Fortportal Municipality repayment clocked 94 percent as at January 1996, some Districts like Mbarara, Apac, Pallisa and Rukungiri, have not yet embarked on recovery, because they received Entandikwa Scheme Funds in December 1995.  Disbursement of funds there was completed between January and February 1996.  Government would like to inform the District Authorities through you, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members and the public, that the second phase of Entandikwa Credit Scheme Funds, will be released in March, 1996; however the Entandikwa Secretariat will base the release a disbursement on phase II funds on the performance of the Scheme, particularly the loan recovery in each county.  

The Chief Administrative Officers, have to submit progress reports on the rate of repayment.  Recovery loans and general performance of the scheme in each County.  The reports should give details of how much has been recovered against what was disbursed per county.  The Government wishes therefore, to make it clear that the Entandikwa Credit Scheme Loans are not grants, nor charity.  All loan receipts must pay their credits in this way, the Political, civic and technical cadreship throughout the country must sensitize and mobilise the beneficiaries of the Scheme, to repay their loans.  To facilitate this exercise, the intermediary agency have been advised to submit to parish in their respect areas of operation, lists of actual beneficiaries showing full names, location and the funds received by each one.  That ends the Ministerial Statement.

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Minister’s statement number six, talks of the recovery rate of the scheme, and at the same time the Minister says the disbursement of the second phase.  That is the disbursement for the money allocated this Financial Year, will depend on the recovery rate and yet you will recall that the slow recovery made, may in fact be a result of the delay, in disbursement.  Now, most of these loans in some areas are for agricultural purposes and particularly in Gulu District and in my County.  Most of the people who receive these loans, receive them very late and they could not in fact put them to use immediately.  So that, if we are going to depend on the recovery rate, which means that, the money will have been applied and whatever was put in, producing something and that from the process you pay.  It means in fact that, these people will not receive loan again in time this year, in which case, the problem will continue to compound.  

In other words, we have always received loan late for agricultural purposes.  So, I wonder whether in fact the Minister could not reconsider this.  After all, it may not be the same people who will be receiving the loans again.  In fact, in my area I advised that, wherever possible, new people should benefit from these loans and not the people who have already benefited before.  So that to delay disbursement means you are punishing people who are not concerned at all in the first place.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to tell the hon. Member that, the rate we are talking about is not on food amount disbursed to that area.  Otherwise we are talking about recovery rate according to the recovery schedule.  For instance, if according to our schedule depending on the funds when were remitted to that particular county or district, you were to have recovered two million out of the 28 million which was actually received by the beneficiaries.  Then the rate will be based on that recovery.  And what we are going to do this time is that, whatever is recovered, we shall give according to what has been recovered.  For those who have recovered say 10 million, we shall put another ten million.  This is one way of inducing those who have been delaying in recovery, whereas actually the funds had been received in time.  It is true; we shall take into account those who received funds late like the districts which I read out in the Ministerial Statement.  

As regards the Agricultural projects where the recovery is depending on the project that has been taken into account.  Perhaps let me use this opportunity also, to clarify that one qualifies for the loan three times according to Entandikwa Credit Scheme.  So, if one was given certain amount of money in the first phase and his performance according to the County Steering Committee was good, and to make his business booster, it would need another smaller amount of money he is entitled to apply.  That decision is left to a digression of the Entandikwa Credit Scheme, County Steering Committee, which is composed of some technical people operating that county, who know the day-to-day affairs in the end.  Thank you.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to thank the Minister, for having come back to show his face to us and tell us about how far this Scheme is going.  But the aim of this Scheme was to alleviate poverty amongst our population by giving a push kick to specific individuals by way of these loans.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the Minister; I know this may not be the end of it, but at least there should be continuous assessment of this Scheme.  I will like to know the cost effectiveness of this scheme, so far.  Others maybe had a fear of people being harassed to repay these loans and for government to recover money from this scheme to the extent that, those who hope to benefit will not have benefited.  I will like to know the cost effectiveness so far.  Thank you.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has raised a number of issues despite the fact that, it looks as if he is putting only one query about the cost effectiveness.  One thing that about coming back, 30 people have the impression that, the scheme has been on ground for quite a long time.  I will like to draw the attention of the hon. Members, Mr Chairman, that the Scheme was launched on 22nd March, last year in Kapchorwa; that was the Official Launch when the Policy framework had been completed and brought to this House.  And thereafter, the disbursement started in April.  In actual fact, the Scheme is coming a year, after the end of this month.  So, already we are undertaking indicators which can show the impact the Scheme has made on the economy in terms of poverty reduction.  

As to cost effectiveness which was his final remark, I have in my Ministerial Statement, indicated that only one percent went to the County Steering Committee, while five percent of this amount, went to the District Steering Committee and only four percent went to the Intermediary Agencies, which is too low.  However, besides that cost of about 5.5 percent of the total amount, the Administration and Monitoring of the Scheme in the rural areas by the Entandikwa Credit Scheme is covered under the Budget of the Ministry of Finance.  And it is being developed to become a project so that this Administration part of it can be known exactly. Otherwise, what we are trying to do is to create the rural financing institutions which will be eventually left independent to operate when there is capacity building in terms of institution and human resources.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member that, our role as Council Members was not really specified.  the Minister in charge did not really inform the Administrative Officers that, Council Members should be included in matters concerning the distribution of these loans.  So, whenever we try to find out or to monitor the distribution, the disbursement and so on, we look like intruders.  So, may I ask the Minister in charge to inform the Administrative Officers and other people concerned that, we should be involved as much as possible.  Because our role in this matter is very, very crucial.  Because we are acting for government.  So, I would like anywhere this to be explained by the Minister in charge.  Thank you very much.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I would have excused him, but we have been here with him since 1989; which is almost seven years and he is qualified to know very well what the role of a Member of Parliament in his respective area.  It is regarding government policies.  The main role is mobilisation, sensitization and educating the public on what government policy is.  But as for Entandikwa Credit Scheme is concerned even, it is a clear policy now that, government should divest themselves from giving credit.  So, even the government, that is why you see that, the Intermediary Agencies which finally are the ones which manage the credit are not necessarily to do with the government machinery.  So, it would have been odd to say that, the Member of Parliament sits on either a County Steering Committee, or manages an Intermediary Agency in his capacity as a Member of Parliament.  

So, the role of the Member of Parliament and that is why I am here, is to inform the population one is representing in one’s respective area, about the Entandikwa Credit Scheme and sensitize them about its awareness, its benefits and the need now to sensitize them about the recovery.  Because I have come to realise that many of our people; one they do not like to borrow.  

Secondly, when they borrow, they borrow when there is emergency; especially the people we are targeting.  But we have to educate the public that borrowed money has to be invested in income generating activity.  And if you are to remain credit worthy, you have to pay back.  And if this scheme is to be sustained as a revolving fund, the recovery is very important.  That will be the role of any hon. Member who cares for the welfare of his people in the area he represents.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Members, who would like to saw something should only give a elucidatory questions and not make this as a contribution, since it has been just a statement from the Minister.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister of State for Entandikwa to inform us and in connection with Entandikwa because the idea is to boost our people to come into business and develop economically.  In 1987, May; some 30 percent was deducted from all those people who changed currency, which was UShs 850,000,000,000 less two zeroes, then 30 percent of that.  So, it is 2.95 million shillings.  May we get the audited report for which that money could go to assist the Entandikwa if it is deemed possible.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Since the Chairman has accepted the question; otherwise, the question has nothing to do really with Entandikwa, and the hon. Member who was suggesting this, is no other than one of the Members on the Sectoral Committee on the Economy and he is very familiar with the affairs of the Ministry of Finance as at times he sits on the Sectoral Committee of Finance and Economic Planning.  I think if there is anything of that nature to become a source to facilitate, if he thinks that could be one of the sources to boost Entandikwa; I think there is something he has to suggest in a different forum other than now when I am just explaining to you on the performance of the first phase and that, we are preparing ourselves for the second phase of Entandikwa Credit Scheme.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA BILL, 1995


MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I draw attention and once again protest very vehemently against the practice of your Office and the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, by persistently determining to take this House by ambush.  We go away from here, we are not notified of the next business to be transacted with result that hon. Members checked today this morning and there was no Order paper.  We cannot continue because there are so many Bills which have been published.  

There are about four Bills published by the Ministry of Health, there are Bills published by the Ministry of Wild Life, there are Bills published by other Ministers and we do not know which business to expect.  I have explained to this House in the presence and hearing of the staff of your office that, in the past the business to be transacted today Tuesday; the business to be transacted on Wednesday, would be put in the pigeon holes today so that when we are leaving, we collect it and take it with us. (Applause)  

That gives Members an opportunity to go and study and prepare themselves and come prepared to transact the business for that day.  Now, when we are being taken by ambush everyday, day in and day out, year in and year out; is it really in order for us to be expected now for instance to debate The Electronic Media Bill intelligently when we have not addressed our minds to it?  When it was published and republished such a long time ago?  Would it not be in order for you now to adjourn the House in order to enable the Members to go and study the Bill? (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, what hon. Abu Mayanja has raised is intelligently correct.  But I would like to clarify that, it is not the Chairman who writes the Order Paper, it is the Clerk’s work.  I want to make this abundantly clear.  I do not make Order papers.  It is the work of the Clerk.  And because my Office is concerned, I would like to take this opportunity to apologise to all of you hon. Members, on behalf of our Office for this unfortunate anomaly which I think will be corrected.  We have taken note, we are very sorry.  And I think hon. Members, because of the little time we have before us notwithstanding the wise advice by the Learned Former Attorney General, I want to say that, let us proceed.  However, we have taken note.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Mr Latigo Olal):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Electronic Media Bill, be read a Second Time.  Mr Chairman, in moving that, I will like to reassure my senior Colleague, the respected hon. Member for Busuuju that, the Bill that I am going to introduce is hardly new to the House.   In fact it is a part of a Bill that has been in this House for a very long time and it is therefore, very familiar with Members; inspite of a very justifiable reasons that the Member has put before the House, as a matter of procedure.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, you will recall the long debate we have heard on the Press Media Bill.  That Bill which is now in our Statute Books as the Press and Journalist Statute, was debated for a period of eight years, involving four Ministers starting with my Colleague the hon. Member for Busuuju, three Prime Ministers and two Vice Presidents.  Among the many proposals under that Bill, was a section on Electronic Media.  Members will recall that when the House decided to refer the Bill to a Special Select Committee; that Committee in its wisdom among other things, recommended that the original Bill be spilt into two.  One part to cover the Print Media and to make Journalism a profession, and the other part for the Electronic Media.  

This Bill before the House is the second part of the original Mass Media Bill.  It has, therefore, been debated many times over by the House as well as by the Standing Committee on Social Affairs and a Special Select Committee.  I, therefore, expressed the hope that Members being familiar with the provisions of this Bill, which again last December, went through the middle of the Standing Committee on Social Affairs; will find it straight forward and non controversial.  

The Bill which has now become urgent and necessary due to the increasing number of private broadcasting stations, is to provide for the setting up of a Broadcasting Council to licence and regulate radio and TV sets, to provide for the licensing of TV stations, to amend and consolidate the law relating to the Electronic Media, to amend the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Act and to repeal the existing Cinematography Act and TV Licensing Act.  The Bill, Mr Chairman, is presented in seven parts as the Chairman of the Select Committee on Social Affairs Committee will elaborate later.  It is as follows: 

There is a preliminary part which includes interpretation, there is a second part which provides for the installation of Television Radio Stations, in which registration procedures and minimum broadcasting standards are stipulated.  Then the Broadcasting Council is provided in part three. Part four, gives Financial Provisions, which is an inevitable component in any management outreach.  Part five, lies out regulations of Video and Cinematograph operators.  Part six, provides for the licensing of TV Sets and the last part, part seven provides for Incidental Miscellaneous Provisions.  With regard to part two, the Bill, lies down the procedure for the installation of TV and Radio Stations; the registration and obligation of their operators and other parts.  

Part three, establishes the Broadcasting Council as a Licensing Authority and procedure for conducting its business.  It is proposed that, the Council be composed of Members drawn from the public and institutional bodies interested in broadcasting as well as representatives of the public on behalf of the listeners.  

The functions of the Council are also spelt out under this section.  Given the need for the Council to be as independent as possible in status as well as in operation; it is proposed that, as well as grants from government, the Council should have other ways of financing these activities namely; from monies paid for its services, and from the percentage of licensing fees payable under the proposed Statute.  The Council may also accept gifts from sources acceptable to it as well as have power to borrow funds.  With the old sets of the error of Video Operators, the old cinema theatres as we knew them, have now practically disappeared, as their business has been centralised to all sorts of places.  Part five of the Bill, therefore, provides for the registration of video and cinematograph theatres for public consumptions.  Section six of the Bill, is intended to amend and repeal the existing TV Licensing Act, which dates back to 1963.  

Mr Chairman, the most important aspect of the proposed legislation is the establishment of the council and I will like particularly to draw Member’s interest in the proposed composition and functions of that Council.  With the passage of financial provisions proposed in this Bill, the Electronic Media under public ownership, will be financial subsidized for the benefit of ordinary viewers who otherwise cannot afford high fees levied by fully commercially run TV stations.  This subsidy is necessary due to the ever escalating forces of acquiring or maintaining the latest technological transmission apparatus.  The principle and details of this Bill, Mr Chairman, as I have stated were covered and endorsed by the House when debating the Mass Media and Journalist Bill.  

For the benefit of the House, I would like in ending to retaliate part of my contribution to the debate, on the report of the Select Committee after it had been tabled here following the reference to it by the House.  I stated during that time in part as follows:  That government objective for the bill have always been honourable and well intended to provide a statutory safeguard for one of the major freedoms we cherish for this country, namely; the freedom of expression of the press.  It so happens that, this freedom is not only of interest to whoever is exercising it, it is often of equal interest to the listener or viewer of the expression about whom it is being made.  

In other words, the right of the press to publish must be guaranteed.  Equally, Mr Chairman, a right to privacy of the individual, must be protected.  The balancing of these two interests is the responsibility of the government of the day.  Mr Chairman, as a proposal for the Bill have again recently as I have said been examined by the Social Affairs Committee, it would be of further benefit to this House, to hear on it from the Chairman of the Social Affairs Committee.  

Mr Chairman, with this brief introduction, I beg to move. (Applause)

MR BWANIKA BBALE (Katikamu North County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand here to support the Bill, and in supporting it, Mr Chairman, I will like to give the report of the Sessional Committee which looked at this Bill, and analyzed it and harmonised it and recommended it to this House to be approved.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I wish to report to this hon. House that the Sectoral Committee on Social Services, met with the hon. Minister of Information, hon. Minister of State for Information, the technical team from the same Ministry, and the First Parliamentary Council and examine the Electronic Media Bill, 1995.  

Mr Chairman, also this Committee invited the Members of the defunct Select Committee on the Mass Media Bill, namely; hon. Rev. Atwai, Prof. Wangusa, hon. Ssengo Kalule and hon. Ruth Aliu who joined us and we were able to share the experience from the Select Committee which looked at the Mass Media Bill.  As the Minister said, Mr Chairman, the Electronic Media Bill, 1995 is divided into seven parts which he has enumerated.  The Bill has two Schedules attached to it.  The First Schedule deals with broadcasting standards and the Second Schedule deals with the procedures and the proceedings of the broadcasting Council.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the Committee came up with a number of amendments on the original Bill, dated 3rd November, 1995.  I want to point out that the amendments which the Committee agreed upon with the Minister resulted into the re-drafting and the re-printing of the Bill which is now dated December, 1995.  I think the hon. Members have it.  It is a new Bill which you should be referring too, which is dated December, 1995; not the other Bill which was dated 3rd November.  So, the Bill has been reprinted.  The new Bill was circulated to the hon. Members of this House in January 1996. 

Let me now, Mr Chairman, attempt to point out areas which the Committee considered and proposed amendment.

Memorandum: The Committee improved on the Memorandum of the Original Bill, by amending the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Act, No.3 of 1983.

Two, Clause 1 of the Original Bill was amended to read; ‘The Statute to be sighted as Electronic Media bill, 1996.’

Three, Clause 2, was retained with an improvement to give interpretations to cinematography theatre and operator which had not been defined in the original Bill.

And four, Clause 3, deals with installation of Television and Radio Stations.  The close sets out conditions, to be made by different category of applicants.  The Committee created a new subsection 3, which provides that provisions of section 44, 45, 46, and 47; of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation Act, 1993; should not apply to Television stations, Radio stations and Broadcasting Apparatus Installed or operated for the purposes of communicating messages to the public.  Clause 3(5), deals with anybody who contravenes conditions set out in this Clause. 

Number five, Clause 4(5) and Clause 6(2) of the original Bill was deleted completely.  

Number six, Clause 7, prohibits the broadcasting of any programmes without a licence issued by the Broadcasting Council and Clause 7(3), provides that, the Broadcasting Licence is renewable every year.  Any person who contravenes these Clauses, is dealt with under Clause 24(2), which reads as follows: Clause 24(2) which says ‘ any person who contravenes this section commits an offence and he is liable to a fine not exceeding shillings 50,000/- or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days or both.’ 

Number seven, Clause 9 was reformulated to read as follows;  a person shall not carry out any broadcasting or operate a cinematography theatre unless what is to be broadcasted or exhibited is in compliance with the provision on the First Schedule of this Statute.  

Number eight, a new Clause 11(2), was introduced to link this Bill with the Press and Journalist Statute No.6; of 1995.  It provides that, in carrying out its functions under paragraph e,f,g, and h, of subsection 1; the Council shall work in conjunction with the Media Council which is established under the Statute No.6 of 1995.  

Number nine, Mr Chairman, Clause 16(3), was introduced and it reads as follows: ‘the Council may with the approval of the Minister engage on contract, such persons as are necessary for purposes of carrying out specialised work of the Council.’ 

Number Ten, Clause 20 provides that, the financial year of the Council, shall be the calendar year, that is 12 months beginning from the first day of January, ending on the 31st day of December, each year.  This is in consonant with the Statute No.6 of 1995, which is the Press and Journalist Statute.  

Number 11, Clause 22(1), was improved on to read ‘ a person shall not operate a cinematograph theatre or a library for hiring out video tapes or cinema films without a licence in respect of the theatre or library.’ If a person contravenes this Clause, he is dealt with as stated in Clause 22, number five.  

Number 12 says Clause 24(1) provides for licensing of television sets and anybody who contravenes this section is dealt with under Clause 24(2).  

Mr Chairman, the printed Bill is missing the penalty which the Minister is going to introduce in the Committee Stage to provide for penalty, for those people who are dealing in repairing TVs and radio sets, so they must get a license and in the next Bill, there was an omission.  So, during the Committee Stage the Minister is going to move that amendment to include it on the Bill.  Number 14; a new Clause 26 was introduced to provide for radio and television stations and any broadcasting apparatus already in existence prior to the commencement of this Statute.  

Number 15, Clause 28(2) empowers a Council or its duly authorised office to confiscate any electronic apparatus which is used in confirmation of this Statute.  

Mr Chairman, the Committee therefore, recommends this august House to pass this Bill.  I beg to move Sir. (Applause)

MR OKWERA (Agago County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill. I want to draw the attention of the Minister of Information to the current problem we have in Kitgum District, particularly Agago County.  There has been a change in the frequency as of Radio Uganda.  Unfortunately this change has put us completely out of air, we do not receive Radio Uganda at all.  And I will like the Ministry of Information to take immediate action, so that we also get informed of what is happening in the rest of Uganda.  I will come back tomorrow to make a substantial contribution when I have gone through the Bill, Mr Chairman.  I thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Information; whether he is in total agreement with what actually the amendment which the Committee came up with.  Because I do not want to see the same thing like the other Committee of Electoral Law, when the Minister actually said, now we should go back to the House.  Are they in total agreement so that we are not going to throw the thing out?

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Yes, I must accept that is a very fundamental question.  I thought the Chairman of the Committee made it very clear that; following the amendments that his Committee and my Ministry discussed over the Bill, it was agreed to harmonise all these suggested amendments, on the basis of the first draft dated 3rd November.  So that the second draft dated 15th December, incorporates and harmonises all the agreements between the Ministry and the Sectoral Committee.  So that, what the Chairman has read out here is all incorporated in the re-drafted Bill, dated 15th December.  May I take this opportunity, Mr Chairman, to comment on the question raised earlier by the hon. Peter Okwera.  What is actually wise as I understand it is an operational issue rather than a matter that is before this House.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of clarification.  I think he would have done a little better if he sought clarification from the Chairman of the Committee, to the effect that the Chairman was really serious.  Because we have had occasion here when a chairman of a Standing Committee, has read a report and concluded by begging us to support the report.  Only to turn around himself and vote against it later.  We want to make sure that the report the chairman has put forward is to the best of his knowledge, what he actually believes in and I think eh would like us to take him to be serious.  Mr Chairman, I would like him to stand up and tell us.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Mr Chairman, I simply said that, if in the deliberation of the Committee and I was a part of the Committee, there is no way I can disassociate myself from the Report I have presented to this House, Mr Chairman.  So, I am part of this report.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Mr Chairman, although I am in total agreement, with the observation made by the hon. Abu Mayanja.  That because Rules and Order Committee of this House was not in place to tell us which Bill would follow.  I am only fortunate to have read this particular Bill before so that maybe what I can contribute now will in some way also give direction to my Colleagues the hon. Members when they come back tomorrow and if I may, I would just say that, I beg to support the Bill that has been presented before this House, Mr Chairman.  Because this is something which was part of the Print Media that was debated, brought back to the House and enacted, which has become law.   

This memoranda here which seeks to consolidate the law relating to Electronic Media and also seek to repeal the Cinematograph Act, which actually for the information of hon. Members, if it is still the same Act, this Act was enacted way back in 1915 and it is therefore, timely that a Bill of this nature comes into the House so that Members begin to have something which is contrary to the society in which we live and what we are going through.  

Clause 5 of this Bill is very, very important because among other things it is very, very concerned about public morality.  Sometimes we have seen whether in CNN or whatever programme that comes, that there is exposure and sometimes it is very, very embarrassing to me a parent when if I am watching a programme with my children.  So I think it is important that, if it is advocating that it has to protect us from this kind of embarrassing situation, then I do not see anything wrong with this particular Bill. And since we are being told in the same Clause that, it seeks to retain what is broadcast to be kept for a period of 30 days, this is important although the period here appears too short.  Why is it too short?  Maybe something as stated which requires me personally and I would like to take court action.  But because of the time that is given, 30 days may have been over taken.  But the point that was advanced by the people who handle this particular area was that, it is a very heavy bulky sort of thing which would need a ware house, if all the records are to be kept.  

I am also very happy with the requisite qualifications which have given to the Electronic Council as it is in Clause 6.  Because that Council, as we had seen in the Press and Journalist Bill, is that which is there to sort of find out like we have in the Law Council or in any other Council where people who do not qualify to be recreated into automatically cannot consider themselves people who should enjoy the privileges and facilities which can be enjoyed by that particular organisation.  And I do see, in Clause 8, subsection 2(a)(b); a kind of safeguard to members of public.  Because sometimes, some broadcast, some publications, and whatever has to do with your private life is brought to bear publicly, without consultation and even if this particular Bill has not been very specific, but I think it is being subjected to the common laws or these other laws which are already existing in our books.  Therefore, together with the Schedule which appears in both Clause 9 and First Schedule; Mr Chairman, that schedule is very, very important because it is very empathic in the area of public morality and I am glad that a programme like this rustling which in the past used to come around midnight and repeated on Saturday around 4.00 p.m.; what is that rustling?  What do these young children benefit from seeing people break their - they turn to fighting as opposed to rustling?  

So this kind of thing which is taken care of in the Schedule 1(b), whatever should come there; should not promote the culture of violence or ethnical treasons among the public especially the children and the youth.  These are the kind of things which I think are well thought of and should be actually taken care of.  Because sometimes, maybe due to lack of proper covering, there are programmes only coming maybe in Luganda.  I will pray to see that, this sort of thing will also bring something from Lango land and also from Kisoro or anywhere.  Because if you are presenting a programme on a national channel and it is that which cannot be understood by everybody, but your tune is going down and as from I think next month, even television is likely to go rural.  What should I emulate if I tune?  This is where I am now trying to say that, it must be balanced in order to let everybody enjoy.  So, with these few observations, Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Bill. (Applause)

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busuuju County, Mubende):  Mr Chairman, an hon. Colleague asked me whether I am ready; I am not ready.  But since you have ruled that we should debate and having regard to the time left before the House would be dissolved under the Constitution, we should go ahead and do our duty.  But I must emphasize that I hope the Government Front Bench and the Office of the Clerk will take this as last time that they will take this House by ambush.  Let us be given the business to come the previous day.  Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  But I want to raise some questions.  

There is a section which says, Clause 3; ‘it says that, the Council shall before issuing a licence under this section take into account the following; (a) that the applicant in the case of an individual is a citizen of Uganda.’  Now, why?   Why in God’s Name?  What happens to people like William Pike, who I understand has big shares in Capital Radio?  No, I am asking why; there should be some reason.  This is the field of investment; we are attracting investors.  

So, Mr Chairperson, I am of the opinion that this Clause should not be there, there is really no reason.  Let the thing be judged by standards and by competition and by what the people want to hear or what they want to see.  And in any event, when you get eminent and all these things, really it is unrealistic to think that we can by a provision like this restrict the capacity to broadcast or televise to Ugandan citizens or any other category of citizens. (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that what he is curious about is only an indication of the lingering punitive law in which we still think that business is done by individuals.  Mr Chairman, business is not only done by individuals, it is also done by companies.  But the person you are referring to has to be an individual or also a company.  Mr Chairman, it is there that curiosity remains.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I think that information does buttress my point.  I think that we should try to go ahead and look forward and not think that restrictively as the hon. Member from Ssese would want us to put it.  But more importantly, I also wish to agree, no, I think dissociate myself with hon. Atwai.  I think that 30 days; the period which this material should be kept is definitely short.  This I think gives, in some cases the shortest period is one year.  Normally libel is six years but one month is too short a period.  I think the Minister should look into that.  I will not suggest the period myself.  Hon. Atwai spoke of the inconvenience of sparing these materials but if you want to broadcast, you should be prepared to provide capacity for storage so that a minimum of six months should be provided for.

Now I want to talk about the first schedule and for God’s sake, let us not provide in our law for things which will be impossibilities.  Where we are seeking to provide Mr Chairman that a broadcaster or video operator shall ensure that any programme which is broadcast is free from political partiality. Is that possible?  Is that realistic?  Is that reasonable?  Is that desirable?  Surely we want to be able to discuss political issues on the electric media.  That is what they are there for; that is why some of us really -(Inaudible).  Even Radio Uganda which is national is not politically partial.  Even UTV is not politically partial, there is nobody who is politically partial. So I think this really should be deleted.  It is meaningless, it is unwanted, it is not conducive to our development and it is totally bad.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The Member has raised a very important point but really if televisions are to be enjoyed throughout Uganda, this campaign of Parliamentary and Presidential would have been very easy because people could watch the candidates through the media.  So he is raising a very important point. 

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, perhaps the most difficult problem which any person designed any law and I was there when we first began with this one about public morality.  How will the council ensure that what is shown on our screens is in conformity with what is morally acceptable?  Who in the first place will be the determinant of what is morally acceptable and what is morally unacceptable?  

Of late there have been commercials.  You can see commercials immediately after the news on Uganda Television.  This is not enticing people to view for commercial purposes.  But you see Meatily systems, there is Meatily dance.  Is that the kind of dance you want to see with your mother-in-law present in the sitting room watching that television?  Mr Chairman, it is really difficult.  This problem of sex for reasons, because I suppose the Christian, my learned Friend hon. Sam Njuba would attribute this to Adam and Eve and say let man.  It so happens that sex is what draws interest.  Explicit sex has become an everyday occurrence on television the world over.  But we do not want that.  Our children have been protected at a point and we must ensure that somehow this continues to be the case.  But you ask yourself - I am not talking about films which are showing men and women in bed.  In the olden days for those of us who are old fashioned and who studied literature, is hon. Wangusa here?  No.  There used to be a rule in writing the fiction that you do not follow a man in the lavatory and you do not follow him in the bedroom.  But writers these days follow a man and in which case man embraces a woman.  They follow a man in the lavatory; they follow a man in the bedroom.  

So, I think then that the Minister must either in regulations or then summon the council, let it clear, let there be some boundaries.  Mr Chairman, the holy quoran talks about transgressing the bounds.  Why there be bounds which should not be transgressed?  So that films, video tapes, whatever need to show certain responsible human activities according to our own standards here in Uganda today.  Let those who want to see those films, they will subscribe to any lot or whatever.  But I am not sure and I am apprehensive and I can only say that in the final analysis, the standards of this country will really set for themselves.  If inspite of whatever I say television companies continue to show what is morally reprehensible, the people of Uganda should show their disapproval by boycotting the viewing of such programmes.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that everyday there are some small children singing about condoms and I do not think people put on condoms to go to school.  They put on condoms to commit sin.  (Interjections)  Yes, they put on condoms to commit sin.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. informer that marriage is very matrimony, is by God and we people here married in that order are entirely allowed to enjoy that cohabited right rightly and it is no sin and therefore it is not true for him to mislead this House that whoever is putting on a condom is putting it on to sin; and in any case use of condom is one of he methods of contraception and it is allowed in marital relationship and there is no sin in marital relationship.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I think the hon. Colleague over there has raised very interesting questions but I want to tell this House that when I was Minister for Information and Broadcasting in the NRM Government, I took a decision as a measure of defending our people against AIDS to go public and I am proud to say that during the time of my administration, we were able to take that courageous decision and we informed the people of Uganda about AIDS and how it is transmitted and how they should protect themselves and there are three methods.  You either abstain completely or you lovely faithfully or you use a condom.  So in this year 1996 for somebody to say that we shall not talk about condoms is really a bit unrealistic and I am grateful to hon. Matembe and I agree with her I think for once.  (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, I have seen that this licensing; okay, licensing of somebody who operates a television broadcasting outfit is important but why do you want to licence a small man who repairs a TV set?  What public interest does this government have?  What interest do we have collectively to relay that this man Musa Luyombo in Katwe repairs television sets and we should licence him unless it is a purely revenue earning exercise.  In which case it is I think not really justified.  I think it is not quite important.  Again why should we licence somebody possessing a TV set?

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  I thank hon. Abu Mayanja for letting me inform him.  Normally licences are for two purposes.  One, is for revenue which  he acknowledges.  The other is for protection of the public.  When we licence a doctor, it is to protect the public against quacks.  When you licence a man repairing bicycles, it is not so much to make sure that the bicycles are repaired in such a way that the public should be safe.  I think it is for the sake of collecting some revenue.  In this particular case he is talking about, I think it is actually upon the Minister to tell us for what purpose these minor TV repairing people are being licensed.  

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Yes, that is what I am saying that eventually the Minister may think that what I have said here, I have not wasted time.  So when he replies to the debate, he will be able to take into account what I have said.  Mr Chairman, in my opinion, I do not see any reasonable purpose for licensing a TV repairer.  They do not licence repairers of bicycles, they do not licence repairers of motorcars, of shoes.  So let this man also go ahead and ply his trade to get a living as a repairer of radios, of video and so on.  Those who are quacks will - the people of Uganda are not really children.  They will find out who are good and genuine repairers and those who are not good and genuine repairers and those who are bad they will die out.  Now there was here in clause seven something which I would like to get information about.  

It was also mentioned by the Chairman.  He said that a person shall not broadcast any programme without a broadcasting licence issued out by the government.  Now, does it mean that you get a licence issued in respect of a programme or is it in respect of the broadcasting station?  Surely it can be only in respect of a broadcasting station.  So I thought I would draw attention to that and if I had been given more time, maybe I might be ready to assist towards the improvement of this law.  But in conclusion, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for Information and Broadcasting that you are doing a very good job.  He took a bold step to license radio stations even before this law was passed.  I think that was good and I have seen that they can be useful.  I say that let us not aim for these which are too idealistic.  Maybe it there were broadcasting stations run by NGOs, they could be politically impartial.  Those run by human beings cannot be.  

So, let us trace the things which want to make.  We want freedom to broadcast but let all the people also who will be operating in this media, the journalists, the broadcasters, the owners, let them know that they owe a sense of duty to themselves as respectable human beings to the country and especially to our children such that the content of what they show is not outrageous and does not tend to breed a morally decayed society.  Mr Chairman, I support the bill.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County): Thank you Mr Chairman. There are some difficulties although I support the motion.  Uganda today Mr Chairman, most of us who have the opportunity to enjoy Radio Uganda, Uganda Television are going to suffer if this thing is introduced because the percentage of the people in Uganda who have access to these things, you find them in towns of Kampala, Jinja, Mbale, Mbarara only.  What about the rural areas?  This law will curtail them.  So I think this kind of thing should be set aside.  I think Mr Chairman, as I talk the television in my area, you cannot enjoy anything.  If you try Mbale, you find problems.  So there are a lot of difficulties.  These Ugandans are going to say, what is happening here?  And you will find this really a problem.  Mr Chairman, when you introduce a licence for a repairer of TV -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member that from the pledge and promise of the hon. Minister, he can now take that to use a TV set, the programme which the Minister has said he has a plan to have the very country covered.  Now even the people of Kaberamaido can receive transmission from UTV and Rwemiyaga Television transmitters.  So indeed I guess with that he will really support the bill and does not have much more.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, I am not grateful for that information. I am telling the hon. Member sitting now that other Ugandans do not enjoy these privileges.  Why then cut them short by taxing them by the time they want to have it?  We are saying other areas of Uganda did not benefit to the extent we are now talking.  I agree the whole idea is not bad but I am saying the majority of other Ugandans are lacking.  For example, if I shall have three sets of TVs and the Minister suggests that somebody to repair that a TV must have a licence, now he may have licence but no TV sets.  What does it mean?  What do you promise as a policy man? So I have a problem there also because we are still introducing ourselves to modern life.  This thing is very new nation wide and we are going to lock most of our people out.  If a Member of Parliament Mr Chairman should buy a cinema or video for that matter, take it to his constituency, he shows it free of charge, why should he really be charged?

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to why he is worried about a repairer of TV having a licence?  Because currently all trades get licences before they operate and even the hawkers who travel around carrying things on their arms actually pay for the licence.  Why should a man who is repairing TVs not have a licence?  I think they should have the licences Mr Chairman unless he can tell us why he thinks he should not be licensed.

MR EJALU:  Mr Chairman, I had of course intended to come at the end of the debate to wind up and answer some of these questions. But on this particular point about why licence TV repairers, the House may recall at the time when we were debating the Mass Media Bill, contributor after contributor in the debate dwelt on the insistence of stealing in our society particularly in other societies and it was particularly singled out that of the leading articles in terms of house breaking the first articles that thieves went for were electronic articles and TV was one of them. The Members of the committee therefore in dwelling on this matter took a long time to argue on the subject that here is an incident where we could have in legislation in curbing because it was made possible by this middle man mainly the repairer of these articles and I would like the House to bear this in mind while contributing as to why licence the so called small repairer.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, hon. Manzi asked me to clarify.  I clarify like this.  We in rural area have not seen TVs and we wan to see.  We want also to enjoy.  Now if you stop us, that means you are locking us out of this country.  This was my argument.  I am talking of the people who have never seen TVs in their lives.  It is true; they are many.  So I was saying that what do we do to these people?  Okay I see the prospect but when I am talking in terms of other Ugandans, we must consider our country as a nation.  Now when you are making advertisements we need all of them to know either be it on wealth, on health and otherwise.  So what is wrong with that when I am making an argument on behalf of the people who have not seen?  This is what I am saying.  We are all entitled in this country to enjoy this privilege but because already the law says we should make law - I am sure our people by then may end up by not even buying these TVs.  That is the problem I see.  

Mr Chairman I want clarification from the Minister as to why these radios like Sanyu, Capital do not reach countrywide.  If they are really getting licences from our nation, why do they not broadcast so that everybody picks them?  Actually I want to find our the truth.  It is only in Kampala that you can receive Sanyu, in Soroti, you cannot pick it.  Can I be educated so that we know why.

MR EJALU:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Since that is not quite relevant to the bill and the House, let me assure the Member holding the Floor that Sanyu and Radio Capital are privately and commercially owned institutions.  They do not fall under the auspices of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  They can decide on their own as to where to broadcast and how to broadcast.  Thank you.

MR ELYAU:  Thank you for that.  I did not request for the sake of it.  I have been asking why these radios do not serve the rest of Uganda.  So it is commercial.  If the television services will reach most of Ugandans, our programmes in government would have been very much easy.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, hon. Elyau has a point.  In fact we could supply television services all over the country by introducing video system.  Recently I think I talked to the hon. Minister, we can have a TV set, we can have Deck and generator.  You station this either at the county headquarters and then the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting can take the programmes and show to the people, for example the visit of the Pope.  I think most of us in areas where there is no television service, we do not know how Pope’s visit was.  So it is very important.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR EJALU:  Point of information.  I think the hon. Member who has just brought supplementary information appears to confuse TV broadcasting and video in this case.  Video is that cassette that you have and can play over and over again in any circumstance you like.  TV broadcasting is actually live broadcasting which you receive directly by not having the video recorder but TV only. I know the hon. Member has been to the Ministry and we talked about this and I did educate him on what the Ministry has with regard to access in the whole country with TV services.  I am surprised that he has come back to the same point again.  But I would not like to bore Members on this subject because a law where that plan is and I will be prepared to look at it when winding up the debate.  Thank you.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that actually TVs work on signals and if you are between Mbarara and Masaka and you buy a TV set which operates on a battery or cells and you are in the village, you will actually get the signal and see the TV; because you have two issues.  Either you rectify education of the whole area which is not possible or you buy TVs which use batteries or cells.  Currently Sembule makes these TVs although they are still in black and white.  You can buy and take in the village as long as you are within the range, you will be able to see the pictures.  So there is no problem in Kalaki.  People see the TV as long as they buy the TVs that use cells and batteries since they are within the range of Mbale and Arua Zone.

MR ELYAU: Mr Chairman, I think most of my Colleagues are not seeing my problem.  I stay in those stations and I am talking what I have seen.  Really we do not get reception properly.  So whether you convince me here on the grounds that many people have got TV sets.  We have a problem really.  Soroti which used to help us is not working up to now.  So that is the problem anyway. So if this country has to enjoy the same privilege and television would have helped us really in educating our masses.  I wanted for the sake of all of us in Uganda, I am not arguing for the sake of challenging the bill but I am talking on a point that people should now be brought also to enjoy all programmes.  

For example, football matches take place in Kampala but our youths there miss.  Even currently as I am talking, electricity is not there.  So what kind of TV do you want us to buy?  So we are complaining about the problem which I wish the Minister to note.  

As far as TV sets are concerned, I want to find out how much will the Minister expect because by now in most areas there are no TV sets.  How much does the Minister expect to collect from radio so that we are attracted immediately to licence this?  If I am given to know that there is going to be anything handsome, I think we should know in the interest of the public.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 March 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)






