	1
Wednesday, 3rd March, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.00 pm in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO CENSURE MR SAM KUTESA, MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Sam Kutesa):- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like my fellow Members of Parliament who spoke yesterday while introducing the petition, I would like to say right from the onset that I also feel, and would like to encourage this House to feel, that this is not a Motion against Kutesa Sam as a person,or Kutesa Sam as a Member of the Movement. It is not sectarian nor is it based on tribalism, because my record about sectarianism speaks for itself.  

I have  participated in the elections of this nation four times now.  I ran for elections in 1980, I ran for elections in 1989, I ran for elections for the CA in 1994, and I ran for elections in 1996.  On three of these occasions, Mr. Speaker, I was successful. I must say that on the fourth occasion, I just managed to become a runner-up in Kampala.  But, I want to say that in no particular election have I ever been elected mainly by people of my own tribe.  I have enjoyed support and fellowship, and I have worked with many, many people in Uganda, irrespective of tribe, religion and  gender. So, I come to this House very free in my mind. There is certainly no reason for me to feel that there is sectarianism, as was being alluded to by hon. Dombo and hon. Okwir,  when they stated that indeed no such thing can be a motive.  I came to this House with clean hands and a clean mind and I invite hon. Colleagues to do the same. (Applause).  

Before I present my defence to this august House, Mr. Speaker, I wish to state that today, like once before in this House, Parliament sits, not as a legislature, but as a court.  It is important that hon. Members realise that when the House sits as a court to try one of its Members, we must cast aside all our prejudices, our political persuasions, our personal likes and dislikes, and we must try as far as it is humanly possible to  dispense justice.  I ask hon. Members to assume that frame of mind. Whoever does not agree with me politically, whoever does not like my face, whoever has other prejudices about me, I ask you, hon. Members, to cast them aside and place yourself in a position of dispensing justice. I have no doubt in my mind that hon. Members will rise to this occasion. (Applause).

It is imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we understand that when we discuss a motion of censure of a Minister, we are invoking a provision of the constitution which empowers this House to express to the President its displeasure and dissatisfaction with the Minister concerned.  Therefore, when we invoke any provision of the Constitution, we must always remain mindful that we are invoking a provision of the supreme law of the land. As such, we must not only follow the spirit of that law, we must also follow that law to the letter. Any attempt, whether deliberate or even unintended, to side step the Constitution or to act in its breach, in my view, Mr. Speaker, would create such a  wrong precedent in the history of our nation which has just made such a young and new constitution.  It is therefore imperative that when there is a constitutional provision, we should follow it.  

My good friend hon. Dombo- shall I say my good friend or my good friend until rather recently - yesterday stated that we should avoid technicalities, that we should avoid distracting this House by going by the law, he said that is diversionary.  Mr. Speaker, I have heard, on many occasions, statements to the effect that we should not be legalistic. I have heard that a motion of censure is a statement by this House regarding a conduct of a Minister and that over reliance on the law is to miss the point because no Minister should be left free on technicalities. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I am sure you will agree with me that that kind of position is not tenable. When this House sits as a court, it must concern itself with the law as it is stated in the Constitution and other Acts of Parliament. The petitioners must prove me, Kutesa Sam, who is being censured, beyond any shadow of doubt, in the mind of each and every one of you hon. Members.  Before you state and decide that Kutesa should be censured, the duty and the burden really is not on me, otherwise, that would mean that there is a presumption of guilt rather than a presumption of innocence, which is the cardinal corner-stone of our legal system.  

The burden of proof is on the petitioners. From yesterday, I realised, hon. Members, it is a heavy burden; it is very difficult to lift, from the presentation of hon. Dombo and hon. Okwir. The burden to prove me guilty is on them and it should be cleared in each and every Member's mind.  It should not be your neighbour, it should not be your friend, it should not be your district man; it should be your mind which should be convinced that the petitioners have proved their case beyond any shadow of doubt.  

The procedure the petitioners follow, the procedure we follow as a House, must not only be transparent, it must be fair and it must be in accordance with the law and the rules of natural justice.  Recently, one of the petitioners, my old university mate and learned Friend, Ben Wacha, who is also the Chairman of the Rules Committee of this House, was quoted in the press as having said that his Committee was almost ready with the rules relating to censure motions.  He was also quoted as saying that, "even if the rules are ready, they shall not apply to the censure motion against hon. Kutesa Sam, instead we shall follow the precedent set in the case of hon. Muhwezi Jim's censure, however fair or unfair."  

If we feel, Mr. Speaker, that the procedures followed in hon. Muhwezi's case were fair and adequate, the question would be why then is hon. Ben Wacha and our entire Committee engaged in making new rules?  It would suggest that there is a general feeling that those rules are inadequate.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I would  not have liked to interfere with the eloquent defence of hon. Kutesa, but something tickles my mind. Are we being fair to quote hon. Ben Wacha on a press report which, traditionally, Mr. Speaker, we have not admitted as facts on the Floor of this House?  Are we being fair to put that into our record on this petition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Here we have hon. Kutesa Sam being censured, or a motion of censure is being moved against him.  In fact, he said, 'before I start my defence'; I think he is just giving introductory remarks. I imagine that since this remark has been attributed to hon. Wacha, and I believe hon. Wacha is here, he will substantiate. If he distributes it, then I will see what to do, but if he does not, let us leave him and we shall consider it.

MR. KUTESA:  I am most obliged, Mr. Speaker.  

As I was saying, I think the rules that were followed in the censure of hon. Muhwezi were inadequate. These rules are still the same rules and I think that is why the former Speaker, hon. Wapakabulo, ruled that new rules should be put in place before any other censure motion is entertained. However, the petitioners in this particular censure motion, are happy to rely on the so-called precedent of hon. Muhwezi. I am not asking this House to postpone the debate on the motion of censure simply because the rules are not yet in place, Mr. Speaker, but if what the press attributed to hon. Ben Wacha is correct, it reminds me of a very old story I read long time ago. 

I would like to go through that story for Members, if only to illustrate the point.  There was once a kingdom where there was no capital punishment, in otherwords, if someone committed murder or treason the highest sentence he would face would be life imprisonment, but he would not be hanged.  Because of personal conflict, one day, a man who was a close friend to the king came to the king and told him that Mr. X had committed treason and that because other people are likely to do so in future, he must be hanged to set an example for the rest.  The king's reply to his friend was that his request could not be entertained because the law about hanging people was clear.  The King said that as far as the law was concerned, in his kingdom, and because of the precedent in the past, he could only hang chickens, cats, and dogs but not people. The King therefore advised his friend to first amend the law and then Mr. X could be hanged in accordance with the new law and precedent.  However, Mr. Speaker, the king's friend was not satisfied because he was so obsessed with hanging Mr. X.  The next day, he went back to the king and said he was working very hard on amending the law to introduce capital punishment, and actually the law was nearly ready.  But, since the law permitted the hanging of cats and dogs, and it was so urgent that Mr. X be hanged, the King's friend suggested to him that suppose they called Mr. X a dog and tried him in accordance with the current laws and precedents for dogs, would it not be possible to hung, Mr. X?  The king thought this was an ingenious idea.Mr. X was called a dog, tried in accordance with the law and precedent governing the trial of dogs, and he was convicted and hanged. The following week, the highest council in that kingdom sat and amended the law. It introduced capital punishment for human beings, but in its wisdom, it made procedures convicting human beings very fair, transparent and demanding very high standards of proof. Today, no person in that kingdom has ever been hanged, only dogs continue to be hanged.  

I have told this simple story just to illustrate the need for fairness and justice for all; what is good for the goose is good for the gander.  If the rules for censure are nearly ready, what is so urgent about censuring Kutesa to necessitate almost calling him a dog and hanging him, then a month later this House passes new rules of censure.  Is it because the evidence against him, if any, is in any danger of getting rotten or disappearing? Or is it because Mr. Kutesa must be hanged?  I ask all of you, hon. Members, what is the motive? What is the hurry?  Must one be called a dog so that he can be hanged? Why do you not make laws to hang human beings on the same basis?  

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, when this House sits to try one of its Members who happens to be a Minister, the procedure for doing so must be clear to all. Hon. Members are sitting here to dispense justice, and as we all know, procedure is the handmaid of justice. If the procedure is wrong or unfair, most likely the final decision will be both wrong and unfair. Equally, Mr. Speaker, it is of paramount importance that this petition against me is in accordance with the Constitution and all laws of this country.  Therefore, we should not feel, in any way, inhibited, by any amount of intimidation in the name of public opinion, to pronounce ourselves loudly and clearly on the law regarding any grounds of this petition.

I now turn to the petition, Mr. Speaker. Ground 1/2(a) states that, 
"The Hon. Sam Kutesa, acting in his capacity as chairman of the Board of Directors of Entebbe Handling Services(ENHAS), and simultaneously holding the above portfolio, placed himself in a position of conflict of interest, contrary to Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code of conduct."  

Similarly, under ground 2 (c), the petitioners state that,
"The Hon.Sam Kutesa in his capacity as chairman of ENHAS Board and being a Minister holding the above portfolio, threatened violence on the Uganda Airlines representatives of the Board, after they had complained about Hon. Sam Kutesa's presentation of false accounts to the 20th Board meeting of 20th February, 1997 in the Efforte Board Room; contrary to section 14(1) (d) of the Leadership Code of Conduct."

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is brought under Article 118 of the Constitution. The said Article empowers Parliament to censure a Minister on the following grounds:
(a) abuse of office or wilful violation of oath of allegiance or oath of office; 
(b) misconduct or misbehaviour; 
(c) physical or mental incapacity that makes the Minister in question incapable of performing the functions of his or her office.
(d) mis-management; or 
(e) incompetence.
These are the only grounds that the House can use to censure a Minister.  However, grounds 2 (a) and 2 (c) in the petition, do not fall under Article 118 of the Constitution. These grounds relate to the violation of the Leadership Code.  Unfortunately, this House has no power, under the Constitution, to administer the Leadership Code until such a time as when we have made a law arrogating ourselves the right to administer the code or giving this right to another institution. The administration of the Leadership Code is vested in the IGG by Article 234 of the Constitution. It is not vested there by an Act of Parliament. It is not vested there by subsidiary legislation; it is vested there by the Constitution, which is the supreme law of this land; that is what Article 234 says. I will read it, Mr. Speaker.  

Article 234 of the Constitution reads:"The Leadership Code of Conduct shall be enforced by the Inspectorate of Government or such other authority as Parliament may by law prescribe."  It is very possible that when we are passing a law to put Article 234 into operation, we could indeed finally decide that the best institution to administer the code could be Parliament. We could do that, it is within our powers; I already hear a few ayes for that position.  But, Mr. Speaker, we have not done so yet, we have not passed such a law.  The law, as it is now, provides that the Leadership Code can only be enforced by the IGG (Inspectorate of Government).  What is possible, Mr. Speaker, is that we, as Members of Parliament, can identify, like any other member of society, that there may be some wrong doing in this place or by that man. If we do so, Mr. Speaker, then we must follow the mechanism that is laid before us in the Leadership Code, particularly if that wrongdoing contravenes the Leadership Code.  Parliament can say, they think there is some wrongdoing; even a Committee of Parliament can identify wrongdoing. But having identified, then you must follow the procedure as prescribed by the law.  

It is my submission, Mr. Speaker, that if we were to allow grounds 2 (a) and 2 (c) of the petition to be part of the censure motion under Article 118 of this Constitution, we will be definitely acting in contravention of Article 234 of the same Constitution.  I am certain, Mr. Speaker, knowing you as an eminent lawyer in this country, and also the Learned Attorney General and Members of this House, you will also agree with me on this matter.  It is therefore my prayer, Mr. Speaker, that grounds 2 (a) and 2 (c), in as far as they relate to the Leadership Code, be struck out of this petition.  

I am not trying to hide behind the technicality of the law, as was implied yesterday by the Mover of this motion.  The formers of our Constitution, most of whom are here, and I have the honour and privilege to have been one of them, had precisely anticipated what can be brought under Article 118 and what can be brought under Article 234. For example, Mr. Speaker, if you look at Article 233, the requirement of the Leadership Code is very different from what is envisaged under Article 118 of this Constitution.  

Since we started this debate, Mr. Speaker, and even before we started, I have been in contact with you in writing and I know that my petitioners have equally been in contact with you in writing. I have greatly admired the manner in which you have ruled on these issues, even when you have not ruled in my favour. You have shown us that, through your guidance, we can contribute to the constitutional development process, and we can create clear precedents that will guide this House in the future. It is with this in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I now ask for your ruling on this matter, which I consider of great constitutional importance.  Thank you. I am seeking your ruling on this particular matter, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the business that started yesterday is based on the Constitution of Uganda, in particular Article 118. I have heard from the hon. Minister, in his opening remarks, that we must adhere to the provisions of the Constitution, both in spirit and also by the letter. Indeed, before we commenced our business here, we took an oath to uphold the Constitution.  

It is a fact that our Constitution has created three organs, namely: Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. Each organ was given functions to perform under this Constitution. As you realise, this motion could not have been entertained yesterday, as the procedure of sending a petition had not been complied with. This move to censure the hon. Minister must have started some time last year, maybe in December, when I understand 116 Members of Parliament signed a petition. The petition which they signed concerning hon. Sam Kutesa was not a petition to this House, it was a petition addressed to His Excellency the President. That is why the grounds that the Mover or the petitioners used to move a motion here were outlined. The provision of the Constitution enjoins the President, when he receives the petition duly signed - this petition, I believe, was duly signed, especially as 116 Members of Parliament signed it. I suppose a copy of this petition must have been sent to the hon. Minister to inform him of what the 116 Members of Parliament were saying. Now, I would imagine that on seeing the petition which does not comply with the Constitution or which is trying to violate the role of another organ, the person concerned, even the President, does not seem to see conflict with the Constitution. Conflict in that Parliament is trying to enforce the Leadership Code when the function was given to the Inspector General of Government. I believe the President has got legal advisers. He would have returned this petition saying that, the petition, on the face of it, is in conflict with the Constitution.  

I imagine if that had been done, then the Speaker would have contacted the petitioner and said, 'but look at this provision, it seems there is a query, can you remedy it?'  Most likely, the petitioners might have said, 'no, this is okay, as far as we are concerned, this is a proper petition.' 

Alternatively, if the President had not done that, the Minister concerned, on being given a copy, would say, 'your Excellency, you have given me this petition, but as far as I am concerned, this petition conflicts with the Constitution because Parliament is now taking up the assignment which was constitutionally given to the IGG. I think it is not a proper petition on which a motion for censure should be based.'  With this kind of dispute arising, with this kind of query arising, I would imagine then, we would look at the Constitution.  

The Constitution gives the powers of interpretation of the Constitution to the court and we would set up a constitutional court. It would be the work of the constitutional court to interpret this document and say, 'this is document is conflicting with the Constitution. Parliament is taking up the role of the IGG and it is unconstitutional.'  This was not done, and now we are here.  

If you ask me to interpret the Constitution, I will not be complying with the provisions of the Constitution, because, I would be taking up the role of the constitutional court in interpreting the Constitution.  Therefore, I would say, I am not supposed to do that.  

However, the issue is; by sighting the two sections of the Leadership Code, namely: 14(1)(d) and 14(2), is Parliament trying to enforce the Constitution contrary to the Constitution?   My view is, section 14 was merely used to describe a conduct, to indicate that even the Leadership Code calls it misconduct. It was not enforcement, but it was just used by incorporation to identify a conduct that the petitioners are alleging was committed. Therefore, because it is not my duty to interpret the Constitution, that is the duty of the constitutional court, I will not interpret, save making those observations. (Applause)

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I remain eternally obliged to you for your ruling. This would have led me to raise another objection of a constitutional nature, but with your guidance, since we now know that we should go to the constitutional court to get interpretation, I will abandon another leg of this petition, which I still consider unconstitutional. I will probably leave it to the relevant authorities however.  So, I will now turn to my defence.  

I wanted to mention for the record, that this petition is based on the report of a Select Committee on privatisation. Mr. Speaker, it is trite Parliamentary practice that evidence on which a report of a Select Committee is based, must be published. Even where the evidence is extensive and part of it is submitted with a report, the remainder must be deposited with the Office of the Clerk, and for good measure, in the library of Parliament.  This has not been so in this case.  In their quest to convict Kutesa, the Select Committee irregularly submitted a report, organised themselves into petitioners, and irregularly indicted me of offences not supported by the evidence on record.  Furthermore, the Minutes of the Committee have never been laid on the Table of this House on their own or with the Report.  

Eminent authors on Parliamentary Procedures, Erskine and May say, "minutes of a Committee must be laid on the Table either on their own or with a Report." The reason this is essential is to enable Members of Parliament to form their own independent opinion, based on the facts stated in the minutes, rather than taking the opinion of the Committee wholesale.  This practice in other Parliaments is for the benefit of Members.  When there is a Select Committee and it comes up with a Report, the Report sometimes could be the opinions of the Members of the Select Committee.  If they come along with the minutes and state what was happening; what answers the different people who appeared before the Committee gave, then Members of Parliament are able to put themselves in the position of Members of that Committee. They are able to judge on the facts, rather than judge on the opinions of the Members of the Select Committee. This is trite Parliamentary practice elsewhere, and certainly in the Commonwealth.

I am not saying this so that I be pardoned, I want to place some of these suggestions on record, so that for the future, when there are other Select Committees of this House, not only do we get a Report, but we should also get the minutes.  This will enable Members of Parliament to be in the same frame of mind as those people who gave their opinions as Members of a Select Committee.  I hope, if anything can be benefited by the delay in introducing our rules, the Committee on Parliamentary Rules and Privileges will take this on Board.  I hope that while I 'face the music', I will be the last one to do so on flimsy ground.  

Since you have ruled on the legal side, Mr. Speaker, I now would like to tackle this petition both from a factual and evidential standpoint.  I now wish to examine the petition on the facts and on the evidence.  
In ground 2(a), Mr. Speaker, the petitioners state that,"The Hon. Sam Kutesa, acting in his capacity as Chairman of the Board of Directors of Entebbe Handling Services(ENHAS) and simultaneously holding the above portfolio, placed himself in a position of conflict of interest, contrary to Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code of Conduct."  Now that we have assumed and agreed that this ground can be entertained, though I contended that it should not, let us look at the facts.  What are the facts, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sam Kutesa, it is true that I made a ruling and declined to interpret the Constitution, but if in your view, in presenting your defence, you still think that this is the position, I cannot force my thinking on you; you can raise it. Maybe other Members may all be of the same view, so that when they come to determine this matter, they will take into account the defence that this is unconstitutional and then decide.  So, you are free to press on in your defence that this thing should not have been done.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, once again I am most obliged to you, therefore, I shall go back -(laughter)- and present the other ground, which I feel should not have been accepted in this petition.  

Let me turn to Article 118 itself, which is the basis of this censure and the source of the authority of this House to censure any Minister.  Article 118, as I stated earlier, is very specific, it requires the petitioners to clearly state the grounds of censure in their petition.  That is a requirement of Article 118, it is specific; it says: " Parliament may, by resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a Vote of censure against a Minister on any of the following grounds- 
(a) abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of allegiance or oath of office; 
(b) misconduct or misbehaviour; 
(c) physical or Mental incapacity, namely, that he or she is incapable of performing the functions of his or her office by reason of physical or mental incapacity; 
(d) mismanagement or 
(e) incompetence."  

I am of the opinion, Mr. Speaker, that this requires the petitioners not to simply state that we are censuring you under Article 118 and stop there.  They should be able to say we are censuring you because you have misconducted yourself or you have misbehaved.  They should be able to say that you abused your office or violated your oath of office or of the country; I think of allegiance.  They should be able to tell you that you are a mad man and therefore you are mentally or physically incapable of running your office.  They should be able to tell you that you have mismanaged or that you are incompetent.  If they do not do so, what does an ordinary Minister do in this House?  For what do I prepare my defence, do I come with a certificate of mental fitness? - (Laughter)  

If you do not become specific, and that is the requirement of the Law, it then means you do not enable the respondent, or the defendant in a petition, a right to prepare their defence in time.  I do not know whether I should have ran to Butabika mental hospital and got a certificate of mental sanity. I do not know whether I should become an athlete to show physical fitness. I do not know whether I misconducted myself.  I am stating, Mr. Speaker, that in accordance with the Constitution, the bringing of a motion of Censure under Article 118, without being specific on which ground, is defective and makes the petition incurable.  

It may be of interest for us to look at Article 118(3), It says: " Proceedings for a censure of a Minister shall be initiated by a petition to the President through the Speaker signed by not less than one-third of all Members of Parliament giving notice that they are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the Minister and intend to move a motion for a resolution of censure and setting out particulars of the grounds in support of the motion."  

What does Clause (3) of Article 118 mean?  It simply means that it is not sufficient for you to write to the President that you are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the Minister.  That does not make you comply with Article 118.  You must go further, in accordance with Clause 3, and state that you intend to move a motion of censure and then set out particulars of the ground in support of that motion.  

What can the particulars of the ground of that motion be?  Again, we must go back to Article 118 (1).  It says: "Parliament may, by resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a vote of censure against a Minister on any of the following grounds".  So, the particulars you come up with, that are required by Clause 3 of Article 118, must comply with the grounds that are listed down in 118(1).  It is my contention, Mr. Speaker, and of course I do not expect a ruling on this, that this motion is defective and it is incurably defective in Law.  

Since we shall proceed with facts, however, I now wish to turn to the facts.  Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, in ground 2(a) the petitioners allege that I, acting in the capacity of Chairman of the Board of Directors of Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS), and simultaneously holding the above portfolio, placed myself in a position of conflict of interest contrary to Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code of Conduct.  Mr. Speaker, what does Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code of Conduct provide?  It provides as follows: " A Leader or his nominee shall not hold any shares or any other proprietary interest which places a leader in conflict of interest in relation to the duties and responsibilities of his office." The words emphasised are, 'which places a leader in conflict of interest in relation to his duties and responsibilities of his office.'  Those are the operative words.  First, he must have an office, two; he must be a leader, three; he must place himself in a position where the actions he takes conflict with his office and his leadership position.  Those are the ingredients of Clause 14(2). It must be against this background that my conduct, as Chairman of ENHAS, must be judged.   

Let me give this House a bit of the chronology of the events that took place in the formation and operations of ENHAS, Mr. Speaker. I think I will then prove to the hon. Members that at no time was I placed in a position of conflict of interest in relation to the duties and responsibilities of my office. 

Negotiations to form ENHAS stated in 1995, the company was floated in May 1995.  At that material time, as I have said before in this House, I was neither a Member of Parliament nor a Minister, nor was I even a Chairman LC 1.  I was a mere businessman and a lawyer in private practice.  So, Mr. Speaker, I could not conceivably, at that time, be described as a leader in terms of section 14(2) of the Leadership Code.  If I was not a leader, then I could not have had an office. If I did not have office, then there could not have been a conflict of interest between what I was doing then and the leadership code.  

So, Mr. Speaker, at the initiation of the business of ENHAS, I want to be categorical; I was not a Member of Parliament, I was not an LC 1 Chairman or anything, and I was not a Minister.  I held no office under the Leadership Code.  Therefore, for anybody to challenge me and say that when you entered this business you had a conflict of interest, the interest must be identified, the office must be identified, and I must be proved to be a leader.  My hon. Friends who led this petition did not do that.  

I think we should not only rely on our Laws, Mr. Speaker, it does help to borrow from elsewhere.  While our own Leadership Code may not be comprehensive, it does provide substantially for what amounts to the conflict of interest.  But there is a case, which does outline this even better. This is a case in the state of California, The Political Reform Act of 1974 of California; it prohibits public officials from participating in Government decisions when personal financial interests may be affected by those decisions. That Act defines what is meant, when it is said that you are making or participating in the making of a decision that makes you come into conflict.  It says, when you make a decision when acting within the authority of your office, you (a) vote on a matter;  (b) appoint a person; (c) obligate or commit the Government to any course of action; (d) enter into any contractual agreement on behalf of the Government; (e) determine not to act unless such determination is made because of your financial interest.  

I think this is a more elaborate definition of what it would mean to take action for what a man or woman must do to be able to come under the ambit of the Law as having had a conflict of interest.  It says, you should vote on a matter, you should appoint a person, you should obligate or commit the Government to any course of action and you should enter into any contractual agreement on behalf of the Government and determine not to act unless such determination is made because of your financial interest.

I would like to invite hon. Members to consider the petition against me with this definition in their mind.  As I have said, there could not have been a conflict of interest when I started my business in ENHAS.  It was not until more than one year, later in July 1996, that I was elected a Member of Parliament for Mawogola County and appointed a Minister of State for Planning and Economic Development.  Hon. Members will all recall that at that time we had two separate Ministries; Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Finance.  It was not until about two years later that these two Ministries were merged, I believe it was in May 1998.  

When I was appointed Minister of State for Planning, I was given a schedule of duties and responsibilities.  I would like to read them to this House and let this House determine whether my actions in ENHAS conflicted with the duties and responsibilities that had been assigned to me as a Minister of State for Planning.

I have a document here, Mr. Speaker, which was written to me on 26th of May, 1997, by my senior Colleague, hon. Richard Kaijuka, detailing my schedules and duties as a Minister of State for Planning.  The President under the Constitution had delegated that power to him. I have that document and I will lay it on the Table. The document reads:
"I refer to the meeting you and I had this morning in the presence of our PS and I write to confirm what we mutually agreed.  You will be in charge of the following departments and your duties and responsibilities will be as follows:

1. You will be responsible for Sectoral Planning as well as being responsible for establishing an effective monitoring and Evaluation Department.

2.  You will also be responsible for co-ordinating the following Donor Agencies in our programming exercise - European Union, EDF, ODA, USAID, France, Ireland, IFAD, Italy, Spain, CDC, DANIDA, CIDA, Austria, UNICEF, FOO, UNXCR, ILO and UNDO.  
Please, note that I will co-ordinate with all remaining Donor Agencies and you will be responsible for departments that I have not mentioned above.  You will also oversee the running of Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the National Council of Science and Technology.  

As I mentioned before, I may handle some aspects of your schedule from time to time if necessary and you may do likewise with my schedule especially when either of us is out of the Country or is absent."   
That is the document that spells out my schedule of duties from July 1996 to 15th May 1998.  I wish to lay this on the Table, Mr. Speaker.

ENHAS does handle ground handling at Entebbe airport, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the airport, by Statute, is under Civil Aviation Authority.  Civil Aviation Authority, even by Line Ministry, is under the Ministry of Housing, Transport and Telecommunications.  I have read to you the schedule of my duties from July 1996 to May, 1998.  I would like to point to you, hon. Members, that at no time was I in the Ministry of Transport. At all the material time, even when privatisation came, I was never in the Ministry of Finance, which privatisation was under.  I was in the Ministry of Planning and my duties were to do sectoral planning and set up an effective monitoring department with co-ordinating Aide Agencies, which I have just outlined.  

At no time, at no time, hon. Members, did I ever find myself in a position where I had to make a decision on behalf of government either for or against ENHAS.  Therefore, I have never had any time, in the course of my schedule of duties and responsibilities, to decide, because of the conflict in me, between government and ENHAS because I am shareholder.  

I think it would be near impossible to say that if you are a Minister in Gender and you have a grader and you wanted a contract to grade a road from the Ministry of Works, then there would be a conflict of interest because you are a Minister.  It is not because you are a Minister that there must be a conflict of interest, the conflict of interest must be between your decision, what you do, and the duties and responsibilities of your own schedule. (Applause).  I know that hon. Members here know this; hon. Members here do their business.  It only constitutes a conflict of interest if what you do in your own business then begins to conflict with your schedule of duties and responsibilities.  

My submission, Mr. Speaker, is that at no time between July 1996 and 16th of April, when ENHAS became completely private, was I placed in a position of conflict of interest, given my duties and schedule of responsibilities.  I implore hon. Members to take note of this.  If you condemn me for doing business with a company which has shares where I also bought mine, and which falls completely under a different Minister, whether it is hon. Nasasira of Transport or hon. Mayanja Nkangi of Finance or hon. Rukikaire of Privatisation; if you say, I should never do business like that, then I ask each and everyone of you, hon. Members, to pass a new law, otherwise, we are all in trouble. (Laughter)

I therefore would like to implore all hon. Members to consider the evidence that has been adduced about me; even the most eloquently made speech by hon. Okwir yesterday, when he was trying to tell you, look at Kutesa not because of what he did, but first of all look for a causal-link.  He called it, 'a causal-link'- that I started doing business in 1995, because there would be a reason to cause me conflict of interest when I became a Minister.  There was no causal link before I became a Minister, or even after. My schedule of responsibilities did not establish any conflict with my duty as a Chairman of ENHAS. I implore hon. Members to dismiss this ground of the petition.  I thank you.

I want to clarify further, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, even when it came to the sale of Uganda Airlines shares, I want to repeat that the entire transaction of selling the shares of Uganda Airlines to the rest of the members of ENHAS took place when I was still a Minister of State for Planning and Economic Development.  The whole transaction, all the negotiations and everything ended on the 16th of April.  Mr. Speaker, that is not being legalistic.  

I did not become a Minister of State for Finance in charge of Planning and Investments, which is even then remotely connected with Privatisation, until the 15th of May- almost a month before or one day to a month when all dealings in ENHAS shares had been completed. I want to invite you again to look back at my schedule of duties; dealing with ILO, dealing with the department, in setting up an effective department for monitoring, trying to do sectoral planning, and then judge me. I was not in conflict, because I was not in charge of Privatisation.  I was not even in the Ministry that was in charge of Privatisation.  I came into the Ministry of Finance on the 15th of May 1998, long after these transactions had been completed.  

Again, hon. Members, I implore you to look at the evidence, let no body judge for you because everybody's emotions can be whipped up.  Do not be told, do not look at Kutesa as this arrogant monster or rich and godforsaken man; I am not.   I am a legitimate person, who does his business within the law, and I think hon. Members and Ministers must be allowed to do so.  You must be allowed to do legitimate business.  If you do not, the consequences are more grave, because people will steal. (Laughter) 

I want to state once again that yesterday, and actually I think the day before, the Petitioners said that I participated fully in the negotiations of the sale of ENHAS shares and that when the deal was over, I decided to disqualify myself.  Nothing can be further from the truth.  It is true that I did write a letter on behalf of ENHAS, on behalf of our Consortium, dated 11th, and I had disqualified myself on the 9th.  But that was to transmit a message, it was not to enter into negotiations and I never did so again.  

An impression has been created that ENHAS is a parastatal company.  This impression is not correct. I think it is important that we make this distinction. An impression has been created, hon. Members, that ENHAS is a parastatal, ENHAS is a private limited liability company in which Uganda Airlines bought shares. It is Uganda Airlines which is a parastatal; not a private limited liability company. When arguments are being made on the Floor of this House that I went to become Chairman to represent the interests of government, that is not so.  

I want to state categorically that I had personal interests, yes, and Members of the Board had personal interests in a private limited liability company. If there were any Boardroom wrangles, which I deny, I want to remind you, hon. Members, that Boardroom wrangles are a common practice in business. You do not go into Board meetings to simply agree with your partners; you go there to discuss and then discussion entails agreement and disagreement.  

I want you, hon. Members, to put yourselves in my own frame of mind.  It is not right to condemn a man because you have gone to a meeting and disagreed with another, who is your shareholder, I think this is common practice.  I am sure that many of us do it, except that not all of us are under censure today.  We all do it.  We all do it, and we do it because it is legitimate - it is legitimate to defend; to make sure that your money, which you have invested, is not wasted.  

I want to state categorically that I think it is wrong to look at ENHAS as a parastatal, it is Uganda Airlines which is a parastatal that holds shares in a private company, just like my own company holds some shares.

I would now like to turn to ground 2(b) of the Censure motion, Mr. Speaker.  Ground 2(b) says that,"The hon. Sam Kutesa being a Minister of Government of the Republic of Uganda and Chairman of ENHAS, was offered and accepted to buy some of the 50 per cent shares of UAC shares in ENHAS at a price below the market value as determined by Delloite and Touche, an audit firm associated with his private company, to wit, Global Air-Links, thus causing financial loss to the Republic of Uganda."

Yet again, Mr. Speaker, a grossly wrong impression has been created by the Petitioners, both in this House and in the Press, to the effect that Kutesa is ENHAS and ENHAS is Kutesa.  It is not true, my dear Brothers and Sisters; hon. Members, it is not.  Kutesa is a shareholder; I am a shareholder in a Company called Global Air-Links. I am not even a majority shareholder as hon. Dombo ably demonstrated yesterday. I am a shareholder in Global Air-Links, which is a shareholder in ENHAS.

I was elected twice by all Members of the Board to become the Chairman of ENHAS. The first time, I was elected in my absence, and the second time I was present. Uganda Airlines was fully represented. I was elected to become Chairman, not because I have majority shares, but because I think the Members of the Company felt I had a useful purpose to serve them as a Chairman. If they had found that I was not useful, they would not have re-elected me.  

Most of you, hon. Members here have gone through elections. Those who have not been useful in the past are not here. (Laughter) You are here because the people you represent think you are doing a good job. All directors and shareholders of ENHAS think that of me, that is why they re-elected me.  So, Mr. Speaker, I did not do kakuyege in this particular case, I was elected, and let it be known, it is not that I imposed myself, I was elected twice.  

When it comes to saying that I, as is stated in this petition, being a Minister of Government in the Republic of Uganda and Chairman of ENHAS, was offered and accepted to buy some of the 50 per cent shares of Uganda Airlines in ENHAS at a price below market value as determined by Delloite and Touche an audit firm associated with my private company called Global Links thus causing financial losses, I totally and categorically deny this.  

I was a shareholder in Global Airlinks, which owned 20 percent of ENHAS at the time of its formation. It is not therefore correct for the petitioners to say in their petition that, I, Kutesa Sam, as a Minister, was offered and accepted to buy Uganda Airlines shares.  Kutesa is not a shareholder in ENHAS, Global Air Links is, Efforte is, Sabena is, workers are, and these are the people who were offered shares of Uganda Airlines for sell. Admittedly, as I have said to you, hon. Members, I have an interest in Global Airlinks, but it is technically wrong even for those who drafted this motion to say that I was offered these shares, I was never offered these shares it is not possible. If there is a pre-emptive right, clearly it applies to me as Kutesa in as much as it applies to everyone of us here. The first people who get pre-emptive rights of refusal are the Members of the company.  

It is not correct to state in a petition that is coming to such an honourable House and also going to the President and which is finally meant to end the life of the Minister in terms of serving in office, that the shares were offered to Kutesa.  They were never, they have never been, and they will not be, until the pre-emptive right issue has been resolved.  So, Mr. Speaker, if there was an accusation to be levelled at all, and in my view there was none, it should have been levelled against the said companies and not Kutesa as an individual.  
I think I better deal with this accusation squarely rather than begin to tell you the difference between Kutesa and the legal personality of a company, though it is important. I want to deal with this accusation squarely. I wish to state categorically that neither before, nor during or after negotiations to buy Uganda Airlines shares, had Global Airlinks ever had an association with Messrs Delloite and Touche either as a business partner or as its auditors.  Never, not before, not during the negotiations, and not even after, has Deloittee and Touche been associated with Global Airlinks either as partners or as Auditors. 
This statement made by serious petitioners saying that hon. Kutesa Sam, being a Minister of the Government of the Republic of Uganda and Chairman of ENHAS was offered and accepted to buy some of the 50 percent shares of Uganda Airlines Corporation in ENHAS at a price below the market value as determined by Delloite and Touche, an audit firm associated with his private company, to wit, Global Airlinks, thus causing financial loss to the Republic of Uganda, is a serious statement. 

I want it to go on record that the statement by the petitioners that Delloite and Touche is an Audit Firm associated with Kutesa's private company, Global Airlinks, is a gross falsehood; and I wish to put the petitioners to strict proof of that.  The petitioners know that this statement is, with respect, a blatant lie. If anybody is willing to disprove what I have stated, I am more than willing to yield the Floor to him right now.  I am willing to have someone come to the Floor of this House and prove that Delloite and Touche has ever been associated with Global Airlinks either as a partner or as an auditor or as an associate. If anyone can do that, I will ask hon. Members here to convict me, but if they cannot, I ask you, hon. Members, to acquit me.  (Applause)

This seems to be the basis of the conflict of interest; that I am associated somehow with Delloite and Touche and Delloite, and Touche is the one which determines the price at which the shares of Uganda Airlines should be sold to the remaining partners, therefore this constitutes an offence by me. I deny that I cheated and made the Republic of Uganda lose revenue, I did not. I deny this categorically; I did not influence Delloite and Touche. I deny categorically ever talking to Deloitte and Touche about this matter. I deny categorically that Delliote and Touche are associated with Global Airlinks Limited at all.  I ask you, hon. Members, if you do not get evidence to that effect, you should dismiss this ground. It is baseless, it is a complete lie and I am ashamed that it can be made by hon. Members.

I can only infer that this statement by the petitioners is made so as to make you, hon. Members, believe that I personally had a hand in influencing the valuation of the shares at the time they were sold to the other shareholders.  Let me categorically deny this again, I would be most surprised. Since these allegations came up, and I saw this petition, and even before, I heard that Delloite and Touche is one of the top 10 companies in the world that are engaged in auditing.  

I was told by my good Friend, hon. Wasswa Lule, that he had the privilege of working with them when he was in London. I think that time he had not become external Director for the Movement or something.  Hon. Wasswa Lule worked for Delliote and Touche and he confirmed to me in the corridors of this House that there is no way Delliote and Touche would succumb to being bribed by the Government of Uganda, let alone a mere Kutesa Sam; that is what hon. Lule told me.  Hon. Lule told me that even if the Government of Uganda wanted to bribe Delloite and Touche, its international reputation is so big that they would not risk to succumb to such a temptation.  He said how much less would you, hon. Kutesa, be able to attract them to succumb to you influencing them to have shares.  

The petitioners have supplied us with some documents and these documents are interesting, for example, there was document E, which I received on Friday.  In the earlier version of the document supplied to us, before I got the subsequent one, it was page 59, but I think in the later version, where a few documents which were in the first one do not exist, it is document 14, and it starts on page 33.  Since most people may have obtained the latest version of the documents by the petitioners, we look at document 14.  If you take document 14 on page 34; we were valuing shares of Uganda Airlines on the instruction of the Privatisation Unit, it says: "Furthermore, after the five years, there are indications that the sector will be completely liberalized and open to new entrants.  UAC has indicated likelihood of setting up an in-house ground handling unit in future.  

This will have drastic impact on future operations of the company as has already been evidenced by reduced turnover in the second year of operation.  

Financial performance.  
The operations of the company are quite profitable. The summary of its financial performance over the last two years are" - it is shown here, although, it is fairly declining.
"Business Valuation.
The value of ENHAS as a going concern has been computed by Ernst and Young and Delloite and Touche separately and independently. The valuations in both cases were based on the current operations of the company. It is also assumed in both cases that the company has perpetual exclusivity. They return the following values(in US$):
Ernst and Young; DFC, NVP". 

Under the recommendation, I see that under Deliotte and Touche, according to the document produced by hon. Dombo, there are two methods; earning method (PE ratio method) and the DFC (NPV)- if the licence is renewed, they give a total value of 9,712,000, and if the licence is not renewed in the same terms, they think the company is 5.635 million.  

I have also seen, in this DRIC note, that Uganda Airlines itself had already said that their shares are worth 5 million not 8 million. It is a document that has been produced by none other than the petitioner, hon. Dombo. Uganda Airlines itself, as a starting point, were not talking about 8 million dollars, they are talking about 5 million.  It is only Ernst and Young that was giving them all these high fantasies; that is in the document produced by none other than the petitioner - Uganda Airlines is stating so itself.  

Hon. Members, let nobody make you fly away with the idea that this is a ruthless businessman who cheated the country of 8 million or 5 million dollars; no! Uganda Airlines, the owners of the shares themselves, do not think they are worth 8 million. It is only Ernst and Young that say so. Indeed that is what it says.

I think I better look at this exhibit which was given by our Colleague. Members should also be able to look at it.  

Turn to document E; page 59-it is very difficult to follow these versions I do not know which is the new one or the old, it is not like the Bible.  But, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the first paragraph, page 60,it says:"ED invited UAL (Uganda Airlines Limited) to present its offer to the Consortium.  Mr. Derek Else, Financial controller circulated two reports, one by UAL and the other by Ernst and Young on the valuation of UAL shares.  UAL expressed the opinion that the value of their 750 paid up shares in ENHAS have a value of US $ 5 M and according to Ernst and Young the value is between US $5 - 8 million.  The UAL offer to the consortium was therefore put at US $ 90" 
That was at the beginning, but then go on to the fourth paragraph on that page, let me read the whole paragraph: "In the course of the negotiations ED informed the consortium that while the sale of shares is forced upon the corporation by circumstances, a very low price will not receive approval by DRIC which is the authority in divestiture transactions.  At this stage the EDP/UAL team withdrew to consult each other more.
A price of US $ 60 per share for 50 per cent of the fully paid up UAL shares in ENHAS was agreed as a new negotiating position. On return to the negotiating table the above price was indicated to the consortium. The consortium also in turn requested and withdrew for internal consultations."  

Uganda Airlines, the owners of these shares, together with the privatisation unit offered to the consortium that their shares should go for 60 Dollars per share.  Eventually, it is DRIC which insisted that the consortium should pay 75 Dollars per share, but the original owners, Uganda Airlines, had already accepted  60 Dollars.
Rather than ask Uganda Airlines why they were selling for 60 	 Dollars when they could extract 70 out of these men, I am being accused of working with Delloite and Touche to under-value these shares. I did not under-value these shares, hon. Members, we were forced as a consortium to pay far beyond the expectations of Uganda Airlines, according to the minutes of a Meeting that have been presented to this House by none other than the petitioner, hon. Dombo.  This is his own evidence; I did not bring this. I did not produce this document, he laid it on the Table I found it here and we are quoting from it, that is what it says. 

On one hand, in the petition, he is saying he has evidenced that I under-valued the shares, on the other hand, the document he is laying on the Table before this House shows us that Uganda Airlines was actually pleasantly surprised by the money we gave them, because they were ready to accept 60 dollars per share. Hon. Members, I beg you to dismiss hon. Dombo's assertions on this ground of the petition.  

Even assuming for one moment, Mr. Speaker, that the petitioners are correct, which they are not, assuming for one moment that I influenced the valuation of these shares, which I did not, even assuming that there is a grain of truth in what they are saying, the final price at which these shares were sold was not being determined by Deloittee and Touche, it was being determined by DRIC. DRIC has many stars here, DRIC has people whom they describe as eminent persons in the names of Onegi Obel, Mr. Abaliwano and others, but more importantly, it has distinguished members of this Parliament.

There were many meetings of DRIC on this matter, Mr. Speaker, and finally a decision of DRIC was made. As I said, there were quite a number of meetings that discussed the sale of these shares to the consortium and these were in the meetings of DRIC.  Some meetings were chaired by the Minister, but consistently attended by our distinguished hon. Members.  I will lay the minutes on the Table. The final one did say the following, "DRIC decision - sale of Uganda Airlines Corporation's 50 per cent equity ENHAS to other share holders at a price of US $3.750 million. Payment be within three months.  First, US $ 1 million on signing, the balance to be paid within three months subject to ADPEU cash requirements. It was noted that the Uganda Airlines Corporation still requires operational funds, payment of US $1 million after one month and US $400,000 for the next month.  Uganda Airlines' request to reschedule the loan owed to ENHAS was rejected as Uganda Airlines would not be in a position to service the loan."  

That was a decision of a DRIC meeting held on the 27th of March 1998 in the Board Room of Enterprise Development Project, 6th Floor, IPS Building, at 11.45 a.m.  Those who were present included the chairman, Mr. Isaac Isanga Musumba who is also Chairman Parliament Committee on National Economy; he was chairman.  Hon. James Mwandha, Chairman Parliamentary Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.  Mr. Onegi Obel; eminent person, Mr. Michael Emojong; eminent person.  Absent with apologies, hon. Mayanja, hon. Nkangi, hon. Kalema. 

The point I am making here, Mr. Speaker, is very simple.  I did not influence Delloite and Touche to under value these shares.  I did not influence DRIC at all to accept this value, I am sure hon. Members here can testify that I never influenced them.  Thank you.

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I hate to interrupt the hon. Minister when he is giving his defence to these very weighty matters, but since my name in particular has been mentioned, for the avoidance of doubt, I request for one moment to clarify.  

I want to start by saying I am not on trial here, Mr speaker. It is true that when the Minister of Finance was not there, and the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation was not there, I was  delegated to chair some of the DRIC meetings. It is only and only in that capacity that my name came on top of the minutes that hon. Sam Kutesa has just read.  Mr. Speaker, I do not want to interrupt his defence, I do not want to go into the details about how we got there, suffice it to say, however, that given the circumstances and the facts that were before us, we took that decision. We believed, at the time, and still believe, that on the basis of facts given to us, we took a decision that we believed was the best and was in the best interest of this country. Thank you.

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am greatly indebted to hon. Musumba. Precisely the point I was making, I neither influenced Delloite and Touche nor did I influence the distinguished member from Buzaya to make this decision.  They must have made these decisions based on the facts that were presented to them, independent of our influence, therefore, this ground must collapse.  That is the basis of this ground, nothing else.  

I have all the respect, and I certainly do not imply anything about hon. Members, hon. Musumba has had the Floor, he should have told you if I attempted to influence him.  He has not.  I did not!  What is the allegation?  Read it again.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas hon. Musumba gave information and made a slight clarification about DRIC, I am quite sure some of us members will, at a later time, after the Minister has made his defence, question hon. Musumba what the facts given to DRIC at that time were and who gave those facts?  It is a legal point.  So, let us not pre-judge it now, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Certainly, hon. Members, at the moment, we are getting hon. Sam Kutesa's presentation, his case, that is what we are getting.  After he has made his case, then it will be open to the House to make a contribution.  So, continue, please.

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am making nobody else's statement. I am making my own statement and I am only saying, even if you assumed that I could influence Delloitte and Touche, which I deny, I could not have influenced DRIC to bring down this price. None of the hon. members of DRIC have said so. In fact, I think none of them can say I influenced them; none of them, because it did not happen!  So, if that did not happen, what does this ground say?  The ground says, 'hon. Kutesa being a Minister of Government of the Republic of Uganda and chairman of ENHAS was offered and accepted to buy some 50 per cent shares of Uganda Airlines in ENHAS at a price below market value as determined by Delloitte and Touche, an audit firm associated with his private company, Global Airlinks, thus causing financial loss to the Republic of Uganda.'  

I deny having caused financial loss to the Republic of Uganda by using Delloitte and Touche to under value the shares of Uganda Airlines.  I deny it, and I want someone to establish whether it is a causal link with Delloite and Touche.  Maybe a causal link may be established.   I therefore pray you, hon. Members in this House, to dismiss ground 2 (b) because it contains no truth. It is a fabrication, and I do not accept it. I believe that hon. Members, given my explanation, you do not accept it either.  I thank you on that one.

I would like now to move to ground 2 (c).  Ground 2 (c) of the petition states that: "The hon. Sam Kutesa in his capacity as chairman of ENHAS Board and being a Minister holding the above portfolio, threatened violence on the UAC representatives of the Board after they had complained about hon. Sam Kutesa's presentation of false accounts to the 20th Board meeting of the 20th February, 1997 in the Efforte Board room; contrary to section 14 (1) (d) of the Leadership Code of Conduct."

I want to deny categorically that I threatened violence on any member of that board from Uganda Airlines; I did not. I attended and chaired the meeting of 20th February 1997.  What is stated in this petition is interesting.  It is interesting in the sense that ground 2 (c), by the petitioners, is even inconsistent with the testimony of Mr. Turinawe whom I am supposed to have threatened violence.  It is inconsistent with the testimony he gave to the Select committee chaired by hon. Omongole.  

Listen to me as I read this, hon. Members,that "The hon. Sam Kutesa in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS Board and being a Minister holding the above portfolio, threatened violence on UAC representatives of the said Board after they had complained about hon. Sam Kutesa's presentation of false accounts to the 20th Board meeting of 20th February."  

Let us go back to the testimony of Mr. Turinawe to the Omongole Committee.  What does it say?  Once again, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, this is not my document, it is hon. Dombo's document; the petitioner.  I want to refer you to document No. 17 on page 42.  I want you to compare the words that Mr. Dick Turinawe stated to the committee, under oath, and what the petitioners are alleging I am guilty of.  The petitioners are saying that I threatened violence on the Uganda Airlines representatives on the said Board after they had complained about me, Mr. Sam Kutesa, presenting false accounts at the 20th Board meeting.  Turinawe states, I think it is line 11, on page 42: "And thereafter, in a board meeting, we were given some financial statements by the Corporation Secretary..." mark my words, the petition says "after Kutesa's presentation of false accounts", Turinawe tells you, it is the Board Secretary who presented these accounts; false or not false. In your petition, you said, no, it could not be the Corporation Secretary; it must have been Kutesa.  You were not there!  Turinawe was there, he was under oath and I would imagine this would have been the basis of your own petition.  

The impression that these petitioners are trying to create is very simple and the motive is very easy to establish.  They are trying to paint Sam Kutesa a rotten man; anything that is wrong, whether it is done by the Corporation Secretary, must have been done by Kutesa.  Yes, I will read the whole of it; I will even read his affidavit.

MRS. EGUNYU: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for Members of this House to keep on interrupting and heckling in a manner which is not polite according to our rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think our rules are clear on this, heckling is not one of the things that you should do.  As I said yesterday, hon. Members, just keep cool, listen and then at the end of the day, you will weigh, rather than prejudicing the presentation.  So, heckling is not part of our way of doing things. So, they are not in order if they are heckling.

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But of course, Mr. Speaker, Dick Turinawe goes ahead and alleges, while exonerating me on having been the one to present the false accounts, and says they were brought by the Corporation Secretary. He goes ahead and alleges (from the 5th line on the bottom of page 42) that I threatened either his life or his job by saying, "I remember then I refused the chairman told me that he had hoped I would live to read those documents and by the way, this is why I told you that although you were 50 per cent, our participation was cosmetic."  

He alleges on the following page, in the middle- "I actually told the chairman, I told him, 'are you threatening me as a person or are you threatening my job?'  And I remember telling him that, 'I know if it is my job, I know you are capable of- (inaudible) - it out"- I think he meant I am capable of taking his job or taking him away from his job. "But as long as I am here, I am supposed to do this job. And as it turned out eventually, Bageya I think was thrown out, and -(Interruption)."  This is alleged to have taken place at the 20th meeting of the Board of ENHAS.   

It is true that the Corporation Secretary presented financial statements. It is true that the accountant who had prepared them was away. It is also true that one member of the Board said 'in view of the fact that the accountant is not here to present these accounts, why do we not first send them to the external auditors to have them verified?'  And it is true that I, as Chairman, ruled in favour of that proposal by the Director.  It is also true that Mr. Dick Turinawe and Mr. Bageya George said 'No'.  

I ruled in favour of the directors who had said that the accounts be withdrawn and sent to the auditors.  But the directors, Mr. Turinawe and Mr. Bageya, said that they would retain these papers because they wanted to read them.  I said 'but if everybody has handed over these papers, why not you?'  And they refused.  I said, 'I cannot continue conducting a meeting like this.  I think my leadership is not being accepted' and I walked out of the room, but before I did, I told Mr. Turinawe, 'we have had so many people from Uganda Airlines coming here.  The other day we had hon. Mutyaba, another day Mr. Kyalimanzi, now you and Mr. Bageya, I hope you will be the same people who will come to discuss these accounts again.'  I said that.  I said that I hope you will be the people whom we shall meet with to discuss these accounts.  I said that.  

Apparently, Mr. Dick Turinawe and the petitioners are not satisfied with what is stated under Oath.  They got an affidavit from me, literally stating the same thing.  First of all, let me say this, I do not know the value of the affidavit, because I think an affidavit is also a statement under Oath.  So, this statement under Oath would have been sufficient.  But any way, Mr. Dick Turinawe has signed an affidavit.  I want, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to also place on record the minutes of that meeting and I would like to challenge anybody who will see from that record anything that says that I threatened violence on Mr. Dick. Turinawe, or anybody else.  The minutes of the 20th Board meeting are very clear, there is no such statement. 

Maybe I do not have to repeat it, Mr. Speaker.  It was laid on the Table as document 15, page 39.  If you look at minute 6.5, it says,
"RESOLUTIONS  
i) That CAA and Uganda Airlines be reminded to come up with modalities of how their staff will take up shares allotted to them in ENHAS.
ii) That copies of the discussion of the agenda item on financial information...
iii) That the draft Financial Performance Reports that had been circulated to the directors be withdrawn.  

The meeting was adjourned after Uganda Airlines Directors declined to hand over the copies of the draft financial information and the Chairman noted that the meeting had reached an impasse and further discussion on the subject could not continue.  

The meeting convened after a short adjournment and Mr. Hezi Bezalel was elected Chairman."  

I felt my authority challenged and indeed I walked out of that meeting.  I do not deny that.  So, this is the minute, there is no threat of violence.  I want to contend further, Mr. Speaker, I was not the only one who attended that meeting; I was present, Mr. Bageya was present, Mr. Turinawe was present, Mr. George Tytens, the director representing Sabena, was present.  Mr. George Tytens has sworn an affidavit, which I want to lay before this House.  I will first read it, Mr. Speaker.
"In the Republic of Uganda of Article 118 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, and in the matter of a petition for a Resolution to censure against hon. Sam Kutesa Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning and Investment affidavit in rebuttal.

I, George Tytens of post address box number 227 Kampala, Uganda solemnly take Oath and state as follows: That I am now a Chief Executive Officer of ENHAS Limited and was a director of the company since November 1995 up to February, 1998 when I was appointed the Chief Executive Officer.   That on the 20th of February, 1997 I attended a Board meeting of ENHAS Limited at Impala house in the Board Room of Efforte Corporation which was chaired by hon. Sam Kutesa.  That during the said meeting, copies of draft financial performance reports were presented by the company secretary to the members of the Board.  That the said company secretary informed members of the Board that the draft financial performance report had been prepared by the accountant, but who was not around to defend them.  That some members of the Board disputed the said draft financial performance report and suggested that it should be referred to the external auditors for verification.  That the Chairman agreed with the said suggestion and ruled that the draft financial performance report be withdrawn and be sent to external auditors.  That the two directors from Uganda Airlines refused to handover their copies and an exchange of words followed between the directors and the Chairman.  That the Chairman said that it was becoming increasingly difficult for him to conduct the affairs of the Board, with Uganda Airlines changing its representatives in every meeting thereby losing consistence, and he hoped that the two Uganda Airlines directors representatives would still be present on the Board at the future meeting to consider the financial report.  That I did not hear the Chairman threatening Mr. Dick Turinawe, that I hope you live to read the Report or any other threatening words.  That the Chairman then walked out, and the members elected a temporary Chairman and it was again resolved that the Finance Report be referred to the external auditors.  That I swear this affidavit in rebuttal of the affidavit sworn by Mr. Dick Turinawe in support of ground 2(c) of the petition to censure hon. Kutesa, that whatever I stated herein above is true to the best of my knowledge.  Sworn on the 2nd of March 1999.  Respondent, George Tytens, before Commissioner of Oaths in Kampala."  I lay this on the Table.

It is not competition on who can produce what affidavit, Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of stating the truth.  I would like to pose a few questions, hon. Members, for you to ponder upon.  Mr. Speaker, if indeed I threatened Mr. Turinawe on the 20th of February 1997, what did Mr. Turinawe do between the 20th of February 1997 and November 1998 when the Select Committee of this Parliament was set up?  I have been depicted as a very powerful man who could threaten the life or job of Mr. Turinawe.  Are we saying that Mr. Turinawe did not feel sufficiently scared by my threat and did not even think of reporting to the Police?  For 18 months a man's life is threatened by a very, very powerful man who can move anything in this country, who is supposed to be so powerful that they could not even take his job.  The man says I hope that you will live to read this report.  My next move would be either to go to the Police or into exile.  Because, what is greater than life?  All of us who have gone into exile once in a while, we have run away for dear life.  But 18 months pass, you do not report to the Police.  Secondly, you are a member of this Board as a representative of Uganda Airlines, you do not even report to your own Board that actually where I am, I am in danger!  Someone is likely to kill me.  But then, this is a threat being issued by a Minister; do you not go to your own Minister and say, 'my dear Minister, protect me from your colleague'?  None of that was done for 18 months. Clearly, the affidavit of George Tytens states that none of those threats was ever made.  

It is my submission, Mr. Speaker, that this ground is a fabrication yet again calculated to tarnish my name.  Before I call upon you to dismiss it, which is what I am going to do, I want to say that up to now Mr. Dick Turinawe is alive and well.  Two, he keeps the same job he was in then. (Laughter)  Unless the petitioners are saying that hon. Kutesa was issuing an empty threat, which I am willing to admit to.  But why would I issue an empty threat?  Mr. Turinawe is well and okay, he is alive and kicking.  He is going about his business in the normal way, he is still the Acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines.  Hon. Members, I appeal to your good sense, I appeal to your wisdom, I appeal to your honesty and sense of fairness and justice, I ask you to dismiss this ground as a fabrication against me just meant to tarnish my name.  
On ground 2(d), Mr. Speaker, the petitioners allege that, "The hon. Sam Kutesa, acting in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS Board and while holding the above portfolio as Minister denied workers of Uganda Airlines Corporation their due shares of 2.5 per cent in ENHAS contrary to the shareholders agreement."  

I do not know whether this is a Constitutional matter? My view would have been that since it is a matter, as stated by the petitioners, which is in contravention of a shareholder?s agreement, there is a mechanism of resolving disputes between the different parties. I know that if anybody acts in contravention of the shareholders agreement, that agreement has an arbitration clause. Just like it would have been unfair for the House to entertain an allegation or an accusation of having threatened violence, I think it should also not entertain business disputes between parties.  Because these are civil matters that can be resolved by courts of Law.  

If anybody in this country is threatened with violence and he comes running to move a motion in Parliament, we will soon turn this House into a Police Station. (Laughter) That is not our purpose.  If everybody in the village says to you, even in your own constituency, that they have threatened me with violence and you run here to censure someone, what will the job of the police force be?  Equally, hon. Members, a mechanism for resolving business conflicts exists.  I am surprised that this one is not contrary to the Leadership Code, but it is contrary to a shareholders agreement.  

Surely, hon. Members, are you going to settle all civil disputes between Ugandans? If there are civil disputes between Ugandans, is this House the right forum?  Are we going to sit here just settling disputes?  Why do we not make laws and create people's courts, maybe try to enforce LC courts?  There may be a little more time available there than here. 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I also would like now to substantively answer that charge against me on that ground. When the shareholders agreement was entered into, it provided, among other things, that all shareholders, including staff of Uganda Airlines Corporation, should pay for their shares by 28th February 1996. However, the staff of Uganda Airlines did not fulfil this requirement. The staff were given a grace period so as to allow them to organise themselves and form a legal entity through which they could co-own their shares. This was never done until September 1997 when they attempted to pay for their shares by making a part payment of shillings 5 million on the insistence that the payment should be done at the value of the shares at inception.  Other shareholders had made their full investment at inception.  

The company had purchased new equipment and definitely the net worth of ENHAS had gone up.  At the shareholders meeting of 28th April 1998, it was resolved that Uganda Airlines and Civil Aviation staff should pay for their shares at the value that was determined by the Privatisation Unit at which all other share-holders bought the Uganda Airlines shares.  

I gave an example here, the last time I was defending myself on the Committee Report.  If I started a business with my good Friend hon. Kanyike, who is absent today, and hon. Kanyike and I agree that each one of us will bring Shs.100,000/=, for example, so hon. Kanyike brings his Shs.100,000/= and we form a Company.  Hon. Kanyike invests his Shs.100, 000/= and calls upon me to bring mine, and I say, I am not ready.  So, Kanyike puts in his money for one year, two years, two and a half years, then I turn up and say, hon. Kanyike, you are my good Friend, I am now ready to bring in my Shs.100,000/=; although your Company now is worth Shs.12m/=, you must respect our old agreement because we are good friends.  I put in Shs.100,000/= as my full payment for shares, inspite of the fact that your Company is now four or five or even ten times more valuable.  Even hon. Kanyike agreed with me that however much I love workers, I would not give them those shares at the same price.  He said, if he did not put in Shs.100,000/= at the time, it would be agreeable to keep my shares available.  But when I come to pay for them, I must pay the right market price of the time.

We have told the Uganda Airlines workers nothing more and nothing less other than saying, the shares have now been valued -they are now 75 dollars a share.  If you want to pay for them now, that is the price, and those shares are still available.  Very interestingly, hon. Members, the workers of Civil Aviation Authority have accepted and they have paid and got their shares.  Why should we treat the workers of Uganda Airlines separately or differently from the workers of Civil Aviation?  

I would even ask hon. Bakkabulindi or any body who represents workers here that at worst you must plead for sectarianism or equality of treatment.  Why should we treat one group differently?  Why should they pay lower than their counterparts for their shares?  These are all workers.  Why should we, even as private people who invested our own money?  This is not charity?  Why should we give this money?  

It is not true that we have refused to give the workers of Uganda Airlines their shares as alleged here,Mr. Speaker.  What we have said is, your shares are available, but pay the market price like your colleagues in Civil Aviation, like other investors.  That is all we are asking for, and the shares are available.  We shall give them to them.

Before I leave this point, Mr. Speaker, I see some kind of contradiction.  Hon. Dombo and the Petitioners are saying that the price, which we paid for the shares of Uganda Airlines at 75 dollars a share, is too low.  When it comes to Kutesa, it is too low, but when it comes to the workers of the Uganda Airlines, this is too high.  What are we talking about?  What are we talking about, hon. Dombo?   If you think we are trying to cheat them and they should pay at 37 dollars per share, why are you insisting that I should pay more than 75 to Uganda Airlines?  Have we had cases of double standards?  Have we had something like that in this House before?  The beginnings have come - (Laughter).  

Why?  How can you sustain that argument, that for one group of people 75 dollars per share is not enough; it is too little, but for another group of shareholders, it is too high?  I have never seen a clearer case of double standards, and hon. Members, I submit to you that this ground is incorrect.  We have not refused to give the workers of Uganda Airlines their shares.  What we have said is, your shares are available, just like those of the workers of Civil Aviation but pay for them the same amount as they paid for them, nothing more and nothing less.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, once again I invite you to drop and really dismiss this ground of the petition.  

I would now like to deal with the last ground of this petition.  This is ground 2(e); 2(e), according to the Petitioners, reads: "The said Sam Kutesa, acting in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS, and while still a Minister in the Government of the Republic of Uganda, condoned the financial loss of the sum of US $ 445,761 which the Board of the said ENHAS wrote off as a bad debt, thus, causing financial loss to Uganda Airlines Corporation, an enterprise belonging to the Republic of Uganda".

It seems to me a bit strange, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.  I think, the first point to note is that the other shareholders, other than Uganda Airlines, owned 50 per cent of the Company.  So, what interest would it be for me, hon. Sam Kutesa, a shareholder, and not an employee, to write off money as a bad debt?  Because, if I do not write it off, we, the private shareholders, would be entitled to 50 per cent of that.  I think one would have to be crazy to willingly write off 222,000 dollars and feel comfortable.  Why?  Unless the imputation by the Petitioners is that Kutesa did not write it off as such, he must have benefited in the writing off.  That can be the only thing that could make sense.  Otherwise, it does not make sense for me to cheat myself; it does not.  Unless there is an imputation that in a round about way, I was benefiting from this loss and the answer to that hon. Members is no.  

I want to tell this House what happened. In our shareholders Agreement, we have a Clause that allows Airline share-holders in ENHAS to enjoy a rebate on the published rates at which we handle Aircraft.  In other words, Uganda Airlines enjoys 50 per cent rebate.  Sabena, I think, enjoys about the same.  So, when British Airways lands, we charge them 100 dollars, when Uganda Airlines and Sabena land, we charge them 50 dollars, because it is self-service; they are members of our Consortium - they are share-holders.  

Our Accounts Department continued billing Uganda Airlines and Sabena as if they did not have any rebate over a period of this year.  This created a false impression that there was money because of ENHAS, because now we were charging 100 per cent instead of 50 per cent.  When it came to the Board, we made a provision - we did not write off - we made a provision to write off.  I am not technical, but I am told by those of you who know accounts, making a provision to write off is not the same thing as writing off.  We made a provision to write off, and we sought further explanation from the external auditors. The external auditors have written, and I would like to place it on record. I do not know if they will believe them, but they are my so-called old friends, associates and partners - Delloite and Touche. They are the auditors of ENHAS, but not Global as alleged in your petition. It reads: "We confirm that the financial statements for the year ended 28th February, 1997, provision for bad debts.  We confirm that the provision for bad and doubtful debts of 445,761 appearing in financial statements for the year, ended 28th February, 1998, related to old balances which are considered irrecoverable from the Company's debtors.  There were a number f factors that gave rise to the recoverability of the balances.  These are explained below:
(a) Double invoicing.  
The Accounting clerks would raise two or more invoices in respect of the same service rendered.
(b) Incorrect price or rates would be charged to customers resulting in disputed balances.
(c) Rebates or discounts given to facilitate collection of Airlines cargo freighters.
(d) Demurrage and storage charges which we had been waived.
(e) Other clerical or book keeping errors.

We further confirm that our audit did not reveal any evidence of fraud or irregularities during the year ended 28th February 1997.  You will appreciate that our normal audit procedures are designed primarily to enable us to form an opinion on the financial statements as a whole and therefore, do not necessarily bring to the light at each audit all the weaknesses in the internal controls or accounting practices which a special investigation might do.
Yours sincerely,
Delloite and Touche."

Now, hon. Members, what is my problem? - This is from Deloitte and Touche.  How did I, according to the petition, condone the loss of money that was never lost?  This is what they are saying.  They are saying that there had been double invoicing, they are saying that we were charging rebates, which were due to Airlines as if they were not due.  So, the money actually was never lost because, for example, Uganda Airlines is the beneficiary of this Clause that says you cannot charge them 100 per cent.  

We had given ourselves a rosy picture of our performance, as a company, by inflating what was a due to us.  When the auditors came, they told us, no, we had made a provision to write it off, we did not write off.  So, I did not cause any financial loss to Uganda Airlines in the first instance, if I had done so, I would have caused financial loss to myself.  So, hon. Members, on this ground, clearly I am exonerated and all other members are exonerated by this letter from the auditors.

MRS. MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification. I am at a loss because of this document that the hon. Minister has just read to us.  It is dated January 6th, 1999, and it is signed, 'Deloitte and Touche'.  I am just wondering; is there a man called Deloitte and Touche?  Because there is no signature as far as I can see.  I am seeking clarification on this, because I see the partners as being Ndonye, Allen, and Onyango.  Who is the officer?  Is the officer called Deloitte and Touche?  Or is he Onyango or is he Asumani or is the document called Deloitte and Touche?  I am seeking your clarification, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister has presented a document, presumably which was sent to him by somebody. I do not know whether he will be able to explain the way things are done in that particular firm. (Laughter) He has presented it to you, it is you to attach weight on it.  If you think it is not the practice, then say that, if you think it is the practice, you say that. So really, the assessment of the value of this document is ours. But for him, he has presented you this document as coming from those particular auditors. Can the Minister tell us more?

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, let me say that I am not in a position to tell very correctly or otherwise whether Mr. Delloite or Mr. Touche or Mrs. Touche are alive or whether these are really their names.  But this is a registered Firm.  Maybe I could tell you a short story, Mr. Speaker.  There is a law firm called, Hunter and Greg in Kampala.  One time an American wanted to register a trademark and he rang Hunter and Greg, and he asked, "I would like to speak to Mr. Hunter".  They told him, "no, Hunter died many years ago"  
Then he said, "Can I speak to Mr. Greg?"
They said, "Greg died before him"
Then he asked, "Whom am I speaking to?"
There was a man called Kasilibayo Chris at that time.  But the Muzungu would not accept that he should call Kasilibayo by his name; he said, "Mr. Bayo, can I call you Kasi" (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the clarification sought was in line with the fact that there is no signature, I think she is not complaining about the name.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, the information I want to give, subject to correction from those who studied Financial Management is, writing the name of the Firm is a standard of signing by Auditors. (Applause).

MR. KUTESA: So, Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay this document on the Table.  
In conclusion to this matter, Mr. Speaker, I would like once again to inform this august House that there was no financial loss incurred by ENHAS, therefore there was no financial loss incurred by Uganda Airlines. If any such loss was there, I did not condone it because it did not exist.  I once again invite this House to dismiss this ground as well.  

I would now like to make very brief remarks on the presentation by hon. Dombo and make a comment on some of the documents that he presented yesterday.  Hon. Dombo, in his presentation on ground 1, sited a number of documents. One of his statements to the House was that I was very unfair to Uganda Airlines by demanding the March revenue for ENHAS.  Hon. Dombo states that ENHAS concession, in the document marked number 1, which he laid on the Table, begun on 30th March 1996. 

Ground handling operations of Uganda were carried out by Uganda Airlines as they had always done, because of this they would have been no point in paying ENHAS for a service it never carried out.  ENHAS, however, took a contrary view and insisted that since the Minister responsible had agreed in the earlier meet that the franchise of ENHAS begins on the 1st of March, ENHAS was therefore entitled to all money generated during the month of March.  Hon. Kutesa's position, as Chairman in this respect, was to give aggressive support for ENHAS against Uganda Airlines interests, and it is in the board meeting where I insisted that this should be strongly limited. He says that, 'I wish to point out that hon. Kutesa became in a Minister in June 1996, but after his appointment he pressed for recovery of this money from Uganda Airlines.' 

I would like to invite hon. Members to look at document number 1, which hon. Dombo laid on the Table.  Document number 1, according to hon. Dombo, is the document that relates to the ground handling agreement between Civil Aviation Authority and ENHAS.  He contends that this franchise did not come into force until the 30th day of March and as a result, the revenue for March should have gone to Uganda Airlines and not ENHAS.  In the same document, which hon. Dombo himself laid before this House, if you turn to page 3 of 12; article 3(2), it is quite categorical and clear; 'this agreement shall be deemed to have commenced on the first day of March 1996.' 

Hon. Dombo says that it started on 30th March not 1st of March; this document is his, it is not mine, he is the one who laid it before us.  I invite hon. Dombo to look at page 3 of 12; that surely should answer your question as to when this franchise started.  It seems very clear to me that if it started on the 1st of March, the revenue for March must be due.  Why?  Because at no time from the 1st of March to the end of March was there any other person authorised to carry out work at the airport by Civil Aviation.  It is ENHAS that agreed with Uganda Airlines that they should carry out their work as ENHAS and recruit some of the staff from Uganda Airlines to join the new organisation. Indeed, it was agreed that Uganda Airlines should deduct all the operational expenses that it incurred during that month.  Having finished that, the net income would come to ENHAS and it would be shared among other shareholders in which Uganda Airlines was 50 percent shareholder.  So, Uganda Airlines would deduct all the operation costs and the net would come to the company that had the franchise, and Uganda Airlines had 50 percent of that revenue. That is what happened, nothing more and nothing less.  

Hon. Members, you may well wish to remember that by 28th February, all other shareholders had already contributed their capital.  So, this capital was employed to generate the revenue of March. It was only fair that it should be shared proportionately according to the share holding; that is what we did.  Hon. Dombo, I would like to invite you again to look at page 3 of 12 because those clearly state when this franchise came into force. 

Hon. Dombo, in his presentation yesterday, referred to document number 3, and he was trying to point out and buttress the argument that I have been marginalising Uganda Airlines as Chairman of ENHAS and that I, as the Minister, ought never to have done that; he cited document number 3.  Document number 3 is a letter from Dickson Turinawe to the General Manager of Entebbe Handling Services, Entebbe and it reads: "As agreed in the last Board meeting, you are to furnish the Directors with Financial Information in order to keep us abreast with the performance of the company.  To date, I have not received any information to this effect. 

The purpose of this letter is to remind you of this directive and to request that this information be availed as soon as possible." 

This letter is addressed to the General Manager of ENHAS informing him of the board directive to send him financial information. I chair the board, I do not produce the reports.  This letter indicated failure on behalf of Management, but not lack of vigilance on the part of the board. If you read that letter, it was the board, which directed.  This is not my document, it is hon. Dombo's document and it says, 'as agreed in the last board meeting you are to furnish the directors with financial information.'  Now this is also being blamed on me, as Kutesa Sam. It is the General Manager who should have, in accordance with the directive of the Board, furnished this information to the other Members of the Board.  I would like to be accused of those things that I am most likely to be guilty of, but something like this, which is so clear, I think, is unfair. 

Hon. Members, I think hon. Dombo is not right in saying that this shows that I was oppressing the Uganda Airlines representatives. In fact, I was siding with them in the Board, but we had a failure.  

The same goes for document number 4,Mr. Speaker. Again I think document number 4 is almost a reminder to the General Manager of ENHAS because I do not write financial reports. The document says,"Please refer to my letter dated 7th November, on the above subject, a copy of which is attached for your ready reference.  
In spite of the Board's Directive, I have so far not received any financial information as it had been agreed.  This is to inform you that the Uganda Airlines views this as a matter of serious concern especially so when we are the majority shareholders.  I must put it to you that we expect better co-operation if our Joint Venture is to progress."  

I agree that this is a directive of the Board to the General Manager of ENHAS and it is expressing a Board directive. I would like to know where hon. Dombo faults me on this matter.  
Mr. Speaker, then there is a letter; document number 5, which was written to me, it says:
"Dear sir,
 RE: Emergency meeting of the board. 
 It is our feeling that there is a crisis in the running of the company especially the financial management. 

 Accordingly, we demand for an Emergency Board Meeting before the 9th February 1997.  We trust that you will appreciate our concern and call for the meeting."  

This was written to me,Mr. Speaker, so here, I think hon. Dombo probably places the responsibility where it lies. Mr. Speaker, when I received that letter dated 6th February, I immediately replied to it, I wrote to the General Manager Uganda Airlines, Mr. Tumubweine. My letter is dated 7th February 1997. It said,

"Dear Sir, 
 RE: Emergency meeting of the Board.  
 I have today received your letter of the 6th of February, demanding for an emergency meeting to be held on Sunday the 9th February,1997.  Unfortunately, neither myself nor two other members of the board, are available on Sunday.  I have also checked to see if the alternate directors could attend in place of the other Directors, but all are also committed.  I trust that you are aware that there is a scheduled meeting to take place on the 20th of February 1997 and the notice to that effect was issued on 5th February 1997.  I am, therefore, of the view that in order to have a comprehensive discussion of the burning issues of the company, all Directors should endeavour to attend the meeting on 20th February 1997 as I believe they will have received sufficient notice."
It was signed by me a day after I had received document number 5, which hon. Dombo had laid on the Table. 

I therefore, wish, Mr. Speaker, to also place this on record.  (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, just a small piece of information about this letter.  I think hon. Kutesa misunderstood the letter from Mr. Turinawe. Mr. Turinawe requests for a meeting before 9th February 1997, and presumably that day was a Sunday. In his reply, hon. Kutesa says, 'you requested for a meeting on a Sunday.' He did not say I want a meeting on Sunday, he said I want a meeting before 9th of February, which was before Sunday.  So, really, I think the Minister misunderstood the letter from Turinawe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, you may be right about what you are saying, but I think the hon. Minister is about to close his case, when he does, then you will assess the case as presented by the two sides.  That is his assessment, your assessment may be different.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your ruling.  As I said, this letter is dated 7th February. I received this letter and I wrote back on 7th February. Before the 9th, there could only have been the 8th and I think it was too short a period.  So, I think my interpretation is correct.  
As I said, Mr. Speaker, both the letters in document number 6 and document number 5 were demanding a meeting. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, there was a meeting on 20th, as I had promised the General Manager of Uganda Airlines. On 20th February, we held a board meeting and the minutes are available. So, the meeting that was being demanded for was indeed held and most of the issues were resolved at that Board meeting.

I have a record of the minutes of 20th February 1997. That meeting took place in the Boardroom on the fourth floor of Impala House. All the matters that were being asked about were discussed, and the meeting was attended by A. K. Akandonda Turinawe Bageya Tytens Bezalel and myself.   So, the issues that were burning were again discussed on that day.  Mr. Speaker, I also wish to lay these minutes on the Table, because that meeting did take place.  The requests by Mr. Turinawe in his letters of 5th and 6th were also met. I lay the minutes of that meeting on Table. I also lay on Table the same letter in which I had called for the meeting.

I now want to address the issue which hon. Dombo dwelt upon at length yesterday.  This is the issue of my having unilaterally changed bank signatures of the company.  On 3rd August, 1996, I received information, as chairman of this group, that at Trans Africa Bank branch in Entebbe, the General Manager of ENHAS had withdrawn US $23,000 using his own signature only and the bank had given him the money.  I thought this was a very serious matter, I thought the company's funds were in trouble, I decided to take a decision myself and wrote to the banks to change signatories, removing him and others. Soon after that, I wrote letters to the different shareholders. In the case of Uganda Airlines, I addressed a letter to Mr. Acaali Manzi on the 5th of August. I wrote; "this is to inform you that I am forced to change the signatories to all banks accounts due to mishandling of funds.  I will inform you regarding this in the next board meeting."  
It is true that we require board resolutions to change signatories, it is also true that resolutions can be sent around for everybody to sign them; you can have a resolution passed by circulation. In this case, I saw it as an emergency.  Under the company's Act, you can do that. I felt there was an emergency; that money was being stolen and I, as a responsible person and chairman of this group, should take action and stop this fraud.  I took this action, I stood by it and I wrote to the shareholders and said that at the next board meeting, I shall report to you this matter for ratification, and indeed, we did.  I went to the board meeting and it was ratified.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this particular document is based on the documents which were exhibited by hon. Dombo and he has said that he had a meeting, I presume he is going to present the minutes of that meeting where they rectified what he had done.  So, why do we not wait for him to do that?

MR. LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, we want to get our minds clear on this.  The letter was written on 5th August, but I do not know whether the other letters to the banks have got any relation to the letter, which was written, on the 5th. One of the letters is dated 25th July, another one is dated 26th July; do they have a relationship?  If they do, then I am a bit lost.  I was following very well until this point.  I just wanted to know.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want clarification?

MR. LWANGA:  I want clarification, because it will help us reach a reasonable, sensible decision without any bias.

MR. WACHA:  Sir, while I respect your ruling that we should not disturb the hon. Minister when he is making his position to this House, would it not be proper if we felt that something is being deliberately kept away from us?  Would it not be proper if we pointed it out before he goes on to misinform the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if he has deliberately decided not to bring up things that are against him, you will cross check with the documents, which were laid here, and then show us the weakness in his case.  But are you going to force him to bring up what he does not want?

MR. WACHA:  No Sir, I am not going to, but if the hon. Minister deliberately states that the matter was brought before the board and it was ratified, when we have Minute No. 6 (d) of 25th October, 1996 where Uganda Airlines is still complaining about the irregularity in the process with the hon. Minister. I think it is unfair to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I entirely agree with you that it will be unfair, because the hon. Minister said, subsequently a meeting was held and we have minutes. I imagine, he is going to produce these minutes, then you will look at the minutes and see whether what is said is true or not.  But if he fails to produce the minutes, then that will be another matter.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  If you look at document No. 12, which I am sure hon. Ben Wacha is looking at, ENHAS bank accounts of Uganda Airlines and Sabena are expressed as follows:
"i) That it was irregular to effect a change of signatories in Bank accounts without the Board's approval and formal resolution.  
ii) That the reported occurrence of money being irregularly drawn was so serious and required the convening of an urgent extraordinary meeting...   
iii) That Uganda Airlines demand to be a mandatory signatory to all headquarters accounts... 

It was clarified that the money drawn on that occasion was not embezzled or misused but was spent for an urgent and genuine requirement and therefore what occurred was a breach of professional rules by the Bank.  

The meeting however noted that the issue of the Bank Accounts could not be conclusively resolved in the absence of the substantive chairman."  
That was a meeting. Absolutely, I was not at this meeting, Mr. Speaker, but I am the substantive chairman of ENHAS. I thought all these allegations that were being made against me are allegations about the substantive chairman of ENHAS and that was me.  If there is another one, then he should face the entire petition.  This minute says, and it is not mine - it is hon. Dombo's, your Colleague - it says this matter cannot be resolved - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you should take into account that by October, a meeting had not taken place to deal with this issue. 

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, the issue of the signatories was not dealt with in the meeting of 25th October, as hon. Ben Wacha and Colleagues want us to believe.  It was dealt with in the meeting of 4th December and I can show that to you under minute 4.6 (i); it reads,
"The chairman informed the meeting that he had intervened to issue new instructions to the bank following an incident where the bank had accepted the irregular payment instructions and had intended to obtain a board resolution of this change at the last meeting which I was unable to attend.  The following signatory instructions were proposed: - Operation account - any one Director with the General Manager and Finance Manager. Collection Account - any one Director with the Finance Manager with the chairman as a mandatory signatory.
Note:  Each shareholder to nominate one Director to act as a signatory.  Uganda Airlines reiterated its demand to be mandatory signatory to all company accounts. It was explained that Uganda Airlines Board had demanded this to ensure that the majority of the shareholders were kept fully informed of the company's financial transactions to be protected to the flow of funds.  

These are minutes, not by me, this is a meeting attended, 4.6 says, 'in response to the demand by Uganda Airlines.' "It was noted that it was more appropriate for the chairman to be the mandatory signatory as he has been re-elected by the board and he would take care of the collective interests of other shareholders.  This meeting was attended by Sam Kutesa, George Tytens, Ambrose Akandonda, George Bageya, Acaali Manzi of Uganda Airlines and Hezi Bezalel."  These are minutes of a Board meeting. If a meeting takes a decision simply because I chair it, should I disobey that decision?  I am just one director. These are the minutes; I lay them on the Table for hon. Members to access them.  Then it goes on to the resolution, "It was resolved that the chairman be retained as a mandatory signatory."  That was the decision of the Board.  Two, that the proposal on different - (Interruption) 

MR. LWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I sought clarification, which would have cleared alot of things. I asked about those dates, so that we get a clear focus on where we are going, I have not had an answer. Is it in order for this clarification not to be given, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, now, as I have been following the evidence of the submissions, it appears hon. Sam Kutesa, as chairman, took a decision to change the mandate, that is the signatories to the account, in July. According to his submission, on 5th, he wrote to the Corporation Secretary informing him about this.  The meeting, which took the decision to set up the new signatories, took place in December.  So, it is a period between July and December, I think that is clear.

MR. KUTESA:  Precisely, Mr. Speaker, you may have wanted it earlier, but that is what took place and these are minutes.  The Board did ratify my action and I am reading to you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the resolution by the Board.  They resolved that the chairman be retained, as a mandatory signatory, and they resolved that in the presence of all these people. They resolved that the proposal of different hierarchies of accounts be developed and other details be concluded at the next board meeting to be held on Friday 6th December.  
Mr. Speaker, the minute goes on to a review of the management structure. It was proposed that Dr. B. Mugizi be appointed joint Managing Director.  
The point I am making here is, at no time was my action, which I admit was unilateral, not ratified by the Board.  It was unilateral because I wanted to save the company funds. The money was being taken away from Trans Africa Bank and I stopped that money. I wrote to the different shareholders, including Uganda Airlines. This gentleman was actually not a company Secretary, he was an alternate Director at the time, and I wrote to him to inform him just like I wrote to the other shareholders. For the meeting that followed, I was out of the country, I did not attend it; that was on 25th October.  When I was here on 4th October, I went to the Board and said, this is the action I took,I took it for the following reasons and indeed the board did adopt it. The board ratified it and set out mechanisms for new signatories.  

So, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the issue of signatories, I make no apologies for having saved ENHAS money at all. I admit it was unilateral, but I did report it to the different shareholders. I did inform them soon after the action had been taken and subsequently the board did ratify my action. I stand by that.  If it were a mistake for which I should be censured, I would apologise to this House, but let me say one thing; my Board has continued to accept it.  

The other point that hon. Dombo made, says that we did not only marginalise Uganda Airlines in respect of signatories to accounts ? I think it is on page 8 of his presentation,it says:"Besides sidelining Uganda Airlines in the financial management of ENHAS, there was also a definite move to sideline UAC from the actual management of the company.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, at the beginning of ENHAS operations, as chairman of the Board, Hon. Sam Kutesa appointed Mr. Ramesh Masrani from his own company, Global Airlinks and Mr. Zeev Shiff from Efforte Corporation as joint Managing directors of ENHAS. Uganda Airlines Corporation was not included in the top management despite its majority share in the company."  

This is not born out of fact, Mr. Speaker.  When hon. Dombo says that, even at the initiation of ENHAS we were marginalising the Uganda Airlines, I wish to rebut by stating the following: At the beginning when we had started the company, in the 6th meeting of the Board of Directors, held on the 19th January 1996, at Sabena Cafeteria Centre in Brussels, under minute 32; the following decision was made: 
Short-listing of candidates for the advertised posts; the meeting considered applications for the advertised posts and short-listed five candidates for the post of the General Manager, six for Corporation Secretary, six for the Head of Finance.

Resolution: The interviews for the short-listed candidates be held on Wednesday 31st January, 1996.  That in light of the bleak prospects of identifying a satisfactory candidate for the post of General Manager, Mr. Mutyaba, Mr. G. Tytens and Mr. Masrani would assist the Corporation Secretary and Head of Finance to manage the initial stages.  

Mr. Mutyaba, now hon. Mutyaba, was the General Manager and Director of Uganda Airlines.  Mr. George Tytens represented Sabena, Mr. Masrani represented Global Airlinks.  This is at the beginning, and can you imagine hon. Dombo saying that at the beginning we started by marginalising Uganda Airlines.  That was hon. Mutyaba, we made him a member of the team that was going to oversee the activities of the company.  These are the minutes of the 6th meeting of the Board of Directors, held on 19th January 1996, I lay them on the Table.  

I also refer to the minutes of 23rd May 1996. In this case, I am referring to Item No. 3 and the bottom line of page 3 where it states: "Mr. Mutyaba then pointed out that the cargo handling had no effective manager.  It was agreed to appoint Mr. A. Mugizi of Uganda Airlines and pay him a salary of one million which is consistent with ENHAS salaries to try and save cargo revenue being lost."  
This is Mr. Mugizi, a top manager in Uganda Airlines, where he still works. And you say all the time we were marginalising Uganda Airlines in management!  Hon. Dombo was saying that this man did not become a director until December; that is true.  He may not have been a Managing Director, but he was Head of the Cargo Section, which is the biggest revenue centre in cargo handling.  Mr. Speaker, this cannot amount to marginalisation of Uganda Airlines.  I also lay this on the Table.

We were not marginalising Uganda Airlines in the Administration as hon. Dombo alleges. I want to sight the minutes of 23rd February 1996, we were working out the terms and conditions of service for all our workers.   This is minute 13 of February 1996.  The meeting discussed and approved for adoption draft terms and conditions of service prepared by Mr. B. Mutyaba with several Amendments.  The Amendments had to be attached to form part of the official record.  Now, if someone is framing terms and conditions of service for all staff, can you say that his group is being marginalised?  I do not think you can say that.  I am giving you records of 23rd May, 19th January and this is 23rd February.  I lay these minutes on the Table.  

I deny that we marginalised Uganda Airlines, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed, hon. Dombo himself does admit that in December 1996, Mr. Mugizi was made a Managing Director.  My submission, Mr. Speaker, is that given hon. Dombo's documents, there was no way we were marginalising Uganda Airlines.  It is true that at the beginning when hon. Mutyaba was campaigning, he was not as active as we were all.  He was not active at the time.  However, the Management was always involved and Uganda Airlines was never sidelined.

When you talk about signatories, Mr. Speaker, I will refer you to minutes of the meeting of 24th July 1996, and I think this was soon after our elections.  Minute Number 4 of 17th, No.4/BB17/07/96 says: "resolve that Mr. Dick Turinawe, Acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines, be and is here appointed a Bank signatory to replace hon. Ben Mutyaba for all Bank Accounts where he was signatory."  
That again is in the minute of 24th July 1996. I place it on record, Mr. Speaker. I can go on and on, but I will probably come to a conclusion on this matter.

I want to conclude by thanking hon. Members of this House for giving me a hearing.  I wish to state that I firmly believe in the rule of Law which expounds that " a man may be punished for a breach of the Law, but he can be punished for nothing else".  It is a basic rule of Constitutional Law that the organs of Government must themselves operate through the Law.  We have been told that when Parliament is sitting to censure a Minister, it is acting as a Political Tribunal and therefore should not be held up by technicalities or mere procedures.  This may be right, but the obligation on the House to act within the Law, is an obligation none of us can escape.  When you sit as a jury, all of you hon. Members, you decide the issue based on the facts presented, but the decision must relate to the facts and the Law.  Short of this, we would be plunging ourselves into a bottomless pit of unconstitutionalism. 
You have now listened to the prosecution, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, and you have also listened to my defence.  I have tried in my defence to answer the allegations Tabled against me truthfully and honestly.  I have, in many incidences, joined issues with the petitioners on their supporting documents.  I have pointed out matters in these documents, which the petitioners did not want you to know or to hear.  In this case, I was not giving my opinion, but I was simply stating the facts and the truth as it is.  I have also submitted to you my documents, which were deliberately excluded, from those submitted to you by hon. Dombo or the petitioners.  I believe that these documents, together with the facts as I have presented them, exonerate me from the accusations against me.  I want you to recall that we are talking of nothing else other than what is contained in our old petition.  I have dealt, I believe exhaustively, with each and every one of the grounds in this petition.  And I would like you hon. Members to dismiss each and every one of these grounds, because I think some of them are incompetently put before you, others are fabrications.  

The final decision in this case, Mr. Speaker, belongs to these hon. Members.  When you are passing a sentence against me, as you are entitled to do, do not look at me as Mr. Kutesa, an arrogant, proud, uncaring wealthy man as has been alleged.  I have been told that I am arrogant, I do not know.  If anybody thinks I am arrogant, and if that is a ground for censure, I beg your forgiveness. (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And certainly it is not a ground.

MR. KUTESA:  Most obliged.  I implore you to look at me instead, as you would any other person who has come to you to demand justice.  I treasure being a Member of this House.  I am proud of what we have done together to promote the cause of democracy and social justice.  I commend you for the efforts you are making to combat the ills that afflict our society.  It is my wish that we keep the integrity of this House, its independence and objectivity, so that democracy can thrive in this country.  I bear no ill will to anybody, including the petitioners. I shall accept the decision of this House, as long as it is fair, as long as it is just, as along as it is based on these allegations and as long as everyone of you is convinced that everybody has proved their case beyond reasonable doubt.  This is the thing we are talking about.  We are not talking about anything else, we are not talking about how short or tall Mr. Kutesa is, we are not talking about whether Mr. Kutesa has done any other business.  We are talking about the allegations contained in this petition.  Any other matter that is extrinsic to the contents of this petition must be rejected the moment it is presented, because I will not have had an opportunity to prepare my defence on it.  Mr. Speaker, these and these alone are the charges against me and I beg you hon. Members to dismiss them because they have not been proved.  I thank you.

MISS. BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am Winnie Byanyima from Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara District, in Ankole - (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, I am a munyankole and I have a special message from the people of Mbarara Municipality. The people in that constituency, which is urban, are from various backgrounds and they are various shades of Banyankole. We have Bahima, like hon. Kutesa, and myself, there are Banyaruguru, Bakokyi, Banyarwampara, Banyaibanda, Batagwenda; all kinds of Banyankole. They live there with other people from outside Ankole.  Mr. Speaker, they send a strong message here.  Their message is; so much work has been done by very many people to unite them into one harmonious people called "Banyankole."  And they ask us, in all earnestness, that when we are discussing all our issues, we do everything possible to protect their unity and their harmony as Banyankole. 

I therefore start my contribution by saying how unfortunate it has been that since December, when this petition was launched, various people have tried to divide Banyankole, and to divert the attention of Members of this House from the substance of the petition, and to look at this as some issue of Banyankole, an issue that does not exist.  Mr. Speaker, I am happy that hon. Kutesa too has distanced himself from this non-issue. I hope that from today the debate will focus on the issues and not on some perceived Banyankole rivalry.  Thank you.

I am one of the petitioners, and I am rising to support the motion on the Floor and to correct the record about somethings that have been said here. A Minister swears on Oath, which is here in the Constitution of Uganda, that Oath is to serve this Republic faithfully.  Mr. Speaker, what I find unfortunate, is that the hon. Minister has taken a narrow view of what faithfulness to the people of Uganda means.  I certainly would not accept that a leader at a national level, be it a Member of Parliament or a Minister, should go to the district, for example, and because he has got power as a Minister, meddles in district affairs, pulls his weight around and causes lower ranking political leaders or bureaucrats to make decisions that they would not have made otherwise.  And then for that Minister to come back here and say this conduct is alright since it has nothing to do with his Ministry, Mr. Speaker, will be very hard to understand by the people of this country.  

My constituency will find it hard to understand that hon. Kutesa is not guilty of marginalising a national interest in a national parastatal because it is not strictly under his line Ministry.  It will be very hard.  It will be impossible for ordinary people from my Constituency to make that distinction in conduct. They have a perception of what the conduct of a leader should be. If a Minister who has power and influence leaves his Ministry and goes to another government department and misbehaves, that is misconduct, Mr. Speaker.  That is misconduct and it has to be punished.  We are not going to take, I am sorry to say this, legalistic definitions of misconduct.  Misconduct is understood to mean, behaving in a manner that is not consistent with what is expected of a leader, particularly when one is sacrificing the national interest for one's personal gain, wherever that may be.  

Another issue that I found unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, is that the hon. Minister talks about himself as a simple businessman and not a Minister. He sees himself all this time, while he is acting within ENHAS, simply as a businessman and not a Minister.  Yet, Mr. Speaker, you will find, even within the correspondence of the business organisation called ENHAS, instances when he is being referred to as Minister.  What does that mean?  A letter was presented here of a meeting of the shareholders of ENHAS, which was held in his office.  In that meeting, the Head of Privatisation himself kept referring to him as, 'hon. Minister'.  What does that mean?  It means that even within the business organisation, where he was acting, his power was being felt and he could use his power positively for the national interest, or he could use it to marginalise the government interest. And we, the Petitioners, assert that he marginalised the government interest, especially because of the powerful position he held within that business organisation.  

It is unfortunate that he keeps referring to the national interest in ENHAS as any other shareholder.  It is unfortunate, because the interest of Uganda Airlines is not just any other share; it is the share of the people of the Republic of Uganda whom you have sworn to serve faithfully.(Applause). You cannot look at it in any other way.  You cannot negotiate with Uganda Airlines; with the people, for your own interest. Here are the people and you are the Minister of the people and you are looking for the best deal for yourself.   The best thing to do in such a situation is to put a representative of your own interest.  

When hon. Kutesa became a Minister, he should have known that from now on, I cannot be a neutral arbiter between myself and the government that I serve. He could have even taken one of his relatives and said, 'you sit there on the Board to represent Global Air-Links.  I will extricate because I cannot be neutral between myself and the people of Uganda who are shareholders in this Company with me.'  Mr. Speaker, his problem started there, when he failed to remove himself when he became a Minister.  He tempted himself to keep pressing for his personal interest against that of the people of this Country.  

I wish to draw some examples from elsewhere; examples that I am sure hon. Kutesa knows about.  There is a man in the United Kingdom who, in many ways, is very similar to hon. Kutesa. (Laughter).  That man is called, Peter Mandelson.  Peter Mandelson is a very smart man.  Peter Mandelson is also a wealthy man.  He was a strategist in the Labour party campaign that brought Tony Blair to power.  Peter Mandelson got a reward for that campaign.  He became a Minister of Trade and Industry.  

When he became a Minister of Trade and Industry, one of his colleagues, Jeffrey Robinson, who was also a Junior Minister, gave him a loan.  Robinson is a millionaire; he gave him a loan.  Now, when he came to do his work, some of his work involved Jeffrey Robinson's business activities.  He did not declare his interests.  Later on it was discovered.  

Peter Mandelson and Jeffrey Robinson both resigned for the good name of the Labour Government. (Applause).  He had done nothing improper.  There were no such grounds of impropriety, but the fact that he had not told his colleagues that he had a loan from Jeffrey Robinson's Company, so he was not in a position to look at any business which involves Jeffrey Robinson. For simply not giving that information, he stood down for the good of the party.  I now ask myself, why must we wait to see proof that he was scuffling, fighting and disagreeing with state employees to be convinced that this was not proper?  That is one example I am giving you. 

My second example is a debate still going on in the United Kingdom.  There is such a thing called genetically modified foods. These are foods that have been tampered with genetically.  The British are worried that this may be harmful in the long run.  The government maintains that they are not, but the government has a lot of work to do in terms of research and explaining to people that these foods are not harmful.  

Within the Government is a very rich man called, Lord Sainsbury.  Sainsbury owns a Super Market chain that sells food.  Actually, his chain does not sell genetically modified foods, I am told, but he seems to have some money somewhere else where there is work being done on those foods.  He is currently a Minister of Science in the Department of Trade and Industry.  He is a Minister of State just like hon. Kutesa.  

Lord Sainsbury's schedule of work, just like hon. Kutesa, has absolutely nothing to do with genetically modified foods - nothing - but the larger Ministry of Trade and Industry has work to do with genetically modified foods.  The debate is on. The pressure is on for Lord Sainsbury to step down or for Tony Blair to put him in another Ministry.  

Now here we are, this is a Minister in Finance and Planning, this is a Minister who has work to do with the planning and investments of this Country, here is something being sold to investors - the shares being sold to investors - and he does not see that surely he is too close to this kind of decision making.  I cannot be the buyer who is so close to the sellers.  

This motion is about the standards we want for the future.  What kind of standards do we want?  Do we want this relationship between our private businesses and people's business?  Or do we want a clear line drawn so that the people's interests are not tampered with, so that influence is not used against the people's interests?  

I brought those two examples, Mr. Speaker, not so much to say that the British have a better democracy.

MR. OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Member on the Floor. I would also like to say that we have an example right here in Uganda where our Inspector General of Police was discovered to have erred -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!  This is a warning to the strangers in the public gallery.  You are just supposed to listen and watch, you do not participate.  

MR. OMONGOLE: I was saying, our former Inspector General of Police was found to have supplied Police with, I think, beans and posho from a Company he owned.  The IGG found this irregular and asked him to step down.  Indeed, the former Inspector General of Police stepped down.  Thank you.

MISS. BYANYIMA WINNIE: I thank you very much for that example closer to home. Mr. Speaker, when the hon. Minister says that Boardroom wrangles are normal, it is true; Boardroom wrangles are normal.  Boardrooms are not so harmonious.  What we want hon. Kutesa to really absorb and accept is that, this time, the wrangles were not between mere business people, they were between a Minister of the Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda. (Applause).  That is what we want him to see, and that in this case, the mediator was actually himself, the Minister of the Government of Uganda.  Where could the fairness have come from?

We are told, for example, that Deloitte and Touche is world famous, it could not have paid bribes, it is therefore above reproach - I am now talking about under-valuation.   Well, I do not want to impute anything against Deloitte and Touche, but, Mr. Speaker, for all these international Companies that do business here, you have to have come down in the last shower of rain to believe that they do not pay bribes in this Country.  

Mr. Speaker, these companies even get tax deductions back home for the bribes they pay here.  It is the acceptable way of doing business for some of them in their countries.  So, Mr. Speaker, I am not inclined to think that because a Company has an international name, it will not do anything to make business or even to pander powerful ministers.  

Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister would not be in this situation of -(Interruption).

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Speaker, the business world over depends on reports issued by Audit Companies. PAC, of which hon. Byanyima is the Deputy Chairperson, depends on some of the reports issued by the very same companies she is saying take bribes.  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for hon. Winnie Byanyima to impute that the repetition of Delloite and Touche, Coopers and Lybrand, Price Water house, and all the professional accounting bodies are corrupt? Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for her to say that without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, I have not heard her imputing anything in respect of this particular Company.  In fact, she started by saying I do not want to impute.  So, I do not see how you can say, she has imputed something wrong (Interjections).

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point I wanted to make is this, had the hon. Minister put himself out of the negotiations, today we would not be here asking him to explain the low value from Deloitte and Touche, we would not.  But, Mr. Speaker, we saw a document tabled here about an earlier meeting of the negotiation between the share-holders and PU taking place in his own office.  The entire PU team, strong as it is, from Muganwa to Opagi  - seven of them or so - all went into his office to meet him and the shareholders to discuss the price for Uganda Airlines shares.  

We also saw a letter presented here, signed by him, offering a price for the shares to PU.  Now, Mr. Speaker, you are a Minister of this Country, you are trying to buy an asset of this Country -(Interruption).

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform the hon. Member from powerful Mbarara Municipal Council that the government has a policy of liberalisation and divestiture. And people from places like DRIC, like the Ministry of Privatisation, are looking for buyers of these institutions.  When you are a seller - a desparate seller - you go to any office; that is how they went there -(Laughter).

MISS BYANYIMA: I thank the hon. Minister for the information he has given me.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, even cattle, which he understands very well, I am sure, have a cattle market -(Laughter).  Where I come from, you do not take a cow from place to place; you take it to a market. PU has its offices.

I want to explain a little bit about the marginalisation of Uganda Airlines because I think the hon. Minister was not being honest.  If you recall, the Mover of this motion yesterday read four letters about demands by Uganda Airlines for financial information.  It is true that the first two letters - serious letters - he wrote to the General Manager reminding him of the Board decision, that is true.  He copied both of these letters to the Chairman of the Board, who did nothing; he did not raise a finger.  Now, he was moved to write a third letter, this time to the Chairman himself, since the Chairman was obliging the General Manager to implement the decision of his Board.  So, he appealed to him as Chairman of the Board. I want to inform Members or to remind Members that in fact, the Sabena official also endorsed the demand for an emergency meeting of the Board.  Then the hon. Minister goes on to say that he did eventually have a regular meeting of the Board.  What he does not tell Members here is, that meeting is in fact that very fateful one where they fought over the accounts and he walked out.  

So, they demanded for the meeting, he did not give an emergency meeting, he asked them to wait for the regular meeting, but even at the regular meeting, when they placed their demands on the table, they fought and he left -(Laughter).   Now, I want also to remind Members -(Laughter).

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I do realise that hon. Byanyima is trying to invoke emotion both here and everywhere, against me, but is she in order, Mr. Speaker, to allege a fight that she cannot prove?  Allege a fight that did not take place?  And actually, is she right in imputing that I fought in a Boardroom?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not know what type of fight she was talking about -(Laughter)- so it could have been a fight of words rather than face to face.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed it was a verbal fight, but we heard, in the committee, from one of the people who was there, that he actually chewed up his document because he did not want the Chairman to get it off him.  So, I can imagine that -(Laughter)- Mr. Speaker. This was told to us but we did not bring it here. It is true that Board members said that there was an attempt to take the papers away from them and they pulled them back to themselves.  Anyway, Mr. Speaker, that is not the point I want to make, the point I want to make is that, while they had a meeting -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have two pieces of evidence here, I think this is where you have to use this evidence like the other.  You have the evidence of the acting General Manager through an affidavit and then you have another affidavit which hon. Kutesa has produced here. Maybe both are not talking about the same thing, but it is up to you to decide which one you believe.  According to the hon. Minister, he would believe the latest affidavit because he has compared it with the evidence, which was given in the Select Committee.  But, it is entirely up to you to really make the conclusion on the evidence that has been put before us.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind Members that the hon. Minister told us here that he found he could not handle the meeting so he left, the minutes also say that he walked out of the meeting. 

I want to take you now to the point after that meeting; that is when Uganda Airlines, together with Sabena, invoked the law to demand for an extra ordinary meeting of ENHAS. It is in the documents as document 6. 

That takes me to the evidence that has been tabled by hon. Kutesa; the affidavit by Mr. Tytens. In hon. Kutesa's affidavit, he calls himself the chief executive officer of ENHAS, which he is. Currently, he is an employee of ENHAS, therefore, directly answerable to the Chairman of the Board, hon.Kutesa Sam.  And you will see that earlier on, before that stormy meeting of the 20th, he had endorsed a letter to demand for an emergency meeting.  After that stormy meeting, he signed a letter (document 6) invoking company law and asking the Minister to call a meeting to discuss the financial status of ENHAS, provision of periodic financial statements, administrative status and structure of ENHAS, and the management style thereof. This is Mr. Tytens, at that time working for Sabena. Now, January this year, he swears an affidavit that there was nothing that went wrong in the meeting of 20th.  If there was nothing wrong in the meeting of the 20th, why did he, on the 5th of March, less than 2 weeks after that meeting, invoke the law to call for a meeting to discuss these issues, Mr. Speaker?  So, I doubt, very highly, that Mr. Tytens is being honest. I think he feels that he wants to please his boss, the Chairman of ENHAS; that is what I can conclude. 
I now want to turn to the intimidation of Mr. Dick Turinawe.  Mr. Turinawe is still an acting manager in Uganda Airlines for sure, but one cannot say that Mr. Turinawe had a pleasant time protecting the interests of Uganda Airlines under the Chairmanship of the Minister.  Clearly his letters over a period of two years; 1996/98 show frustration and anger at the way their interest was being treated within the co-operation by the Chairman of ENHAS.  It is true Mr. Turinawe did not go to the Police when he felt threatened, but Mr. Speaker, how many small, middle level state employees go to Police to report Ministers?  Let us be honest with ourselves - (Interruption).

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I rise to give information to hon. Byanyima Winnie. A houseboy took Hon. Kajura to Police on allegation that he took his money -(Interruption).

MISS. KABASHARIRA: I would like to inform the previous speaker, through you, Mr. Speaker, that, that house body had already left working at hon. Kajura's place, that is why he had the guts to report.  Otherwise, if he were still there, he would not have reported. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, hon. Byanyima.

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, my house boy went to the Police when he was still working with me, he even went foward and made a statement, but all that time I never took this seriously because it was my money and there was no - (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, but you should wind up because other people want to contribute.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Yes, Mr. Speaker, I shall be winding up. I did not know that the houseboy of hon. Kajura passes as a public servant but, maybe.  
Increasingly,Mr. Speaker, because of the firm stand that this Parliament has taken against corruption, we are seeing public servants coming out to trust a Parliamentary Committee and tell them what has been happening to them.  This confidence has come as a result of a persistent and consistent stand on corruption. If the Police could also take a stand like we have, I am sure there are many Tytens waiting to seek protection there. 

There was an issue of writing off money, Mr. Speaker, it is in the grounds of this petition. The Minister asks why a shareholder would want to write off money of his company when he stands to benefit?  Mr. Speaker, the reason is simple, hon. Kutesa had made himself the mandatory signatory to most of the accounts of ENHAS.  It is in the minutes that it has been resolved that he becomes the mandatory signatory, endorsing what he had made himself several months earlier.  Now, in that position, he was the sole person accountable for the funds of that company, he was the last person, even the accountants below were answerable to him because the buck stopped at the Chairman.  Therefore, you will find that Uganda Airlines was questioning the accounts and was asking for an investigation of this money that was not properly accounted for.  Uganda Airlines wanted an investigation, but the Chairman found it easier to write off the debt because he did not have to face the pressure of having to be investigated since he was the signatory.  (An hon. Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you realise that hon. Byanyima has spoken for a very long time, now when you interrupt, you extend the time.  I think you should leave her to wind up.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I will just quickly go to the March income. I am not a lawyer, but I do have a sense of what is just.  Mr. Speaker, this concession agreement does indeed say that the concession begins on the 1st of March, it is signed 30th March.  In otherwords, when they prepared the agreement, the understanding was that ENHAS should begin to work on the 1st of March, but as it were, it did not, it started to work during April.  Now, in March, Uganda Airlines continued to work using its equipment.  What happened, and what the hon. Minister admits to, is that, because we planed to start on the 1st of March, and we were allowed, although we did not work, we had to share the profits.  So, they deducted their costs and the profits were shared with those who did not work.  Is that fair?  I do not consider that fair.  (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, I think it is time to wind up.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I am sorry I cannot take information because of that. It is also true that Uganda Airlines protested about not being on the top management of the company.  And it took almost a whole year before their pressure resulted in Mr. Mujuzi becoming a joint Managing Director, joined to a Director from hon. Kutesa's company and a Director from Efforte co-operation.  In otherwords, the point we are trying to make is, the peoples interest was constantly in conflict with the Minister's interest and the Minister would relentlessly pass through his own interest.

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we are trying to say that there ought to be a standard of conduct for leaders in this movement so that we are faithful, as we swear to the people we serve. Do the people of Uganda deserve leadership of this kind, where we mix our interests with government interests and then favour ourselves?   Mr. Speaker, recently, I heard on the radio some multi-parties saying that Ssebaggala must remain our Mayor; a convict.  Are we in the Movement now saying that the leadership we want is of this quality -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should avoid bringing in other characters when we are dealing with this debate.  We have moved on very well, please, refrain from involving other people, be they hon. Members sitting here. Just restrict yourself to the motion.

MISS. BYANYIMA: Thank you for your guidance, Mr. Speaker.  All I wanted to say is that, where should the people of Uganda turn to if within the Movement Government we do not set some standard of quality leadership and stick to it?  I hope that there are enough of us here to restore the people's trust in their leaders.  I have some confidence that this House will say no to certain actions that have been outlined in this petition, Mr. Speaker.  I urge the House to vote for this motion, for the credibility of the leadership of this country.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for purposes of future submissions, I would suggest that because we have very limited time and there are many Members who are interested in contributing, if you think a point has been sufficiently covered, be it for defence or for the petitioner, you may have to just restrict yourself to another point or ground that has not been sufficiently covered by the petitioner or by the defence side.  Otherwise, as I see we have to limit the time to maybe 10 or 15 minutes tomorrow when we start.  This is a convenient time to adjourn the House. We shall re-convene tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.
(The House rose and adjourned until 2.00 p.m on Thursday, 4th March, 1999).