	1
Thursday, 11th March, 1999

Parliament met at 2.30p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we adjourned yesterday, we had reached somewhere with the preliminaries of the debate on the SWIPCO report. Yesterday we agreed that we needed some comments and updates on the SWIPCO matter, so that we can proceed to debate it from an informed position. All this was in view of the fact that the report was prepared almost two years ago, and we were informed by the presenters that some circumstances had changed.  

The Chairperson of the Committee, who presented this report yesterday, has assured me that he is already in the process of gathering the information for the update. He told me that on Tuesday, his update would be circulated to hon. Members, in time for the debate on Wednesday.  

RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW U.S $ 12.37 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING FOR THE PROTECTED AREAS MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE USE PROJECT (ICBPAMSU)

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Gerald Ssendaula): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that this House allows Government to borrow funds, for the purpose of meeting the requirements, as shown in the Order Paper, Item No.3.  
Before I make my presentation, however, I want to congratulate hon. Ongom for joining the revolution of dressing in this House.  

The Resolution before Parliament is to authorise Government to borrow U.S $ 12.3 million from the International Development Association (IDA), for Institutional Capacity Building for the Protected Areas Management and Sustainable Use Project, which in short is referred to as ICBPAMSU, as shown in the Paper that I am due to present.

This is a constitutional requirement, and Colleagues, who may have the Constitution, can go to Chapter 9, which covers Finance, Article 159(2) says: "Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except has authorised by or under an Act of Parliament".  
Then 159(5) says: "Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or a grant out of any public fund or public account."  

So, it is under that constitutional requirement that I am before this House to seek your authorisation for the following, and to cover the sector that I have stated.

In brief, the Government has negotiated a credit of 9.1 million from the International Development Association, IDA, for Institutional Capacity Building for the Protected Areas Management and Sustainable Use, PAMSU, in the Wildlife Sector.
The project, which is to be implemented under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, has the following objectives:

1.  Establish an effective institutional capacity for strategic planning, programme development and implementation within the Tourism and Wildlife Sectors.
2.  Promote sustainability of the Wildlife and Tourism Sector.
3.  Protect Uganda's National Resource Base.  

The project, which is expected to be completed by July 2001, has the following components:
1.  Strengthening of Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA, in short) capacity in tourist planning, financial and human resource management.  
2.  Capacity building of other conservation related institutions. Those institutions include, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry's Wildlife department, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and Uganda Wildlife Training institute.  
3. Strengthening the capacity of the Department of Antiquities and Museums, which is in charge of preserving, protecting and exhibiting Uganda's cultural assets, all of which are so important and vital for our history.
4.  Strengthening capacity for tourism planning, development and promotion within the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.
5. Strengthening Uganda's Tourism Board (UTB), management, and promotional marketing capacity by provision of technical advisory services.  

These are very central clauses.  When you are involved in the tourism sector, you need to be able to effectively market tourism.  

I would like to say, at this juncture, that what we are saying, the need to have this kind of money, is so crucial and central.  Governments around us, within the region, expect to earn so much out of Tourism.  You may all have been able to read about this in the recent past.  Tanzania, for example, expects to earn about 700 million dollars out of tourism in the year 1999/2000.  

So, how is the project funding going to be?  The total project cost is estimated at U.S $ 20.3 million, including taxes and duties, as detailed in the paper which I distributed.

Of the total cost, IDA Credit will meet an estimated cost of U.S $ 12.37 million.  The Global Environmental Facility, which is a grant from the World Bank, will also cover an estimated U.S $ 2 million.  Then the Government of Uganda's contribution, through the life of the project, is estimated at U.S $ 4,187,000 dollars.  That is what is known, in financial language, as a counter fund or counter funding.  The money we are committing, as Uganda Government, will be budgeted for by the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry in their Vote over the Project period.

What are the terms?
This is the central point; under which terms are we going to get this money?  I think we have moved together all along.  You know where I am getting the money from, you have known the purpose of which I am seeking the money, and what I am going to do with it, now I am giving you the terms.  

Terms:
The IDA Credit has the following terms:
Credit amount; SDR 9.1 million; maturity - 40 years, including 10 years of grace; then there is a service charge of 0.75 per cent.  

How is this money going to be repaid?  
The payment of the principle amount of the loan would be in US dollars, in semi-annual instalments, payable on every 1st day of the month of March and 1st day of September - starting September 1st, 2008 and ending March 1st, 2038.  I have all the hope that most of the hon. Members will be alive at that time.  

The Global Environment Facility fund, of SDR of 1.5 million, is a grant from the World Bank.  My Ministry considers the lending to be conventional and in line with the Government's debt strategy.  So, I am not really worried on that score, because we have already signed.  Before we go to the debt relief, we were given conditions that we can only take loans of a certain nature, and this is in line with those requirements.

Conditions of the IDA Credit.  
What does the IDA require from us?  They require the opinion of the Government, the Chief Legal Advisor, and the Attorney General on the Credit Agreement.  This is a normal practice. After you have approved, the Attorney General always signifies to say, he agrees with the terms, after he has gone through the Agreement.  Government ensures that he implements the recommendations of the concessions Committee Report, that is, ensuring that concessions for tourism and facilities in the protected areas are awarded on competitive and transparent basis, and that their management is sound.  This is very crucial. When giving concessions in areas, the people, who are responsible for operating of tourism, should make sure that this is all done in a transparent manner.  These are the conditions from IDA. Then they continue to demand that Government maintain, until completion of the project, the senior management team, including Director, Deputy Directors and Co-ordinators to oversee the project implementation.  

Selection of an Executive Director by Uganda Wildlife Authority, within three months after the credit, is declared effective.  I think what they are calling for, is to ensure that we utilise the money properly and we are showing sound management on the ground.

Then they continue to demand for the implementation of the project by Government, in accordance with the Project Implementation Plan agreed with IDA.  There is an implementation plan for this Project, which has already been filed with the IDA, by the relevant Ministry, through the Ministry of Finance.  So, they are demanding that we stick to that.  There is no question about saying any other thing today.  

Ensuring that audits are carried out annually on the Project Accounts and Activities and the Report is forwarded to IDA.  I think this is what you would always wish to see.

Appointment by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, of Treasury Officials to sign these requests.  This is what I normally do, I do not have to physically sign for this money. They demand that I appoint these people on routine, basing on the arrangement as agreed on already with IDA.  

The Government to continue its annual budgetary observations for the project as already covered. We have promised that we shall provide so much and we shall ensure that we continue to do that.

Other crucial points, before you finally endorse and authorise me to go and borrow this money, are, given the reduced state of the Country's Wildlife Resources and the persistent problem of insecurity, growth in Tourism is likely to slow down in the next few years. It will only be possible if the World Bank and other Donors provide the necessary support to protect the resources, on short term, and gradually restore and improve in the long term.

Through its support for the sector, the World Bank has established itself as one of the main donors, which has played an important role in promoting and facilitating policy and institutional reform, and served as a vocal point for donor co-ordination. It has pioneered minor innovative mechanisms for supporting conservation, through its role in establishing the GEF and funding Mgahinga and Bwindi Impenetrable Forest Conservation Trust.  

(b) Again, one of the points that you need to know and you need to take note of is that, the project is expected to have a positive environmental impact. It will assist the Government to maintain protection and management of its protected areas and Wildlife in the short term, while at the same time, helping to put in place an effective institutional structure to ensure conservation in the long term.  

The project is not expected to have any significant social impact, except where more effective protection of Wildlife and protected areas may reduce opportunities for illegal exploitation of Wildlife and indigenous plants by local communities. Some times, people overrun those protected areas, but when we have this project in place, it will help to ensure that we reduce the poaching and other related activities, including overrunning the plants.  Some people have also been known to interfere with these areas, which we have already gazetted as crucial for the future promotion of our tourism.  

These impacts will be reduced by the on-going related programmes supported by other donors in areas around the major Parks. For the people who live around the Parks, this project does not, in fact, exclude them, because we want the communities around the Parks to participate, so that they do not just look at these projects as white elephant, only for people in the Ministry of Tourism. They will look at them as their own. As a result, there are programmes, which have been developed by other donors, to support the people who live around these protected areas.  

The project will provide support to ensure that potentially affected communities are able to participate in the on-going programmes.  This project falls within the Country's priority projects in the public investment plan. I remember distributing the PIP, a relatively large book.  If you really look at it, you will see that this kind of project is included.  

Now, what do I require from you, hon. Members?  Mr. Speaker, I request these hon. Members, in light of all that I have stated, because I have been speaking for quite a long time, I request hon. Members of Parliament to:

1. Note this brief and the attached Parliamentary Resolution to be passed. The Resolution I have, which says: "Authorise Government to borrow from the International Development Association, IDA, for Institutional Capacity Building for the Protected Areas, Management and Sustainable Use Project (ICB-PAMSU)."  

2. Agree that there is a need to procure and utilise the said Credit and the grant facility from the World Bank, at the stated terms and conditions - I have stated the conditions.  As you all agree, as a custodian of these conditions given by World Bank and all other donors, I have said to you earlier, that these conditions which are attached to this Credit, are the very conditions which were laid by all the donors.  The facility is, therefore, very right to authorise my Ministry to borrow from IDA, a sum of SDR 91 million for Institutional Capacity Building for the Protected Areas Management and Sustainable Use Project in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution. I have already read that Article and the relevant areas of the Article.  

Before, we used to have a lot of debate about this Capacity Building. I want to state this, hon. Members, the use of Capacity Building in this sector is very central and very crucial.  Not only does it help us to preserve those gazetted places that we are preserving, and that we have already identified as tourist attractions, it also helps us market, this is the other aspect.  It co-ordinates us with the rest of the world, because it is a sensitive kind of trade where you are tell somebody, when you go, you will this and that.  To get him out of his comfort in Washington, in Hong Kong, and other places, you really need that capacity, you really need to build that capacity. So, it is very crucial, we certainly need this capacity.  

If there are any other questions, any other issues that hon. Members may wish to rise over this credit, I am prepared to answer all of these with the support of the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is also the Minister of Tourism Trade and Industry.  I beg to move and appeal to you to support the Resolution. (Applause).

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. I.Musumba): Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, in accordance with our rules, our Committee on National Economy has had opportunity to look at the Minister's draft resolution and hereby wish to give a report as follows:

1.  Background
Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, Tourism, as the Minister has said; if well developed, could be a major sector of the economy through generation of foreign exchange, generation of revenue, employment and income to the communities.  Until early in the 1970s, Tourism was the country's third largest foreign exchange earner -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, can you speak into the microphone.

MR. MUSUMBA: Okay, I will speak into the microphone, Sir.  Mr. Speaker, speaking after a seasoned politician like hon. Ssendaula is a problem; I may not have the amount of vigour that he has, but I hope the House will bear with me.  

I was saying, Tourism, if well developed, could be a major sector of the economy, through generation of foreign exchange, generation of revenue, making employment available to our people, and increasing their income generally.  Until the 1970s, Tourism was the country's third largest foreign exchange earner, after coffee and cotton, with a growth rate of about 20 percent per annum. 

The political turmoil, which characterised the country over the past two decades, reduced the tourism industry to its lowest level.  All institutions responsible for tourism development and management have virtually no capacity to perform internationally.  The political stability ushered in by this Movement Government, coupled with peace and security, has provided an excellent opportunity for revitalising the Tourism Industry.  

Capacity to build
The institutional capacity building that is to be developed, will ensure that Uganda will be able to conserve, manage and develop its valuable natural resources, and regain its past glory as a major tourist destination.  For example, part of the capacity that has to be built institutionally, is the training of staff and facilitating game rangers - even these are in short supply, Mr. Speaker.  Game rangers in parks will be recruited, trained, facilitated and given radio calls or whatever.  Training of hotel operatives is another; these are in short supply in this country, training and development of the tour and travel agents, development and facilitation of the road maintenance technicians on the parks; these roads need people to maintain them. These maintenance people are not there, and more often than not, we have received graders and they have got "rotten" in the parks because there are no people to repair them.  So, even technicians are not there, this is the capacity we are talking about.  

Furthermore, while the institutional capacity is being strengthened, the project will also provide operational funds to help secure the vital natural resource base in the protected areas. The long-term sustainability of Uganda wild life authority, which is the country's major tourist attraction, will depend upon its functions effectively and efficiently with a business like approach to management. 

Areas for capacity building  
Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, the project will provide key elements for operational support, training, essential equipment and supplies, and initial infrastructure development, pending the major phase.  The figures reflected cover the IDA credit component only, the grant, taxes and duties are reflected separately, but the clarification of global amount has been presented in the Minister's Annex.  

The breakdown of the IDA credit is as follows:  
The Uganda Wild Life Authority, this is the authority that is in charge of all our wild life; the parks and the protective areas generally - this facility will have 5,220,700 Million Dollars from the IDA credit that is being sought.  

Uganda Wild Life Authority has been undergoing a restructuring process. The funding will help it consolidate the restructuring process, through strengthening the management systems and operational capacity. During its deliberations, Mr. Speaker, the Committee categorically made it clear to Government that no portion of this credit should go towards payment of foreigners, in the name of executive directors or technical assistants or whatever.  The Ministry was advised to seek a grant, if the executive director is to be a foreigner. This was a very tricky point during the discussions of this draft resolution.  The Ministry sought the advice of the committee and got a grant from the Global Environment Facility of US Dollars 540,000 to pay the executive Director. I think this was a very big achievement.  The saving from this component, we agreed, should be re-allocated for the development of the hotel training institute in Jinja; it is now the Crested Crane Hotel. It has been gazetted by this Parliament, to house the training institute for the hotelians and hotel industry.  So, the benefit that we made from the money that was going to the executive director, has been further allocated to that hotel, and that institute alone has been able to get well over a million Dollars.  

The other selected conservation related institutions would have 1,736,200 Million Dollars under this credit.  

The project will strengthen capacity of other selected conservation related institutions, thus complementing the role of Uganda Wild Life Authority. These institutions are: 
The Wild Life Department 
The Uganda Wild Life Education Centre at Entebbe 
The Wild Life Training Institute at Lake Katwe, Kasese 
The Project Co-ordination and Implementation. 

It will also strengthen the capacity of the Department of Antiquities and Museum and develop a strategy for transforming it into an autonomous self sustaining national commission for antiquities and museums. To this effect, they have got an allocation of 574,000 Dollars, under this credit.  

Another component of this financing will be strengthening of the Ministry and the Uganda Tourist Board to promote the development of a broad based, competitive, well regulated and sustainable tourist industry. Under this, they will get 1,756,000 Dollars.  
They will also strengthen the capacity of human resources development within the tourism sector, through a "Train the Trainer" programme, which will benefit both the hotel and tourism institute, and the private training institutions.  As I earlier on informed this House, to this effect, 1.168 million dollars has been allocated to the Hotel Training Institute in Jinja, currently named Crested Crane Hotel, for rehabilitation and development.  

The project also has a grant component of 2 million dollars from the Global Environment facility. So, in addition to the credit we are seeking, or which government is seeking, there will be a grant from the GEF of 2 million dollars.  

There will be Government counterpart funding, of 4.18 million dollars, as the Minister has said.  The taxes and duties for the project will amount to 1.73 million dollars. The total the total amount for the project is 20.3 million dollars, but the loan that is being sought is 12.3 million dollars.  

Donor interest 
This project is necessary for two reasons: 
1.  Our tourism sector needs urgent financial support. Although government provides subvention to the institutions in the tourism sector, the provisions are inadequate to support the operations of the institutions.  Hon. Members, you may wish to recall that this House approved a contribution of 0.25 percent from the import commission, for the sector of Tourism, but todate, no provision has been made from the treasury for this.  When the House did so on three occasions, it was further recognising that the amount of money the Central Treasury is able to allocate to the tourism sector is not enough, so they sought to supplement these efforts by apportioning the 2 percent import commission, part of which was supposed to go to the tourism sector, but this did not happen. 

The second reason is the consortium of donors to the tourism sector. The tourism sector is one sector that has been attracting a lot of donor support. The consortium of donors have stated firmly that they will not be able to extend a total of an 100 million dollar aid facility to the sector, if the sector does not have even the basic capacity in areas like financial management, game protection techniques, road maintenance techniques, and sound and effective middle and top management skills. They will not be able to extend this 100 million dollars, unless this basic capacity is put in place. The borrowing, therefore, is a necessary precursor; it is a necessary condition set to create capacity to absorb the grant aid of 100 million dollars, which is to be given over a period of 5 years.  

As I end, I want to talk about the Bwindi tragedy.  Hon. Members, you are all aware of the recent incident, which took place in Bwindi National Park. 8 tourists were brutally murdered in cold blood, and our park official was brutally murdered as well.  Bwindi National Park has hitherto been contributing 70 percent of the total revenue generated by Uganda Wild Life Authority. That revenue has now been shattered.  There is, therefore, an urgent need to support the organisation and help to restore confidence in the industry, which will take some time to build.  The Committee wishes to take this opportunity to convey profound condolence to the families of the deceased.

The Committee's recommendation:  
Following the detailed scrutiny of the project by the Committee on National Economy, in consultation with the Sessional Committee on Tourism Trade and Industry, we now wish to recommend to this House that the authority for Government to borrow a total of 12.37 million dollars from the World Bank (IDA) be granted by this House.  
I beg to recommend, Mr. Speaker. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we do not want to go through yesterday's experience of being incapacitated by this modern equipment. So, when you stand up, until the Speaker recognises you, do not start fumbling with the microphone. You have all the time in the world and you will talk.  Thank.

DR. SHANNON KAKUNGULU (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the Motion.  The future of Uganda lies in the service industry, and tourism is a very, very strong part of the service industry. The future of Uganda partly lies in the development of a well established tourism sector.

Time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we have come to either support or refuse Government from borrowing, but I think this is borrowing for a good cause.  Mr. Speaker, however, I have some clarifications and some suggestions I would like to make.  For a long time, in this country, most of the funding from these grants, from aid, from borrowing, has always been restricted to either the central part of the country or it is skewed towards a particular part of the country.  My suggestion would be that in recruitment for training, we should put in place a quota system, there is so much tourism potential spread out all over this country, I am sure in every district of this country there is something to show to tourists.  Unfortunately, these facilities have not been given due attention by the centre.  

My plea to the Ministry would be to decentralise, like in all other sectors. Masaka has a lot to offer, for instance, Sembabule district has the Biigo Byamugenyi, which is a fantastic site that should be developed.  Kasese has something, Mbale's Mt.Elgon has potential, go to Tororo Rock, there is a potential for tourism, go to Bujagali there is a lot of tourism, go to the Northern part of Uganda; everywhere.  If we are to create a well sustained and good tourism industry that will benefit the people of our motherland, Uganda, we must spread out all this money equitably.  

Most of the people who have been recruited to work in the tourism sector are always based in Kampala or Jinja, and these are town based fellows who, as soon as they get qualifications, either fly to South Africa or work in Kenya, so we are actually training for export.  That should stop. On the other hand, if you recruited someone from Kasese, some one from Masaka, some one from Teso, he or she will be forced to go back home and put that training to use.  Mr. Speaker, since everything is now geared towards the private sector, we should not restrict ourselves to employing people only from Government owned institutions like Sheraton, Crested Crane Hotel, but we should also employ people from the private sector, from hotels owned by private individuals, for this type of training.  

I was extremely delighted when the committee refused to have a foreign director to be paid for by this loan. I am, however, still not happy that the Ministry has gone around and got a grant from GEF worth US $55,000 to pay for a foreign director.  What is the essence of having someone foreign to run this organisation?  Is there no possibility of recruiting a Ugandan?  Do we not have any Ugandans qualified to run this project?  Otherwise, if we are looking at capacity building, we have already got it, all we need is to remunerate them sufficiently so that we can attract them from the Diaspora to come back home and organise tourism industry. 

The department of Antiquities and Museums again, Mr. Speaker, is only located in Kampala; that is absurd.  So much of our culture is lying in the districts unexploited. This department should also be decentralised. I beg to be corrected by the hon. Minister concerned, whether there are tourism offices at the district level. I do not think we have such officers, I think there is need for them to be at the district or at the regional level, if possible.  

On the question of Government counterpart contribution, through the life span of the project, estimated at US $4,187,000, I think we ought to be serious about this.  The downfall of most of our projects has been that Government usually withholds its counterpart funding, thereby frustrating the entire project.  The hon. Minister of Finance should be more serious about committing to our part of the bargain.  

As I conclude, Mr. Speaker, on the Bwindi tragedy, damage control in such conditions is very vital. I am glad to say that His Excellency and his Cabinet came up very fast to try and minimise the damage, because the whole world was focused on us.  But then, I think the foreign press and the world at large has double standards when it is looking at these issues.  When so many Ugandans are killed, it gives very little press coverage, when a foreigner is killed in Uganda, it gets front page coverage in the New York Times and in Australian Times, which is a bit absurd.  But this calls for having a good and highly motivated diplomatic service throughout the world.  Have career diplomats who are trained to give a positive view of such tragedies in our country, other than appointing politicians who, most probably, have no training on how damage can be minimised.   

Egypt had a similar tragedy, when tourists were killed in the tombs.  Yemen recently had the kidnapping of tourists, but still tourists flock there, because they have an efficient damage control mechanism spread out all over the world.  Mr. Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity, and I beg to support.

MR. OBEDMOTH (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to support the Motion, but there are a lot of questions that are not so clear to me.  A lot of borrowing has been done, especially for Uganda Wildlife Authority. Many of us have seen a lot of fleets of vehicles related to the PALM Project.  My concern is, for how long is this country going to continue borrowing to build capacity, and every time when we borrow to build those capacities, the capacities are never built?  The idea of the loan is very vital, and I do appreciate why this Government should go and borrow, but we should not make it a routine. I know, after this PALM Project ends, we are again going to borrow and the borrowing on most occasions does not have an impact on what we are supposed to do.

The issue of the Executive Director being a foreigner, originally, I thought, was a condition for this IDA credit.  Now that the Ministry has looked for an alternative grant and it is coming, why should we insist on having a foreigner to control Uganda Wild Life Authority.  Mr. Speaker, we must protect our national resources with a lot of zeal. If you look at Bwindi Impenetrable forest or at Mgahinga, we have got a lot of flora and fauna, which are not available in any part of the country and in some parts of the world.  Now, you have a foreigner going to preside over Uganda World Life Authority. Would we not have opportunity of foreigners coming under the pretext of tourists and picking our plants and going to use them outside?   We must look at our national interest, because if these tourists are supposed to come, and maybe some researchers who are coming under the pretext of tourists, they must pay for whatever they collect from our national resources.  
I am still concerned about the issue of the Executive Director being a foreigner.  It is not a very positive development. We have always heard of countries like Mauritius where mercenaries can come and overthrow the Government.  An executive Director is going to be deputised by Deputy Directors, we are all aware. But Uganda Wild Life Authority has got game rangers who are about 1,500 in number and carry AK 47s.  It is not in the interests of the security of this country to have a foreigner controlling about 1,500 troops. Mr. Speaker, besides the security aspect, all this amount of money going to be spent on the payment of a foreigner is too much. This country cannot sustain it because, on the average, you are going to pay something close to US $15,000 to maintain a foreigner.  We can successfully get a Ugandan who can get a less sum of money.  Unfortunately, this Executive Director is going to be deputised by a Ugandan, who may not even get half of what this foreigner is getting in this country.  That aspect of it is not in the interest of this country. 
Another area I am raising concern in, Mr. Speaker, is the manner in which Uganda Wild Life Authority has handled its affairs. The way it has handled them is not in the best interest of the people who stay near National Parks.  Mr. Speaker, I am saying this because I have stood here to support Uganda Wild Life Authority, so that the Government of Uganda can borrow money to strengthen the capacity of the Uganda Wild Life Authority. 

I do not want to be misunderstood by my people, however, that if the capacity of Uganda Wild Life Authority is built, it will learn to consult, it will learn to be a friendly organisation to the people who stay near these National Parks. Currently, one aspect or event is coming, in which, for the very first time, the Minister of Tourism will have to come down to negotiate with us, as a population, when we become resistant.  We have had a lot of problems as people who live along National Parks, especially the people of Jonam County. The Pakuba Reserve has caused us a lot of problems. Now, we are hearing rumours in the corridors that a lot of consultation has taken place in Gulu.  The Jonam people originally stayed in Gulu, until insecurity caused them to cross and go to West Nile. We are still there because of insecurity. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister should make it very clear.  I represent the whole of Northern Uganda, the people Kilak, the people of Nwoya, have sacrificed enough and have never benefited so much from these National Parks.  River Nile flows through there, and the Acholi people buy fish from a foreign land.  I hope this capacity you are going to build is not going to bring back the Aswa Lolim and Kilak control hunting areas.  Those are lands that specifically belong to us, and we are giving you an opportunity to consult us and negotiate with us. If that project is carried in the manner, which is being rumoured, this time our people will not support it.  We have already suffered enough, having the Park next to us.  

I hope, Mr. Speaker, if those anomalies are looked at very seriously, especially the point brought up about the Executive Director, I will very much support the Motion. I wish the Ministry good luck.  Thank you.

MR. DICK NYAI  (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to support the Motion. I know that when you do not have the experts, then Management goes haywire. 

Whereas I support this Motion, Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister responsible for Tourism and Wildlife to take into account the common and ordinary belief of our people. An Ayivu finds it very strange for Government to spend a lot of money to protect an angara fish in the Park, and then tell this Ayivu, you cannot pass through the Park, which is his only other alternative route, unless you pay fees for bird watching.  The Ayivu are not bird watchers.  Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is, it is not as is the case with places like Kasese, where to get to Kasese town, we have to drive through a National Park and those people are not taxed.  In the case of the people travelling to the West Nile - people travelling to Nebbi, Arua - tomorrow, when there are rebel attacks on the Arua-Gulu road, on the Karuma-Pakwach road, and arrangements are made so that we can go through Paara, then the Minister for Wildlife says these Ayivu must pay! Which is more valuable to this country?  Is it the Ayivu human being or the antelope?  

On this matter, Mr. Speaker, it is people who are our priority. Whereas you need Game Parks, and you need the Wild Life Authority, those who are also living next to those Game Parks should have a symbiotic relationship. There was a time we used to come through Paara and the people working within the Park, even the Game Wardens, would fish and we would buy the fish, and we would exist.  Just like hon. Obedmoth has said, some mzungu was put in charge and he has made it illegal even to fish, yet, I do not believe that the fish in that water is an endangered species.  

I hope the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife will take these concerns of ours very seriously. I do not see how you still insist that some body, who is being shot at, between Karuma and Pakwach, must pay to go through Paara, yet His Excellency says he can pass through to save his life.  I think it is unfair and I hope the new managers, who are going to train in this capacity building, will live like human beings and understand the needs of human beings. I believe this House will pass this Motion.  I thank you.

MR. ELLY KARUHANGA  (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like my Friend from Ayivu, I also stand to support this Motion very strongly because I have an interest.  As hon. Members may know, Mr. Speaker, in this House I represent an area where there is a National Park; the Lake Mburo National Park. This is the nearest National Park to Kampala. You can drive from here, go back, and come back. But now, there is no road that you can use to go and visit that place.  So, if this money is going to help us improve the infrastructure within the Park, so that tourists can see the natural beauty of our country, and the resources, then our Park shall turn into gold for our country. 

Having said that, I wish to point out something to the Minister, which I have pointed to him in private, in various committee meetings that we attend. I would like now to put it on record here.  My people, for a long time, have viewed the Lake Mburo National Park as a rival to their interests. They were moved out of Nshara and it was curbed for animals. The only lake we have in the whole of Nyabushozi, if not the district, Lake Mburo, was taken and given to animals for tourists, yet you know we rely heavily on water for our animals and we are one of the largest producers of cattle in Uganda.  

Periodically, over the dry seasons, we cross into the park and, as Obedmoth said, those guys are armed.  So, there have been a lot of exchanges and/or abuse of human rights on the population surrounding the Park. Having talked to the Minister for a long time, he convinced me, and I became one of the leading conservationists. I went and addressed many gatherings around the Park and I told them not to go to the Park and finally, they started buying my story about the possible value of the Park.  Then, there was a law passed here, that communities surrounding the Park shall benefit from proceeds of the people visiting the Park.  To-date, we have never got anything.  Now, we have borrowed money.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: I am from Budadiri East, on the slopes of Mount Elgon, where there is also a National Park.  I shall not elaborate the details of that, but I would like to give information. In Mount Elgon Park, on the side Budadiri East, there is no infrastructure, there is no road going that side. My people have cried, like hon. Karuhanga's people, for roads to be constructed, for their 20 per cent to be given to them, but to-date, it is a story.  I am sure that what we are saying is the truth.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I thank you hon. Member, because, you have really amplified my point.  But I know there is a big will at the Ministry to actually have the communities surrounding the Parks in Uganda participate and be sensitized towards the advantages of having Parks. I know that this will is there, but there is no money.  Now we have borrowed money, but look at what we are spending it on, we are spending it on important items, but one item is forgotten, and that is participation of neighbouring communities in appreciating these parks.  If the communities do not participate, they will go on poaching, then we shall put money in buying guns and life will never be as good as the hon. Minister would like us to believe.  So, I really would like to see a major component spelt out by the Minister of Finance together with the Deputy Prime Minister; they should tell us loudly and clearly, so that as I go to address my people tomorrow, I can tell them that things are going to happen.  This time, the Minister has got money; you are going to be catered for.  I would like this to be made clear.  If it is not made clear, then you can rest assured that the World Bank will always find problems in Uganda.  

I tell you there is no way I can stop people, and hon. Kezimbira is here he is my witness, there is no way we can position an army to stop Nyabushozi people from taking their cattle to Lake Mburo for water, if there is no way you are providing water for those communities through this scheme.  I think that point is made clear. I am sure we have discussed it for long and the Minister is going to talk about it.

I want to raise some few issues that have been raised here, Mr. Speaker.  If you turn to page 2, part (b), of the Minister's paper which was circulated, it has got capacity building of other conservation institutions, they are: Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry's World Life Department, Uganda World Life Education Centre, Uganda World Life Training.  I would have liked to see the Uganda World Life Education Centre, and the Uganda World Life Training moved to Uganda World Life Authority.  I think it is more relevant to get it out of the Civil Service structure to an authority structure.  The authority would then be in charge of training and also in charge of education.  Other than that, you are going to always have the authority running to the Minister to see the Permanent Secretary, and then the Commissioner, and then the Senior Assistant Secretary, and life will always revolve around this and there will always be a debate.  Unless there is a good reason for keeping these two institutions out of Uganda Wild Life Authority, which the Minister is free to explain to us, I would recommend that he consider seriously transferring those two departments, the Education Centre and Training Centre to Uganda Wild Life Authority.  

I was amazed at the conditions of the IDA grant, which the Minister spelt out on page 3.  It is almost an insult to our intelligence and to our Government for somebody to give you a loan and tell you now, do the following; Government should maintain, until completion of the project, a senior management team including a Director, Deputy Directors, and Co-ordinators to oversee the project implementation.  Surely, does the World Bank think that the Government cannot do this? Do they doubt Government, and the Minister of Finance, and the Prime Minister?  Look at the last point there; "selection of an executive director for UWA within three months after the credit is declared effective."  As if you are not going to find it necessary to have a director of UWA?  Should we really have this as a condition?  And you know when you read all the conditions to the end, they are just saying nothing but, we are dealing with an incompetent group of people, we must now tell them what to do; the A, B, Cs of life. I do not accept this.  I think this is not really fair, it is like they are not so sure whether they are dealing with normal people.  They are dealing with people who are absolutely incompetent, unaware of what should be happening, and so they must spell out things. I find it very difficult to bring this to Parliament; for us to say oh yah, you should do that.

Having talked about this, I will talk about the chief executive.  I know that in Kenya they had this man called Mr. Leaky, he is a very good friend of the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs here, Dr. Martin Aliker.  So, they dismissed him one time because he goofed politically, but after a short time, things collapsed in the National Parks in Kenya.  So, they went almost on their knees and called Mr. Leaky to come back and run the KWA.  Now, it seems to me that the management of UWA can be a problem too.  Because, I remember a man called, Dr. Edroma, my Friend, we really criss-crossed these national parks together when we were carrying out sensitisation programmes.  What had he done?  It was alleged that he had swallowed a lot of fund money for the World Life Authority. There was a big battle going on between hon. Moses Ali and that man.  Finally, one of them had to go and it obviously had to be Dr. Edroma. Dr. Edroma had to go, but he was probably the most qualified Ugandan, whom I always felt very proud to know. He was in charge of a field where he was most qualified and able to do his job.  Since that time, they have been moving people in and out.  

I sincerely believe, we can have another Dr. Edroma, who is not going to be in trouble with money.  This is a question of money; even if you bring a foreigner, he can also swallow.  I know many tourists are foreigners and they probably would be happy to come into an office and find a Dr. Leaky looking type of person.  It would be discriminatory and against our Constitution for us to say, we are advertising a job, these are the qualifications, the person must not be a Ugandan. I think it would be unconstitutional.  All jobs should be competed for, if it is a "Muzungu" who wins on merit, so be it, but we should not say that Ugandans are going to be excluded from this job - I have not even heard the Minister say so, but I have heard Members of Parliament raise it.  I do not know whether this is the Government Policy, but I do not think. If somebody could provide information on this, I would be grateful, because many Members are going to stand up and harp on this forever.  So, if this is the policy, I think it is very important that we know, because we are going to find it very difficult to pronounce ourselves on this.(Mr Otim Omara rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I have not given you the Floor, hon. Minister. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  But I would welcome the hon. Minister's information.

MR. OTIM OMARA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much and I thank hon. Elly Karuhanga for giving way.  I stand to give information and offer some clarification on the issue of the recruitment of the Executive Director. I would like to remind Members, especially those of the Sessional Committees of Tourism, Trade and Industry, together with the National Economy, that this issue did feature very much in our two to three months deliberations, during the Committee Stage.  We mentioned to Members that in the process of recruiting the Executive Director, we advertised internationally and used all the available print media. Mr. Speaker, we used The Times, The Financial Times, and The Economist and even locally, we used The New Vision and The Monitor to advertise this position.  Over 80 people did apply or respond to the advertisement, including Ugandans. There is therefore no truth, whatsoever, and I want to repeat, there is no truth in saying that there was a deliberate attempt to block Ugandans from responding or applying for this job.  What finally transpired was that, the last four people who were short-listed did not include a Ugandan, after several Ugandans had applied.  Probably that is what is being misconstrued as having been intended to lock Ugandans out.  Otherwise, they were given an opportunity, they did apply, and in the preliminary short list, they also appeared, but when the number got reduced to four, I think on the basis of the credentials submitted, no Ugandan featured among the last four.  So, that is the position that was adopted, there was no deliberate attempt to lock any Ugandan out.  Thank you.

MR. MAITEKI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Following from what the Minister has just informed this House, may I specifically know what happened to the application by someone called Dr. Muhirwe?  That would give us clearance.

THE SPEAKER: No.  I thought you were giving information?  Hon. Karuhanga, I expect you to come to your conclusion now.

MR. KARUHANGA: I am definitely going to come to my conclusion.  I am mindful of other Members' interests to contribute. I am very grateful to my Friend, the hon. Minister of State for Tourism, for that information.  The thing about all these matters, when you see them coming to Parliament and coming on the Floor, it is because Members have heard a lot of stories. One of the stories is that, when you advertised world-wide, it was not the Board or UWA which received the applications, the applications were not even assessed in Uganda, but in Washington.  That is what we are being fed on.  If it is not correct, it is very important for you to clear the air here.  Who did that selection?  If things were done in a transparent way, as you have described, and things were done here in Uganda, and it is a "Muzungu" who won the short listing, I have no problem.  The problem is, if it is true that they were being done in Washington, and they were looking for "Bazungu", and we are just supposed to borrow money, pay them, and then they take so much money out of what we have borrowed, only to pay some foreigners, that is questionable.  That should also be cleared.  I think you can clear that when you get a chance to.  May you kindly please allow me to receive information from Chairman of the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He does not require your information.  That is by the fact that he was standing and appealing to me.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you very much hon. Karuhanga. To prove that it is a deliberate move by the Government to recruit foreigners, recently, Mr. Kanyomozi qualified for the job of UEB, but then he was thrown out and they brought in a South African, who is a foreigner.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you for that information.  I am not the Minister for Energy and I cannot answer for him.  I think hon. Kaijuka will be addressing these matters when he comes here over Bujagali.  

My last point, Mr. Speaker, is on the GEF fund.  The Mgahinga - Bwindi Impenetrable Forestry Conservation Trust was established by the World Bank and a lot of money was put on an account in America, I think it is run by MaryRich.  The interest, which comes out of that money, is supposed to be doing some good work here. Now, Mr. Speaker, as a Member of the Committee on Government Assurances, sometime ago, we invited the Minister of State for Tourism to our Committee. We questioned the way the money of that Trust had been extended, and I think there were also some heads that rolled there. The Minister moved in and sacked some people and many people left.  

We have not yet been appraised on the goings on of that fund.  I think, at that time, there was something like two billion dollars put on an account from which interest, which is a lot of money, would be used for conservation of this project.  I do not know how much it was, but I was told two billion dollars.  It is not our money, it is money that has been collected and is kept in America; we only benefit from the interest of that money.  Now, of course they can tell us how much it is.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is not true that we got two billion dollars.  We had about five million dollars, we deposited it in a bank in London, not in America, and we were drawing on the interest every year. We have a Committee, got from people in the districts bordering Bwindi and Mgahinga Parks, not Members of Parliament. These people say they do not want politicians to manage their funds, because they have different minds.  They say that the fund should only be handled by the local people, the people in the area, and this is what is happening.  A lot of money has been made and we are using it to put up community projects like roads joining the two villages, schools for these people, bridges and so on.  So, it is not two billion dollars, it is four to five million dollars.  That is the correct information.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am very grateful for that correction, I hope my format was obviously wrong.  The thing is about Members of Parliament being excluded from sitting on those committees.  I have told you how useful I consider myself to be, in my Constituency, over the matters concerning the National Park. My usefulness, I can assure you, has been appreciated by the Minister himself and by his Ministry officials.  I have drummed up sensitisation programmes there and I have also been sitting on many Committees of PAC, in my own right.  But when it came to this money in Bwindi, Members of Parliament from that area, including some people who are here, -(laughter)- were told, in the Government Assurance Committee, that they were being excluded from that fund by some people in UWA at that time.  It so turned out that, the interest was eaten and the person who ate it was dismissed; I have already mentioned his name.  There is no need for me to drag in his name here too many times.  That man was not a politician.  Definitely, Dr. Edroma was not a politician, but he ate the money.  Now, why do they think that when politicians get involved in using and supervising such funds they are eating the money?  The people who allege those type of things, I would like to convince the Minister, are people who are interested in eating without being seen by politicians. I think it is important that on this Trust, you quickly move and include the politicians in that area, to make sure that the money is being used for the right purpose and you will find it very useful.  

On the question of 5.92 million dollars from the Ministry of Finance, as counterpart funding, I can guarantee that, that money will never be paid in full to UWA, unless the Minister stands up and also guarantees us that it will be paid. I do not think there is any counter funding, which has taken place, and the Government has fulfilled its obligation.  So, if the Minister of Finance can stand up and say, the figure of 5.92, which is about six million dollars, which I have inserted on the bottom chart, on the last page of my letter, before the Resolution, being the counterpart funding from Government of Uganda to this Project, will come. If it ever comes and we get 50 percent, we shall be very, very lucky, those of us who are supporting this project.  I support this loan, I think we should not give it undeserved delay, and I hope that the Minister is taking notes so that he can improve his Ministry when he gets this money.  Thank you.

MR. ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Resolution to borrow this money.  

My area, together with Bulisa County, is the home of Murchison Falls National Park.  In the past, we used to get many tourists in these areas, but as it has been mentioned by the Committee on National Economy, because of security problems, we have very few tourists. We normally earn revenue from greater numbers of tourists visiting these areas.  There are also a few concessions, which have been granted to some private investors in Murchison Falls National Park, but these concessions cannot be completed because of insecurity.  

I would like to appeal to Government and to us here, to put more effort in trying to restore complete security in this Country, especially in the area where I come from.  The people are, at the moment, crowded in what we call, protected camps.  They are under-going a lot of hardships.  Government is not able to take care of them and very often they lack food, they lack shelter, they lack medicine and so on.  

Tourism has developed my area in the past, but all that is now gone to ruins.  The Local Government in the past used to get taxes collected from the workers in the camps, in the National Parks, but at the moment we have the main camp that has been transferred to the other part of the Nile.  It is a pity that there have been attempts to knock down buildings which used to house the Headquarters of the National Park on the northern side of the banks of the Nile.  I would pray that -(Interruption)

MR. MURANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and my hon. Friend holding the Floor.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend that the same thing is happening in Kasese, in the Rwenzoris.  So far, all the tourists who used to go to Rwenzori have stopped.  Even those who have been visiting Queen Elizabeth National Park are no longer going there in the right numbers, because of insecurity.  Therefore, concrete efforts should be made by the Government, to combat this insecurity, in order to attract the tourists who have been going to these places.  Thank you very much.  

MR. OLUM: Mr. Speaker, this problem of insecurity cannot be over-emphasized.  I just want to put it on our agenda so that we continue to think about solving these problems. The people of Nwoya have supported the Parks Authority in the past and they do support it in its effort to develop the tourism industry to its maximum capacity.  

There is this issue, which has been raised by hon. Karuhanga.  There is the relationship between the Parks Authority and the local population.  This point can never be emphasised enough.  We must continue to remind the Minister and UWA that it is absolutely important for UWA authorities and the local communities to co-exist in peace and harmony.  I hope that this money, which is being borrowed, will enable the UWA authorities to be able to get closer to work with the local communities.  

It has been mentioned that there are other programmes, which are in place, to help educate the local communities on conservation, working together with the UWA authorities.  But I would like to report here that, as a person who represents a greater part of the Murchison Falls National Park, those programmes are not felt on the ground.  They do not have enough ranchers, they do not have enough wardens to go and deal with the people.  So, these programmes also need to be looked at and strengthened, so that we have a way of handling disputes between the local communities and the Park Authorities.

At the moment, there are a lot of complaints about how the suspected poachers are being handled.  It has been mentioned by hon. Obedmoth, but I think this is the right time for me to mention, that a great effort needs to be put in place, so that when a person is arrested in a protected area, he is treated humanely, according to the law.  

There are cases where people are beaten up and tortured, people have been killed and it has created bad blood in some of the areas where we have protected areas.  So, I pray and hope that, as part of the training, more effort will be put in trying to educate the warders, the wardens and the ranchers to really look at conservation, not for their own sake, but as a means of co-existing with the local communities. They should try and resolve their disputes in any breaches of the law in a more humane way, so that the people can appreciate what is going on better.  At the moment, I think there is a lot of improvement needed on the side of the people who are handling the local communities.  

One area, which has been mentioned by hon. Obedmoth, is the re-alignment of boundaries between the existing National Parks, especially the Murchison Falls National Park and the former Achwalulim and Kilak controlled hunting areas.  We were a bit uptight that the consultations, which were carried out, were not really done adequately with the grass-root people. The officials from UWA went to the district headquarters and talked to councillors, and a few selected people, and that triggered quite a lot of resentment from the people on the ground; those who are directly neighbouring the National Parks.  We have given our opinion as Members of Parliament who come from that area, but we hope that in future, the Ministry will take keen interest in this kind of consultation. When you want to commit the land, which belongs to the people, for conservation purposes, the new Constitution requires a lot more convincing and compassing than it used to in the past, where you could just declare these issues by Statutory Instrument.  

I would like to urge the Minister and the staff of UWA to liaise very closely with the local people and not to fear to consult Members of Parliament.  In any case, these issues will come here and when we get it from third parties and request to meet these people, it will look kind of awkward.  Normally, we would support them if we were convinced that, that is in the interest of our people.  So, I really would like to urge the Second Deputy Prime Minister to look into these issues very seriously before new areas are gazetted.  With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the resolution.
MRS. AMONGIN APORU (Women Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.  I stand to support this Motion.  I strongly support this Motion because I specifically saw that the Tourism Training Institution at Jinja is going to be facilitated with 1,168 million dollars.  Mr. Speaker, this has given me the strength to stand up and support this Motion, though here, in this report by the Chairman, he has not really outlined what rehabilitation is going to take place.  I do assume, however, that the rehabilitation is specifically going to the areas that were raised last year when the Committee visited the institute; specifically the kitchen.  The kitchen of this institute, as of now, is not in a very good condition. You know very well that if you are to train in the hotel industry, the kitchen must be perfect and you must have utilities that are adequate for all the students.  

I would like to inform the Minister in charge of Tourism that, as much as money has been given to this school, bearing in mind that it is the only Government tourism institution, the numbers are growing. When this school used to be managed by the ILO Programme, they used to handle about 50 students, but today, the numbers have grown.  We now have 163 students in this institute and the greatest problem is accommodation. There is no accommodation for these students; the institute is just hiring premises for these students.  So, I would like to urge the Minister to take into consideration the issue of the expansion - a hostel.  The institute has already purchased land in front of the hotel.  In their next budget, they should, at least, start planning for accommodation, so that we have more and more of the students coming here to be admitted.

The institute has got three major diploma courses, which were started this year - catering, tourism and hotel management.  All these are services that we require in this Country.  Most of our tourism centres - the hotels, the tour agencies - still lack the right trained category of personnel.  So, I would urge them to consider this.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Training Institute is there, alright, but there is no Library; reference Books are missing.  So, the Ministry should also bear in mind that, as much as they are encouraging this training, they should consider the type of books that are current with Tourism education today, so that we cope with the rest of the world.

This particular institute was taken over by Ministry of Education, according to the restructuring that is going on now.  But with the background of this school, being established under the Statutory Instrument under the Ministry of Tourism, there is a problem - there is a snag, in as far as the Board of this school is concerned.  The school, as of now, is operating, but there are no clear guidelines; who is responsible for the school?  Is it Education?  Is it Tourism?  I hope the Second Deputy Prime Minister will clarify this to the House, because it is not only this school that is under Ministry of Education, even the Wildlife Training Institute is also under the same, yet the Boards governing these institutes are still under Tourism.  So, I would like clarification on this point.  

I would like to talk about the Kidepo National Valley Game Park, Mr.Speaker. The Kidepo National Valley Game Park is disadvantaged. The infrastructure is not up to date and the roads leading into this Park are in a very appalling situation.  I hope, as we approve this money, indeed, Uganda Wildlife Authority will take into consideration the rehabilitation of these roads, because tourists normally end on the way, they do not go to the interior of the Park.  Even the hot springs within this Game Park, Mr. Speaker, are completely silted.  I think the Ministry should really get down and rehabilitate this infrastructure and the natural attractions that are in this Game Park.

The personnel, who are working in that Game Park, seem to have ceased to be part of Uganda Wildlife Authority.  They do not have communication equipment.  Once they are on one extreme of the Park, it is very difficult for them to get to know which direction their colleagues are.  I visited the place and there were no walkie-talkies or communication systems; they did not have vehicles. The Game Warden was the only one who was facilitated.  So, I think the budget should consider the work force within the Park, because these are the people who give us the information, they are the ones who know the numbers and the species of the animals which are in this Game Park.

These people who work in this Game Park, Mr. Speaker, are working under very, very difficult conditions; and I do not think it is only Kidepo, I am sure the same story is true for Murchison Falls and the rest of other Parks.  I think the Ministry should find ways and means of really helping these people who are working in these insecure areas of this Country.  

The animals that are being poached are the ones that should be most cherished by the Tourism Industry in this Country.  What law has this Ministry put in place to make sure that the Wild Game is protected?  When we were here for the first Movement Conference, the Second Deputy Prime Minister said that the animals are also decentralised - the Wild Game.  Yes, these animals are decentralised, but still there is no law in the districts.  When these animals get out of the Park and they come into the open land, they end up being killed because people do not know the laws governing the animals.  So, much as the animals are being poached, people directly kill them because once they are out of the Game Reserves, they go and cause destruction. The ordinary citizens may not know what the effects of killing an animal are.

The areas that are gazetted for Game Reserves in Karamoja, Mr. Speaker, are the most fertile ones.  Mr. Speaker, we have got a problem with the Karamojong.  May I urge Government to at least give some of these fertile areas in the Game Reserves to Karamojong, so that they settle there with their cows during drought and they do not cross over to disturb neighbouring Teso?  There is vast land in Karamoja, which is gazetted as Game Reserve.  They have some lakes, which could contain and maintain the cattle.  I think, Mr. Speaker, specifically for Karamoja, if some of this land is given, it would do us good and save us the conflict with the Karamojong, who claim to come down following water and pasture in Teso.

I would like to end, Mr. Speaker, by saying that there are other historical sites, which this Ministry does not really put emphasis on.  Kumi district, for example, is endowed with special types of clays.  People are just locally using that clay.  I would urge the Ministry to put emphasis on this special clay we have in Kumi.  It is good for pottery and other items that may be very useful in our households.

We also have special attractions in these grinding stones the earth just gives.  You get a grinding stone, and within a minute, it solidifies and it comes in the shape you would want to cut it.  These are some of the attractions in my district, and I would like to call upon the attention of the Second Deputy Prime Minister on this matter. Then of course, there are the famous Nyero Rock Paintings indicated on the maps. So many tourists come to Nyero, but the district does not benefit from that facility.  Tourists pay money to the regional office at Mbale, but the people of Kumi district, Nyero in particular, where I got married, benefit nothing, and yet we are the ones who keep on maintaining the site. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to give opportunity to the Second Deputy prime Minister and  - I do not see the Minister of Finance, the mover of the Motion.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILD LIFE (Brig. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all I want to thank my Colleague, the Minister of Finance, the Chairman, and hon. Members who have contributed positively. I am grateful to everybody who spoke and I think those who have not spoken are definitely in support of this Motion.  

I want to answer few of the questions raised, starting with that of Dr. Kakungulu.  He was concerned about this money, even if approved, will remain here, at the centre, meaning that some parts of Uganda will not be catered for.  This money is building capacity, and then it will be used to cover all parts of the country. Even before this money comes, on our own, we have already started covering the country; for example, we have introduced some bird viewing centres. If Members are observant, surely, you will see, in some of your wet lands, we have introduced some bird viewing centres. Even in Kumi, for that matter, at that lake, there is a very rare bird, which is already being shown as a tourist attraction. There are many other centres.  So, we are really trying to cover the country. The Sese Island is part of this; we have a very big project for Sese Island and many other areas. In fact, the Uganda Tourist Board had written to each Member, if you can look through your documents, I had written to each Member, inviting you to give us information on what is of interest in your districts or in your constituency, so that we can follow up from there.  According to our information, very few Members have responded, but I will go back and ask the Uganda Tourist Board to send the same letter to the Members again, now that we remember and we are all concerned. Through this, we will be able to co-operate and co-ordinate with the Tourist Board.  

Bigo Byamugenyi has been a focal point, but the issue is lack of funds, otherwise we have been there. His Excellency, has been there, and we are now trying to work with the local authorities on how much land we need out of that area so that the rest of the public can use it. Immediately we get funds, we shall be able to put up some development. Since the industry is heavily privatised, I think we will also encourage the district council, now that they have the feeder road machinery, to begin to open the roads to that area and perhaps put a kiosk, to begin with, to sell some of these things, so that people will know that people are coming.  (Interruption)

MR. GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, is the Minister in order to suggest that there is no master plan for tourist development in this country and he is going to wait for MPs and districts to develop the plan? He knows that for Kenya to become a master of tourism, they injected something like 5 billion dollars, from 1968 to about 1975 or 77.  If there is no master plan, is the Minister in order to suggest that he is going to look for the master plan from the MPs and districts.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not understand; are you saying the Minister is not telling the truth, that there is no master plan?

MR. GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, it appears he does not have a master plan. Is he in order to suggest that, if he has?

THE SPEAKER: If there is no master plan and the Minister is telling us so, I do not see how he can be out of order.  He would be out of order if he told us there is a master plan when in fact there is none.  Proceed.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, I did not say there is no master plan, but I was trying to register the support of my Colleagues.  I have a master plan, if I give it to you, it may take you six months to read -(Laughter)- so, I am registering your support.  

On the issue of the hotels in Jinja,Mr. Speaker,they train everybody, including the private sector, where you pay to be trained. It is because of communication, that we are somehow handicapped, otherwise they train even the private sector. I think, on that ground, we are doing very well. I will ask Colleagues, when they are at that side, to branch and see the progress, as you take some tea.

On the issue of the executive director, I think my Colleague had elaborated on that, I do not want to contradict what he has said.  The same speaker asked for decentralisation of tourists. Actually, we have already decentralised them, that is why we are calling for your support.  Now, as to whether we should have district tourist officers, that again will have to go back to my Colleague, the Minister of Finance. When he gives us something, we shall then be able to have these officers at district level.  

On damage control,Mr. Speaker, after the Bwindi attack, I must say that the Army has moved very, very, effectively. In the Ministry, we are also trying to work very hard to see that we work on the damage that has been made.  Now, of course the appointment of officers is with Foreign Affairs, we shall take care to appoint other people, other than politicians, but that is not our area.  

Our Colleague, Ofungi, talked about fleets of vehicles  - well, I do not know how many vehicles he is calling a fleet. Again, he talked of the Executive directors being a problem.  On staff behaviour with the people in the neighbourhood, if I could combine this question with that of hon. Dick Nyai, the master plan we have is now promoting the relationship between the community in the neighbourhood of the park and the park staff.  Now, if I can also combine it with the question of hon. Olum Zachary, if a poacher is a criminal, it depends on how he behaves on arrest.  If you want to be violent, then possibly you might invite violence from the people trying to constrain you.  But, if he accepts to be arrested, then there is no cause for mishandling or beating him; I have no information about poachers being killed.  If they have been killed, we shall find out who killed them.  Otherwise, we are now aiming at improving our relationship all over, so that these people become protectors of these parts, instead of feeling denied. Until this incident in Bwindi, the relationship has always been very cordial, although we are thinking of improving so many other things. It is very vital, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)
MR. KANDOLE: I would like the Minister in charge of Tourism to clarify to me what steps he is going to take on the issue of the cattle keepers who have encroached on Katonga Game Reserve in Kabarole. I want him to clarify to me, Mr. Speaker, on what he is doing about the letter which was written to him by His Excellency, the President, through Kale Kahihura, written in June and I think reached him in September. I would like him to explain to me, what steps the Ministry is taking to implement the resolutions, which were made in the Kyaka meeting, which was attended by Kabarole leaders, and leaders from Mbarara, over the issue of Katonga. They resolved that His Excellency the President should withdraw his directive of allowing people from Mbarara to go and graze in Katonga in Kabarole.  If you want, Mr. Speaker, I could give more details, but since I was not given the chance to talk, I would ask the Minister to clarify on these issues.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: We are handling this Katonga issue. We have already held meetings with district officials from Mbarara and Kabarole and our staff from the headquarters; and we are due to meet again.  We will assess whether we can solve the matter at that level, then I can take the matter to Cabinet and Cabinet will advise accordingly. I think it is more of an administrative matter, but I will ask the colleagues to give us chance to handle it at that level. 

The same speaker talked about Aswa Lorimu controlled area. This question applies to all wild life areas. Exercise is going on and consultations have been made with various people. If Members are saying consultation is not enough, since you are here, we shall draw up programmes and give you, so that, if you agree, we can ask those people to come here and we discuss more. If you say they should go back to the rural areas, definitely also with your help, we could organise.  Otherwise, we are not going to decide on areas without consulting you. In any case, whatever we agree to do will finally end up here, so it is to our advantage that we consult with you thoroughly before we go further.  

On the issue of comparing Paraa with Queen Elizabeth National Park, maybe, hon. Nyai Dick is complaining that people in Kasese are not being charged. There are two different situations; one is the road going through the park in Kasese is the only route, there is no alternative route.  We have a route from Karuma to Packwach that is the normal route to West Nile.  Now, it happened that one time the road became insecure and people were forced to go through the park, but when you enter the park, normally, for the park to be maintained, they need to raise funds. They need to charge people, mostly foreigners, and even our locals are charged, moreless one third of what we charge the foreigners. If you come, you must cross the river, there is a ferry which is very weak, and it used to fail.  If you use the ferry, definitely we will ask you to pay something small, so that we are able to maintain this ferry for the next day's crossing. If everybody crosses freely, then we will not be able to maintain it. However, when the president directed, it is not true that we continued charging people.  We worked out an application, we wrote to the Minister of Finance, who was then our Colleague, so that he could compensate us, so that we continue giving services to the people; it was not possible.  However, if our normal route is open (karuma/Packwach) there is no need for somebody in West Nile to leave that route and come this way, because it is going to give you difficulties.  So, whenever that route is open, I advise the commuters from West Nile to use the normal route, where we do not charge. Where there is insecurity, we are normally co-operative; we do not charge. We only charge, for crossing with the ferry, to maintain the services, not only for you, even for the park authorities, when they have to cross from left to right.  So, if we do not charge them, how do we maintain the services? 

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Ministry does maintain staff along that portion of the road, which passes through the park into Kasese, and I believe that the people of Kasese and the people of Arua district are all Ugandan citizens.  Mr. Speaker, I find it extremely difficult for the Minister of Tourism and Wild Life to stand here and tell me that when I am being attacked on Pakwachi/Karuma road, Paara is an alternative! It is now my lifeblood. When it does become my lifeblood and His Excellency, in his wisdom, rules that it is my life blood, Mr. Speaker, is it surely asking too much for our hon. Minister of Tourism and Wild Life to treat the people of West Nile as human beings?

BRIG. ALI:  Mr. Speaker, I have the same sentiments, because I am from West Nile any way.  If it is the issue of fighting for West Nile's case, I am equally concerned. I do not think we are going to weigh who is more concern than the other, because of what we are saying here.  I am definitely as equally concerned as my Colleague. Even if we go to West Nile today to address people there, I will convince the people of West Nile that they should pay something; just a token to maintain the ferry, because if they do not pay, tomorrow they will find the ferry cannot move, which is worse.  I think paying a little is better than not paying at all.  Mr. Speaker, I want to move quickly to hon. - (Interruption) 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on this point of order extremely reluctantly.  Whereas the hon. Minister for Tourism and Wildlife is saying that the people of Arua should pay for the ferry at Paara, even when there are difficulties to maintain the ferry afloat, is it in order for him to make that statement when he knows fully well that another ferry, which operates to Kalangala, is free?  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker, to misguide this House so that this House treats the people of West Nile as second class citizens?

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister was directing his attention to a specific route and a specific ferry.  He is saying, in the case of this ferry of Arua, if you do not make some little contribution, then you are going to end up in a worse situation namely; that there will be no ferry, because there is no money to keep it afloat.  I think the Minister was saying that. He was not insinuating something negative, in that, elsewhere, ferries can be free, but the West Nile people must pay. Hon. Minister, I would seriously suggest you conclude.

BRIG. ALI:  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to inform my Colleague that Kalangala ferry is the same like the Laropi ferry. With the Laropi ferry, we do not pay; it is for the Ministry of Works.  I do not know if they pay in Kalangala, but if you go to Masindi Port, you do not pay.  There are free ferry services elsewhere, but this is a park.  Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I do not even have to bother my Colleagues because they have supported me, I do not want to - (laughter) - I do not want to antagonise them.  I think we could clarify those points raised later, otherwise, since we seem to be running out of time, I would like to thank my Colleagues, very sincerely, for this support, which is rare in this House. I would have liked to inform the Colleagues on what measures we are taking as a result of what happened in the Bwindi, but I will maybe come with a statement later next week.  Thank you very much for the support, ladies and gentlemen.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, first and foremost, I wish to thank the hon. Members for the support that has been given to this resolution.  The spirit was so encouraging and developmental, that all of us who are involved in the day to day operating of development matters in this country, felt very encouraged, and I think that spirit will continue.  Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues raised.  

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue and I would like to raise this because it concerns the life of my people.  The people of Mount Elgon have been forced out by guns. There were people staying in the forest reserves and at the same time, there are people who are also being protected by guns in Katonga. While others are being forced to get out, others are being protected. I had wanted to find out if it was in order. While some people are dying and being forced by army men to get out, others are being protected. Is it in order to have this discrepancy at the same time?  Is it in order for Government to have double standards?

THE SPEAKER: I am in great difficultie to appreciate the point order. If you are asking whether it is in order for Government to have selective, or shall we say discriminatory, policies on matters that you have just raised; if it is so, that Government is actually pursuing that, as a policy, then I think this would be number your one point of order. But, I am not so sure whether that is a Government policy; it may be a problem of implementation, a weakness in implementation.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Thank you very much.  We have taken note of the point that has been raised by the hon. Member because this matter is not coming to the House for the very first time.  I remember the hon. Member, whom he defeated in the elections, hon. Wanendeya, used to raise this matter.  So, we had taken note of it and we shall seriously look into this matter.  Thank you very much. 

There have been a number of issues raised, some of them have been answered by my Colleague, who is responsible for the sector, and I indeed thank him very much. At the same time, I assure you, hon. Members, that in the course of your contribution, you have made a number of useful points, which have all been noted by the technical staff, who are sitting in the background. All of these - (Interjection) 
THE SPEAKER: When the Speaker is talking, you know what to do.  The rules are very clear, I do not want to open and read them out. I was addressing myself to the hon. Member.  I am requesting him very kindly to allow the Minister to conclude.  

MR. ILUKORI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking this pertinent clarification from the hon. Minister. Arising from the contributions from this important debate, Kidepo National Park has been mentioned to be disadvantaged and it is true.  The contribution by hon. Christine Amongin, of Kumi district, did mention clearly the disadvantage that Kidepo National Park faces. In course of the response by the responsible Minister, there is nothing that he mentioned about it.  Mr. Speaker, infrastructural development, in that part of the country, is needed; the Katurumu Lodge, started by Amin's regime, has remained dilapidated and yet, there is talk of capacity building. Can the people of Dodoth County and Kotido district as a whole be clarified as to what the fate of Kidepo National Park is?  Could I get this clarification, Mr. Speaker?  Otherwise, the people of Dodoth County are saying, they can go and graze the animals there, so as to stop going to the neighbouring districts to disturb.  Mr. Speaker, I seek this clarification.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I support this Motion, but the clarification I am seeking is a matter of principle, which the Minister of Finance has consistently not heeded to whenever he is seeking approval of Parliament; that is the inconsistency in using units of account.  The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is from page one, item 1.  This loan is designated in special drawing rights.  Page 3 (iii) says this loan is going to be paid in dollars, not dollars equivalent, and in the resolution itself, which the Minister has presented, it talks about Parliament approving a borrowing of 12.37 million, it is not talking of special drawing rights.  Can the Minister tell us why this inconsistency is there, because in any legal agreement, where you are borrowing, there must be a designated unit of account, so that when you are repaying, you either repay in that very unit of account or the equivalent of that unit of account in.  Can I get this clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister can you respond to those two points of clarification.

MR. SSENDAULA:  The first point of clarification sought was about Kidepo; can people in the neighbouring area start grazing in there, because they have not heard from the Minister, expressing himself over the issues, which have been raised previously?  I did mention that the points, which may not have been responded to by the hon. Minister, are all extremely useful and they have all been recorded by the technical staff who are seated right behind here; and this matter of Kidepo is important.  This project is coming to revamp; give new life to the tourism industry and certainly, Kidepo is one of those that we have cherished over the years. Kidepo is certainly going to be covered.  So, I request that the hon. Member does accept that Kidepo is not going to be left out.  

Now, coming to the point which was raised by hon. Okumu, one of these good days, when we are negotiating some of these things, I will provide literature on SDRs, on units of accounts vis-à-vis the dollars.It is agreed and it is within the Constitution of these organisations which use SDRs and then convert the money; when you have converted for purposes of drawing up your agreement, then finally, you have to pay in the converted currency at the time. The SDRs have an exchange rate of 1.33, as of the current rate of exchange of SDR against the dollar. The agreement, when it comes to paying, will obviously imply that conversion was made when the SDR was converting at 1.33, this is covered in the agreement.  So, please, kindly bear with us, these things are always negotiated by these brothers who are as good and they are familiar with financial matters, just like we are in Uganda.  

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I will move to wind up. I am happy with the Members, again, for pointing out the issue of counter funding.  In fact, it is unfortunate that the hon. Member who raised it, even said, 'I bet you, here in the House, if that Finance Minister is going to provide counter funding'.  Surely, I think we have Government Assurances, just as we have the Committee on the Economy or the committee on Finance. It is now a priority, in all these cases where we have counter funding; it is one thing we have to carry forward every time; that the counter funds are provided and provided in good time to ensure effective implementation of project we undertake. So, the Ministry of Finance will provide the counter funds we have committed ourselves to, in this project, I guarantee this.  

Now, I will come to the conditions, which are on page 3, which again the same hon. Member said were so archaic, so naive, so light that they should have been possibly left behind; they should not have come to the Floor of this House.  Hon. Members, I want to inform you, through the Speaker, that we are endeavouring, as much as possible, to create a tradition of transparency, so that we let you know exactly what kind of conditions we are getting with our financiers - the bilateral and multilateral lenders.  They give us conditions.  Now, however naive, however light these conditions may seem to you, it is crucial for somebody to know that there is a selection for the executive director, whom, within three months after the credit, is declared. This is the bench mark, it is a point of reference that the person, who is providing the money, is sure, beyond doubt, that there is going to be a person in the executive position, who is going to supervise the usage of this money.  So, it is important that this is covered and this is brought up.  The conditions may look so small, but they are crucial and we always move with them.  

Now, I will comment on the issue of recruitment of executive director, his deputy and the rest.  I will read you the document, which we call the project document.  The project document states; "an individual with strong management skill in charge of management will be recruited internationally to serve as Executive Director for three years."  Now, this opens up the position.  What is going to be required is to advertise the position, when it is advertised, then people respond, and Ugandans who have the right qualifications are equally free to respond. That is the position.  

As I wind up, I will talk about the security matter and its effect on our tourism.  Yes, this is quite true.  It is not only on tourism, but it is even destabilising our people; it is destabilising everybody, as it is destabilising every programme.  So, it is a point of priority for all of us to see that there is total security in this country.  It is not fair, some day when we are talking, to thank you very much for the security in the country when some other parts of the country do not really have that security. So, it is at the back of the mind of the Government, and the Executive as a whole, to see total security in Uganda, because every part of Uganda is productive.  

As we talk about tourism, we are talking about generating foreign exchange, which is dearly needed. The shilling is depreciating because the contributing factors are so few, we only look to coffee, a few vegetables and fish, and these are the only items. If there was total peace, Murchison Falls, Kidepo, and Queen Elizabeth National Parks would all be operating, that would mean another 100 million coming into the country. We would have a stable Uganda Shilling against the dollar or any other currency, for that matter.  

Regarding purchase of vehicles with money, I think this is an issue, which has been very well addressed by Government.  First of all, the Government has come out, very strongly, with the policy, which was passed by the Cabinet about a month ago, that even the capacity of vehicles, which have to be bought for projects, be controlled, so that we really minimise on the expense.  You can see the kind of saving that was made when a request was made to the donors to provide salary for the Executive Director.  That saving is now going to go into the Jinja Training Institute.  So, naturally, we are also going to be looking into the number of vehicles to be bought, as we look into the capacity of vehicles that we are to buy.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I think we have been able to provide you with as much information as possible as far as this project is concerned.  I appeal to you to support the project and the Resolution, which reads as follows: 
 "WHEREAS a Development Credit Agreement of US $ 12.37 million is to be concluded between the International Development Association of the World Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing the institutional capacity building for the protected areas management and sustainable use project (ICB-PAMSU) and; 

WHEREAS upon Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source, subject to other Constitutional provisions and; 

WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament and; 

WHEREAS in line with the above stated Constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation.  

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government of Uganda is hereby authorised to secure the said credit from the International Development Association (IDA) upon the terms and conditions therein stated."  

I beg to move, hon. Members.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that Parliament do authorise Government to borrow US $ 12.37 million from the International Development Association (IDA) for the institutional capacity building for the protected areas management and sustainable use project in terms stated in the credit agreement.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: This means that the Government can now proceed to borrow, in accordance with the terms stated in the agreement.  Hon. Members I thank you for your contributions. This is the only item in today's agenda. I wish, therefore, to adjourn the House until Tuesday at 2.00 O'clock.  The House is adjourned.
(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday, 16th March, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)