Thursday, 15 March 2012

Parliament met at 10.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning, honourable members. It does look like we have some meetings going on and this has limited the coming of Members at the moment. However, let us start and see how far we shall go with this morning session.

10. 43
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Just this week in my constituency, I experienced a very tough situation regarding the residents in Kabwoya and Kyangwari areas. This is to do with Bugoma Forest Reserve and about 1,000 people who have been displaced. 

It began last week on 7th of March and I thought it would be contained but it has continued up to today. Quite a number of people have been arrested, a number of houses have been burnt and property destroyed after a lot of beatings. This is because there is an assumption that these people are staying in a forest reserve around Nyairongo areas and Kanyegaramire. Those places are villages within Kyangwale and Kabwoya respectively. 

Why I raise this issue as a matter of national importance is because it requires urgent attention. To have over 1,000 women, children and men with no shelter or food and all calling on their area MP to come to their rescue is alarming, and I feel I cannot handle it alone. That is why I call for the attention of Government and specifically the minister in charge of disaster as well as that of water and environment. They can provide emergency support for the affected families, especially the children and women who are helpless as we talk.

I request the Minister for Water and Environment to stop the harassment of the people in the area, to stop any further arresting of our people, to intervene and ensure that there are measures put in place. It is a long time since Bugoma Forest Reserve was surveyed - actually, it was during the British colonial days, around the early 1930s. It is very difficult now to locate the surveyed mark stones. People have managed to encroach on it and as a result, we do not know the right ownership, or where the forest stops, where it starts and where the human settlement should take place.

This is therefore to call upon the minister and her agencies, especially the NFA, to ensure that the boundary marks are put in place and there is an opening of the boundaries to reach a solution. A solution can be reached when we know where the forest reserve ends and where the human settlement should begin; otherwise, we risk continuing to have forest encroachments. As Member of Parliament from that area, my obligation first of all is to protect the environment but also to provide a solution for human settlement. My major concern is for NFA to come in to ensure that they re-open the boundaries for us to sort out the matter because it is long since this forest reserve was surveyed.

In 2010, the same operation took place but then when the matter was taken to court, to the surprise of the residents there instead of NFA coming to defend their position it was individuals. So, there is a feeling that there could be some people hiding behind NFA to grab land in that area. That is why the community is resisting leaving that place. How could you have NFA complaining and then when you reach court, the matter now goes to individuals complaining against the residents. Thank God the matter was dismissed because of lack of evidence to prove ownership. 

The urgent matter is for the minister to also investigate the officers involved in brutalising our residents, to ensure that we understand side b. With the discovery of oil, and particularly in my constituency, the land conflicts have become one of the major security threats. A number of people are being threatened with evictions. As I present this, I have a message from Kabwoya that there are a number of people who are going to be evicted. 

If the response I have requested comes, then we shall join hands as leaders to work with the ministry to ensure that we sensitise the communities on the need to protect the environment, but the situation needs urgent attention.

10.49
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): First and foremost, I want to sympathise with the plight in the constituency of my colleague. This issue keeps coming up here in Parliament. Having been a member of the Eighth Parliament, I remember that it was also one of the main issues that used to come up especially regarding displacements. 

We made an amendment to the Land Act, which gave rights to people who are bona fide occupants. A bona fide occupant refers to that person who was staying in a place since 1983 - that is twelve years before coming into place of the 1995 Constitution. When you look at some of these issues, it seems that these people have been in these forest reserves and game reserves for quite a while, even beyond 1983. I do not know how this Parliament should proceed with this recurring issue. This is because reports are made, recommendations are made to Government and Government takes these recommendations but again when these issues keep coming up, we go back. It has become a cycle.

It is high time we get a select committee to look at these matters and come up with recommendations in line with the provisions of the law, especially on land. Parliament would move ahead if we did this. De-gazetting is a function of Parliament. Some of these places could be de-gazetted. 

These are symptoms of a bigger problem. There is a population explosion in this country. The land that people have now is not enough, and it is automatic that they now have to move around to look for where to settle. So this is the bigger problem, which needs to be addressed. If it means Government coming up to de-gazette some of these gazetted areas for forestry, for wild life, maybe that is the direction to go. I beg to submit.

MR NOKRACH: Thank you for this opportunity. The information I want to give is that there is a similar situation in Apar, Pabbo Sub-County in Amuru District. An area where people have stayed for quite a long time has been gazetted for a game reserve. People have been voting from there for many years, they have stayed there for many years, now they want to displace them by force. The situation is not good. 

So, Mr Speaker, this is a serious issue. I think we need to take stern observation of this and try to find out why we gazette areas where people are staying without consulting them. This is not an easy thing; it is a very bad thing and Parliament should take a stern look into this.

MR NDEEZI: I just want to say that this issue is not new, and as MPs we are to blame. I remember we debated this in the Eighth Parliament and in the one before and we agreed that this law called the National Forestry Act should be amended. It is a bad law, which gives a lot of powers to the National Forestry Authority. We know that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely. So, the solution is to review the National Forestry Authority Act, otherwise these other things that we talk about again and again will never get a solution.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I stand on another matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us close this one first. 

10.55
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to send my sympathies to my grandparents. The Banyoro are grandparents of the people of Busoga so anything that affects them, we equally get concerned.

I want inform this House that just like yesterday when we were considering the rules regarding the saving of business, in the last Parliament there was a select committee that was set up; it was codenamed the pastoralists select committee and others named it the Balalo committee. It was not Balalo, and the definition of Balalo became an issue here. If we had been given a slot to discuss this report, I think some of the issues coming up would have gotten a solution. 

Last weekend, I led a committee to the Teso sub-region and Karamoja to assess the effects of disarmament. During our interactions with the people in those two regions, this issue of national parks and game reserves conflicting with people came up eminently. In places like Napak District, there is a sub-county called Iriri which is one of the most fertile sub-counties in Karamoja sub-region, but you find that the animals are being favoured, including the trees, at the expense of the people. Whereas we need to protect the environment, at least since Karamoja has suffered as far as food security is concerned, we need to address their problem.

The issue of Bunyoro came up and I was a member of that committee that was chaired by hon. Patrick Ochieng, who lost his seat in the last election, and the vice chairperson was hon. Sam Njuba who is not here. I think that is one of the reasons that led to the collapse of the report. However, if it had been given space on the Order Paper, maybe after being saved, we could have got solutions as far as this matter is concerned.

I think we need to get a lasting solution. A case in point is Busoga South Forest Reserve in Mayuge District. During campaigns, people get a lot of hope to get that land. It is around 20,000 acres of land that accommodates the forest reserve. There are those who were there before the tsetse fly infections. These people were relocated because of the tsetse flies but after that, this land was declared a national forest reserve. 

People are suffering in as far as cultivation is concerned. When it comes to harvesting or after campaigns, these people are evicted and they keep suffering. After campaigns, they are given hope that the land will be partitioned and only the portion near the lake will be maintained as a national forest reserve. I want to appeal to this august House and the ministers concern that we get a lasting solution to these problems because we want a peaceful Uganda. We want people to stay in harmony with the environment.

10.58
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Like my colleagues, I also want to sympathise with the people of Bunyoro on this issue. 

I want to implore National Forestry Authority to revisit its approaches in environment management. It is a fact that the population is increasing and people have to coexist with these resources. Therefore, let us move away from the protectionist view of the environment where we are harassing people, burning houses and sending away people, to the sustainable development view of the environment. 

In the sustainable development view of the environment, man coexists with the environment. The environment is, therefore, man, but you have to use it mindful of the future generations to come. So I am imploring NFA and other environmental institutions to revisit their approaches and to shift from the protectionist approach to the sustainable development approach.

MR ATIKU: I just want to inform the august House that in Arua, we have got Barifa Forest which is now at the centre of Arua town. The municipal authority did engage in a process of de-gazetting that forest and the National Forest Authority– actually I think it is the Ministry of Environment – gave them some terms to fulfil. They were supposed to get an alternative piece of land and plant it with the tree species which were in Barifa so that the de-gazzeting process can ensue. I am sure that this Parliament has also been petitioned to do that.

I remember that when I was still in the district, COSASE visited Arua and interacted with NFA and the municipal authorities. They assured us that the de-gazetting process would be completed soon so that maybe other forms of development can take place but to date, no proper communication has been given. 

A dead body was discovered this week in that place and it had decomposed. This is just to inform the august House that some of these forests have become sources of insecurity. For Arua’s case, for example, the forest is in the centre of the town where Inzikuru Stadium is supposed to be constructed, and on the other side there is now Muni University. In future, there will be a lot of movement of students across Barifa Forest. With that kind of scenario, I think this Parliament together with NFA and the Ministry of Environment should come up with some tangible solutions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR KWEMARA: I thank you, hon. Atiku, for that information. I hope it does not take away the fact that we need a sustainable development approach. 

What I have seen is that in most cases, environmental institutions do support the communities that are on the fringes of those reserves. This is aimed at dissuading the communities from using these reserves irresponsibly. It is something that we can envisage.

Lastly, on the issue of investigation, you know there is a scramble for land in the Bunyoro region because of oil. It is possible that these people could be masquerading as officers of National Forestry Authority and yet they actually have ulterior motives. This happened in Kyegegwa where somebody came masquerading as an officer from National Forestry Authority evicted people but at the end of the day, NFA disowned him. The case even reached court and he lost the case as an individual. So, it is possible that somebody could be masquerading, so I support the idea of investigation. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable members, for the concern and support that you have given the honourable member. I ask the frontbench to give some responses on this issue.

11.03
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is not occupying his rightful place. 

I would like to thank the honourable members for raising these issues. I think they are legitimate and pertinent issues, which affect the people they represent. The issues are sector specific - they affect the Department of Forestry and Environment. My colleague, the Minister for Environment, is not here but I have summarised all the points for her and I will brief her soon after this session. I would like to undertake that she will make a statement to this House responding to these issues. 

I would like to appeal for calm for the time being because these issues are quite involving. We need to hear from the Government position but also attend to the plight of the people. So Mr Speaker, if you allow, I beg that the minister comes here and makes a substantive statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

11.04
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, District Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you. I rise on a matter that is involving one of our members in the Lango community who served in this country during the Presidential Policy Commission, Yoweri Wacha-Olwol, who is elderly and not very well. He requests that the Executive, as per the letter written by the President on 16 June 2010, the one written by the Solicitor-General giving an opinion to the Ministry of Public Service to pay ex-gratia as he served as a former – I do not say former President because here it is stated as former member of the Presidential Commission. 

The matter is broadly on the question of the retirement benefits to the former Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Prime Ministers, Speakers and Deputy Speakers. This matter was already resolved and a directive given to Ministry of Public Service to pay this category of leaders but as of now, payment has not been effected. In the case of Mzee Wacha-Olwol, whose health is deteriorating, this particular money would help him in matters of his health since he is a very elderly man.

I would need a commitment from the frontbench, with all the formalities already done and only the directive to the Ministry of Public Service to pay, when it can be paid. The other person also affected in the Lango community by this particular aspect is the estate of the former Prime Minister, Adyebo. His widow is also not doing well. Of course, I also have in the Lango community the widow of the former President, Miria Obote, who would also falls within this category. So as the Lango community, we have three people who would fall in this category. 

The directive has already been made for this money to be paid but so far, nothing has been paid. I think they deserve to know why in the circumstances the health of the two of them is deteriorating and they do not have another source of income. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, hon. Amongi. I think that is a matter for information and action. Can I seek some response from the frontbench? 

11.08
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruuli Mukasa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Amongi, for raising this point. It is indeed a very pertinent point. 

The case of Mzee Wacha-Olwol has actually been brought to Cabinet and Cabinet has had a look at it. However, it has not made a final decision because there was one issue that Cabinet has to decide on. Mzee Wacha-Olwol was a member of the Presidential Commission and that commission consisted of three eminent gentlemen. According to the laws we have in place, they recognise one past leader, like the past presidents we have had, like Obote and the rest. So Cabinet was deciding whether to treat the Presidential Commission as one President and then the benefits which would accrue to one President is divided equally amongst the three. So, we are still looking at it, but the principle of paying emoluments to past leaders is not in dispute. 

I think the Ministry of Public Service was tasked by Cabinet to go and get a further opinion on the matter and come back as soon as possible to guide Cabinet, so that Cabinet can take a definite decision and settle this question of Mzee Wacha-Olwol and the Presidential Commission. I am sure that Cabinet will come up with a definite decision and do the right thing as soon as possible. I cannot say next week. Now the matter has been raised here on the Floor of Parliament, I undertake to raise the matter before the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and also the Cabinet Secretariat so that the matter is brought up -(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for yielding the Floor. I think instead of addressing issues individually, it would be a better position for the minister or for Government to come up with a defined policy. 

The reason there is a lot of corruption, I think, in this country is because there are no mentors or role models that Government has come up with; we are not recognising and rewarding former senior citizens of the country. If we did that, it would inspire other people from within to begin serving this country diligently. 

If we begin saying this is an isolated or particular case that we are addressing, then it is not right. We should come up with a clear policy as Government that a person who performs or serves the country in this capacity, at this level, and performs in an exemplary manner should be treated in a particular manner. It may inspire other people to continue serving with a committed heart in as far as service delivery is concerned. 

If we begin saying we are discussing this particular matter, for example the one hon. Betty Amongi has raised, suppose I also came up and say that hon. Specioza Kazibwe served this country as Vice-President and she is my voter and I also need to – (Interjections)- I think discussing isolated cases is not right. We should come up with a clear principle that should be adopted by the House and Government takes it up to begin addressing it instead of discussing isolated cases. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought a law was passed, actually. Wasn’t the law enacted by this Parliament? So, what more policy do we need? 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, the policy is clear and the law was passed as you have said. However, I think we should take note of our history in those days, the history that brought about the Presidential Commission. It is not always that we have a presidential commission but the particulars of that time demanded that we should have a presidential commission, in other words, three people who served in the position of President in this country. That is why this problem has come up. It required Government to give it thought, discuss it and settle it, and we hope that we shall never again have that situation requiring a presidential commission. However, the principle was passed. 

As for Maama Miria, I think, again, the principle has been passed and the commitment is there and the obligation is there. These people are survivors of a former president and – (Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the explanation given by the minister on behalf of Cabinet but I am seeking clarification in relation to consideration of a presidential directive and consideration by Cabinet. I believe even other people outside this Parliament would be interested in knowing what happens once the President issues a directive. Maybe you should put the record clear. 

Our colleague mentioned that the President issued a directive to the effect that three people be assisted. However, the Cabinet, who plan for Government, are now telling us that Cabinet has a meeting to discuss the same directive. So, we need this clarified. What happens when the President issues a directive? Is the directive subject to a debate by Cabinet or do you simply implement the directive?

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving us a response but I wish to point out some factual information concerning the legal position. This Parliament passed a law and there is one important aspect which I want to remind Government of. Within that law, there was supposed to be medical insurance for the widows, in the case of Mrs Obote and Mrs Adyebo. 

I wish to remind Government that we are dealing with people who are not very young and the medical requirements are something which must be catered for. This is something which is not out of the ordinary and it is within the legal position. So, I am asking Government at the very least to implement some aspects of the legal position so at least we have some security in that situation.

However, I thank the government for taking the commitment. I wish to hear more from them as to when they intend to fully implement the legal provisions and also the position as pointed out on the President’s directive for the ex-gracia payments. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Wafula Oguttu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what point are you rising because the ministers were responding and these people are seeking clarification on what they have said. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This problem of senior citizens who have served this country and are living in dire need or a bad life - we seem to be ungrateful for what they have done - is not only confined to presidents or former leaders. I think it is proper that the government looks at it in a broader way. 

Look at the people who have served and gone and are supposed to have pension; most of them have not been paid. It is very difficult once you retire to go on a pension roll. Many of the people who served in the East African Community are dying or have died without compensation. So, it is not just an issue of the presidents and their wives but just senior citizens who have served our country. The Government owes them a lot of money but year in year out we hear statements from Government that they are going to be paid and they are not paid. So, I think that Government should do something because we are all going to get old – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The clarification you were seeking?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The clarification I seek is, what is the government doing about all senior citizens who have retired and have not been paid especially the people who were in the East African Community and the veterans? It is an issue, and the other day we were talking about it here. Everywhere we go, the veterans harass us because they want to be paid their money. So, what is the government doing about all of them and not just about the former presidents?

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, I happen to have intimately interacted with Mzee Wacha-Olwol and I can add my voice to those who think ­very highly of him. If there is any Ugandan who has given exceptional services to this country, it is Mzee Wacha-Olwol.

He worked as a district commissioner and the deputy chairperson of the Public Service Commission. Between 1987 and 1988, he was the chairperson of the Lango community that prevailed over their children to desist from rebel activities. I think this is great honour. 

The clarification I seek, Mr Speaker, is: what benchmark is there for considering those who should be granted ex-gratia? As a lawyer, I know that you cannot go to court to prove certain things. But for men of good intentions - and I know the Government of Uganda is composed of men of good will - such men will always grant ex-gratia in circumstances where people deserve it, especially those who worked hard in serving this country. In my estimation, Mzee Wacha-Olwol is one of those. If he is not granted ex-gratia, can I be given clarification –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable member complete his submission. Just state the clarification.

MR AYENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is as to whether Government has set any benchmark for people who fall in the category of Mzee Wacha-Olwol to be granted ex-gratia. Such people are many, especially those who served as county chiefs and those who served in government who left office without ceremony and may not have had a direct input in the manner in which they went out. Thank you. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think managing this reward for single persons may be a little difficult. I would like to think that for us to manage it very efficiently, we limit them to only former presidents and vice-presidents’ families. Otherwise, if we continue in that line of senior citizens, you may end up having all Members of Parliament, who are also senior citizens, demanding to be rewarded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but there is already a law that takes care of those people.

MR MAJEGERE: Yes, there is a law, but there is that presidential directive where the other colleague’s demands fall.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with my colleague for raising this matter. We have a number of senior citizens who are suffering. They served this country by putting in a lot, and they never stole any public funds as we see today many public servants do before constructing many houses. The senior citizens I am talking about genuinely served this country before retiring. We need to recognize the fact that their retirement benefits are so small that they cannot live on them. 

There is an elder in Kabale District, Rukiga, called Kisamunyu. This old man was a Member of Parliament but also served in the East African Community as the chairperson. The state seems to have ignored such people. So, they have no resort to satisfy their financial needs. It is therefore important to give people of this nature support in one way or another either by revising the pensions that they are currently getting to match with the current cost of living, or find some token for them in form of ex-gratia as my colleague has suggested.

MS ANITE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue we are discussing is a very important one. As a young person yet to grow into a senior citizen, it is very important that I raise my voice. The information I would like to give my honourable citizen is that already Government is supporting some retired senior citizens; for example, at our last Women’s Day cerebrations in Nebbi, I witnessed some citizens receiving some funds. So, when my honourable colleague says that Government is doing nothing, I start wondering whether actually that is the case. 

However, what I would like to add is that we need to be very specific and say that maybe that is not enough. We also need to come out very clearly with the categories of people that we need to see Government extend help to. Thank you.

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Jack Sabiiti, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that Government has the Old Persons Scheme, which was launched by the President some time back. What we need to do now is to request the Minister of Public Service to come and give us more information on this scheme. Otherwise, it is not true that Government is doing nothing about this situation. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I did not say that Government is doing nothing. What I was trying to put across is that we should not have a selective policy in regard to this issue. We must have a general policy instead, for the senior citizens to live happily after retirement, by looking at pensions and any other little things they are giving to some. There must be a general policy to ensure our senior citizens live a happy life after retiring. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am happy that all sides are agreeing that senior citizens should be looked after. This is very important because I want to see the Prime Minister live a decent life in Kanungu, after retiring. That is why I am worried. 

We met the former Vice-President, H.E. Wandira Specioza Kazibwe, the chairperson of Microfinance Institutions. You are aware she has been dipping her hands into the coffers out of frustration. I think this is very dangerous. If you had paid her, she would not have dipped her hands in the coffers. That is a clear indicator that we need to come up with a clear policy on how to deal with those citizens who made contributions in public offices and also those citizens that my sister is talking about in the villages who contributed in farming and other things, and they are treated differently. So, we must come up with a good policy to handle this. 

This time I want to ask the Prime Minister to help me. What have you done about my former Speaker, who was my MP, the late Wapa? I have not seen our share of that contribution to him. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, maybe you could also guide on the timeframes and things like that so that people can have an idea of what they can think about. The honourable minister, Muruli Mukasa, said the case of Wacha-Olwol came to Cabinet and the issue was because they were three, they did not know whether the share for one president should be split into three, and other related matters. When can these issues be resolved? The honourable member says the old man is sick and something could happen to him, which might not be good, and yet these monies could help him do some things.

Also, the law is clear on the surviving people of former presidents, former prime ministers and people of this nature. What progress is being made in the implementation for former presidents Gen. Lutwa, Milton Obote; and in the case of the late Apollo Milton Obote, he has a widow that is living. The law makes specific provisions about how they should be treated. Maybe you could guide on what Government is doing on this. 

11.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When hon. Betty Amongi brought this matter to my attention yesterday, I actually wrote a note to her suggesting that the best way of handling this is to raise it as a question for oral answer. The advantage of doing that is we get opportunity to prepare, on our side, so that we can give you a concrete and realistic response. 

The only thing I can say now is that I will ask the minister responsible to prepare a comprehensive report covering all those so that he comes to Parliament as soon as possible to update Parliament and the country. He will give updates on what Government has done and is planning to do - whether by way of implementation in terms of payment or where new legislation may be required - and how far we have gone in preparation for that.

I would not find a problem in the payment of the former triumvirate, the three - the late Nyamuconco, my friend Mzee Yoweri Wacha-Olwol, and Saul Musoke. Shs 500 million can be paid now as we sort out whether to pay more or not, and when we should pay it. These people are aged and they obviously require a lot of support, like Mzee Wacha-Olwol who is sickly. So, I will push that this be done as soon as possible as we wait to resolve the matter whether they should be paid individually or collectively share the Shs 500 million, or whether this is too small as the President indicated in his letter. That is all I can say at this time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the business of today is the business we have been running for the last few days. I am looking at the time and the numbers we have in the House and I am wondering whether we are able to go to the next item. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, in light of the numbers, the only thing we can do is debate without taking decisions, and I am not sure it is a prudent approach. So, I wish to propose that we adjourn until 2 O’clock and we carry out mobilisation. This is because if we debate now and then people come in the afternoon, they will start all over again. So, my proposal is that we adjourn now, come back in the afternoon, hopefully with the numbers, so that we go straight into decision making.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually we have passed the debate stage; we are at committee stage and at committee stage we do not debate. We will be dealing with a specific amendment and there will be no general debate on those issues. 

If we are unable to go to committee stage on account of the numbers - I am advised that some committees had scheduled business. They had invited members of the public to come but could not send them back on short notice. So, they are already in some meetings. So, it might be appropriate for us to suspend the House at this moment and resume at 2 O’clock. The House suspended to 2 O’clock this afternoon.

(The House was suspended at 11.37 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.34 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in accordance with rule 160(6) of our Rules of Procedure, the acting Government Chief Whip, hon. Daudi Migereko, has made the following changes and re-designated people as follows: 

1.	Hon. Turyahikayo Mary Paula from vice chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Information and Communication Technology to chairperson of the same committee;

2. 	Hon. Bagiire Vincent re-designated as the vice chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Information and Communication Technology;

3. 	Hon. Mulindwa John Brian has been relocated from the Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs to the Sessional Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry.  

Honourable members, we had finished with matters of public importance in the morning and we are now going straight to the order paper.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, you will recall sometime back I wanted to bring a motion to this Parliament in respect to the national information security system commonly known as the ID project. I was advised that this matter is being handled by the ICT Committee. However, according to my information, it appears that the ICT Committee is not giving it the necessary attention and yet this is a very serious matter. I am wondering whether this committee was given a timeframe within which to bring to this Parliament its findings in respect to this project. 

This is a very serious project and very many Ugandans are waiting to be given identity cards and also be able to enjoy the outputs of this project. The government has sunk in a lot of money. The purpose of raising this matter was to advise Government in respect to funding this project. It is my prayer, Mr Speaker, that this committee be given a timeframe within which it can be able to present its report for debate on the Floor of Parliament. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was raised here and referred to the Committee of ICT; is the chairperson here? 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable member and the House is that the issue of national identity cards issuance is being handled by two ministries. One is the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is the mother ministry that has the mandate to control immigration and the like. They co-opted NITA to work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs assured us yesterday - the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs - that next week they will be presenting a comprehensive programme that they are following to implement the whole process. So, like he said, the Ministry of Internal Affairs will be in a position to update the House next week. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Gallery this afternoon we have student leaders of St Andrew Kaggwa Senior Secondary School, Kasaala who are represented by hon. Latif Ssebaggala Ssengendo, MP Kawempe North Constituency. They have come to observe the business of today. You are welcome. 

2.40
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a matter of public concern pertaining to the need to protect the Uganda Museum. As Shadow Minister of Water and Environment, I have received information that the Uganda Government has sold land on which the Uganda Museum is situated to a foreign investor to construct a 60-storey building. 

This is a matter of public concern because the Uganda Museum is the national symbol of our heritage. It was founded in 1908 and took shape, in its present state, way back in 1945. We are all proud to see a house of history that houses relics of artifices that belong to every part of Uganda. The Uganda Museum is priceless, a symbol of natural wealth with intrinsic values which cannot be purchased by any dimension of money. I am reliably informed that the museum may be dismantled any time from now. I am also informed that the land title for that land is not found anywhere as I speak right now. 

It is on record that sometime back in the past a renowned professor, Prof. Maathai Wangari, whom providence called, once fought tooth and nail to stop a development of that kind germinating in Uhuru Park, Nairobi. I am reliably informed that after failing to get that project take off in Nairobi, the proprietors have now found a dumping ground in Kampala at Kitante where they want to construct the same.

Environmentally speaking, it will be disastrous because even the parking space to accommodate the requirements of such a building, by architectural standards, would not be tenable. So, I am making noise, and honourable noise, in defence of that great and yet important place. Let the Government of Uganda state to us whether the rumour, which is being cited, is true or false. If the project is ongoing, we would like to know. We would also like to know where the land title is. I beg to move. 

MS CHELANGAT: Mr Speaker, I am the vice chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry but we have not got any communication from anywhere that the museum is under any threat. Is the honourable member in order to misinform the House and make noise in the House when he is not a member of the committee? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as by law established. We neither engage, nor deal in nor perpetrate any rumour mongering. We act on facts, and it is on facts that we pass laws and policies. So, we are not permitted to start peddling rumours and related matters in the Chamber of the House. The hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi said he heard rumours; we are not going to start discussing rumours in this House. That would not be very honourable for the House. I do not know what he meant by the noise that he qualified as “honourable noise”. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Those are not rumours. I am a Member of Parliament who also doubles as shadow Minister in charge of the Environment. The building in anticipation would cause some environmental calamities if it was allowed to be constructed. So, with humility, I would like the Government of Uganda through the Leader of Government Business to demystify the “rumours”, if they are rumours at all. (Applause)  In the absence of that, I would take it that what has been reported to me is correct. So, I humbly beg the government to demystify the rumours, if they are rumours at all. As Member of Parliament, I have a right to demand and I am so demanding. 

THE DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you going to proceed with the statement of government business for the week starting with next week? Let us allow the honourable member to make a comment first.

2.46
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not answering my honourable friend, the shadow minister, but what he has raised has made me also think of the people in Uganda who have developed a culture of taking public land. It is related to what he has just mentioned. In fact, we might call it a rumour but eventually the rumour will come true because we have seen it elsewhere.

I think this government must come up because if you go to schools, people have surrounded most school land. If you go to Kitante here, Kololo, and even Makerere University recently lost in court. They have now appealed but they were losing property worth billions. What is it that is happening and causing people to grab public land here and there and there is nobody concerned?

This is serious. In fact, up country it has spread to even churches. Initially, churches and the small local government parishes used to have land. This land is being encroached upon; people grab it and get titles. I am wondering what is happening to our land reform. Mr Speaker, this is a concern that we should take seriously. Thank you.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, when hon. Lukyamuzi spoke, he alleged that he had heard rumours but from the content of his submission, it appeared as if the shadow minister responsible for the matters he was raising had heard them from reliable sources of information-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was for him to say. If he did not say so, we cannot start putting words in his mouth.

MS KABASHARIRA: Mr Speaker, I conclude that maybe the sectors concerned - This is all over; if you go to agriculture, you will find it and the other time I was in Jinja and saw it. If you go to education, it is the schools. If you go to -(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague is that the other day I was in a village in Rwampara and the sub-county land was actually being given out to an unknown investor. The title is missing, and it was mentioned in the newspapers. When I raised this to the sub-county chairman, I got a number of blows; I was punched. I do not know whether I would raise this as a matter of national importance but I am looking at people stealing government land-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for you to raise it as a matter of public importance means it has to be urgent. You have already been punched, so it is not urgent. (Laughter)

MR MUJUNI: Mr Speaker, we could laugh now; today it is me, tomorrow it is someone else. We are meant to monitor government projects including government land. In the event that we have a situation where people are encroaching on government land in our sight, I think it is only important that this House pronounces itself, maybe through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development or the local governments, that these lands that are not surveyed-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still giving information?

MR MUJUNI: Yes. That the lands that are not surveyed be surveyed urgently otherwise we are losing a lot of public land.

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think when we talk about the subject of land, we should be conversant with the Constitution because this subject was well dealt with by the Constitution. When one says government land, “government” has a definition, which is Government of Uganda. The land of government or the land, which belongs to government, is under the control of Uganda Land Commission.

There is also what we call public land, and that land is under the control of the district land board. Also, when you talk about public land, there are two types. There is, for instance, mailo, lease, and free hold that belongs to the individuals that have got leases. The other chunk of land we have is the customary. I think the problem with customary land is, how do you own customary land? 

So, I think you should be able to specify which type of land you are talking about; government land belongs to Uganda Land Commission and it has the powers to protect it.

MS KABASHARIRA: Mr Speaker, I am closing -(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of government land grabbing is an issue that all of us should take seriously. In the past week, issues of grabbing land in Sembabule District were in the press, and it is not a rumour but facts. More than 15,000 land grabbers came to Sembabule District in Lwemiyaga County. They came from as far as Masaka, Mubende, Kyengegwa, Kiruhura, Lyantonde and Kyenjojo. They were from about eight districts. They came to occupy land that belongs to Uganda Investment Authority, which is government land, and National Forestry Authority land. The Inspector-General of Police went to Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule, and drove these people out but that was just chasing them and I hear they are trying to come back. 

So, this is not a matter where we just have people grabbing land left and right and when they are chased, they come back. It is an issue that we should think through seriously. Why is it that at this time, or in many past in other regions, there were grabbers? That time they were called them Balaalo but this time these are not Balaalo but people who just come with hoes and pangas and say, “Here we are and this is our land”. I think colleagues, as she says it is not a rumour but a fact that should be of concern to each and every one of us here. I thank you.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you so much, honourable members, for giving information and I thank His Excellency the Vice-President for the clarification. That leads me to state that people are using government bodies - Uganda Land Commission and district land boards - to grab this land. There are some people here who masquerade around those offices. They are trained and know when a lease is about to expire anywhere and they go, fill their forms very well and take the land, including school land and hospital land. I do not know if it is greed or what, but it a serious and rampant thing. Everyone is now looking around, including some big shots in Government, to see where they can grab land and they often succeed. The government should help us because we need this land. Thank you.

2.57
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no smoke without fire, and I am getting terribly worried about certain institutional lands. 

I was in the Museum in 1958 and at that time there were regalia and other things in that museum. I went back there in 1964. It is a place which no one should joke around with. In my view, although it is a rumour, let it be taken seriously, so that at least we in Parliament say if it is still smoke and the fire is not yet burning, let the fire not burn. (Applause) Mr Speaker, there was that rumour of UBC land in Bugolobi and we brushed it aside as a rumour. Now there is no more UBC land in Bugolobi. (Applause) There are many examples. 

Just last week in my own area of birth, somebody came with documents that tend to come from Uganda Land Commission. He said they were bringing surveyors to survey that portion of land – moreover 90 percent of it is Mayanja Swamp - because it was public land; I do not know the definition of public land. We vehemently refused because we were born there and we have some land there. This situation is getting out of control and as Parliament we must insist that these issues must be curtailed; otherwise, our people will no longer have swamps, land and even institutions of importance like the Museum will have no land. I am not about to accept such a situation.

3.00
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It seems to me that hon. Lukyamuzi could have tainted his message by using the word “rumour”. What I know is that most investigations start with rumours, and we cannot afford to completely ignore if the rumour is there. 

What I want to say now is that it is not just a rumour. I am a member of the trade committee and have been privy to information concerning the Museum land. It is true that the plans are in advanced stages to erect an ultra-modern building on that site where the Museum stands. My question is: When does a Member of Parliament seek to know what is taking place? Should we wait for the new building’s foundation to be erected before asking what is going on? 

If there was nothing sinister to be hidden about the whole transaction, why shouldn’t a statement be made on the land before this House? I suggest that the lands minister makes such a statement before this House. What I know is that there is a partnership to construct an ultra-modern building on that land, which is Government land. Thank you.

3.02
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative, Central): Mr Speaker, I sympathise with members expressing this concern regarding what many call grabbing of public land. However, I want us to distinguish between what is legal and illegal. The land we are talking about is, among others, vested in the Uganda Land Commission. I am making reference to the Constitution, Article 239. One of the functions of Uganda Land Commission and the district land boards is to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in land.

Mr Speaker, the point I am trying to make here is that legally and constitutionally, the Government, through Uganda Land Commission and the district land boards, has the power to buy and sell land, whether it is public land or not. Therefore, I am advising those people who are opposed to the sale of public land to come and amend the Constitution or the law itself. (Laughter)

MR RICHARD TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The subject of land is very sensitive. I represent a constituency where more than 95 percent of my voters know the importance of land, just like in any other constituency. 

Picking from that line, we have been reading in the newspapers lately that the Ministry of Lands is advertising that those on customary land should go and get certificates for customary ownership. We wonder whether we, as leaders from such constituencies, can be briefed on how these certificates are being acquired. This is because wrong people are going behind our backs and getting certificates for customary ownership. When land is owned customarily, it does not belong to any individual but the whole clan, so in whose name is this certificate written? I seek clarification on this area.

MR SSEKANDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, as I had earlier stated, it is important that we get conversant with the provisions of the Constitution tackling land. If you look at Article 237 of the Constitution, it talks about land ownership and it talks about how you acquire land - customary, freehold, mailo and leasehold. It provides thus: 

“(4) On the coming into force of this Constitution – 
(a)all Uganda citizens owning land under customary tenure may acquire certificates of ownership in a manner prescribed by Parliament.” So, it is possible for somebody owning land under customary tenure to get a certificate, and I think that is the certificate that the minister was talking about.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give my honourable colleague in relation to what the Vice-President has clarified is that – some of us also went to law school - we are asking why that process is taking place in Kampala. People down there have not been sensitised and no one has been informed. The LCs have not been involved but you see people at the Media Centre getting titles of customary land, which probably belongs upcountry. 

So, what we are saying is: why is the process happening as if Government is in a hurry to do something? It must go alongside sensitising those who own the land from down there before it reaches the Media Centre. That people are being awarded land titles at the Media Centre may have far reaching implications for those at the grassroots. I think that is the concern and the information I want to give my honourable colleague, hon. Richard Todwong.

MR TODWONG: Mr Speaker, basing on the fact that we as leaders and the local community are not informed and we are just reading about it from the media, in the event that that exercise is being carried out, we plead with this Parliament; we request you, members, that we inform the ministry involved to halt the exercise until all stakeholders are in harmony with what they are doing. (Applause)

3.08
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to commend hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for bringing up the issue of the Uganda Museum. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I want to tell you that I will stand to be counted as one of those members who are going to make loud noise about the Uganda Museum. A country without history, culture or heritage is no country at all. Even UNESCO goes throughout the world trying to identify places of heritage. 

While the former Vice-President visited Uganda Museum in 1964/65, I visited Uganda Museum in 1968 and I was very happy to see the relics of the Bagisu in the Uganda Museum. Now, are you people telling us that you want to destroy our history? A country without history and heritage is no country at all. 

The grabbing of land in Uganda is on the increase everywhere. You take a newspaper and you read about land grabbing everywhere in the country. In Mbale, they grabbed Uhuru Park and the lorry park, and I found it very difficult to relocate the market vendors in Mbale. As I speak, the market vendors were relocated to a piece of land, which was taken away and grabbed through the same dubious ways, and the market caught fire. As I speak, all the market vendors have lost their property. Where are they going to be relocated? 

The issue of land titles should not come as an excuse. It should not come as an excuse that Uganda Museum has no title. It should not come as an excuse at all! This place belongs to Uganda and it is the history of all Ugandans and of all tribes. It is the Uganda Museum. 

So, honourable members, we must join hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to make loud noise, like we did for Mabira Forest, that Uganda Museum should not go. These are places of prestige. How will our children know in future that there was history of different tribes in Uganda? I request all Members of Parliament; the Museum does not belong to any one tribe but it belongs to all of us. It belongs to Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded the time allotted for this kind of matter- 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think it is good to wrap up the issue which is being talked about. I think it is important this House addresses its mind to Article 26 sub-section (2) of the Constitution which says, “No person shall be compulsorily deprived of property or any interest in or right over property...” In this case, what I would want you to guide us on is where property is owned by Government in the interest of the country. It is land where there is a hospital, a school or prison; that is land being held in the interest of the people of Uganda. That is what I understand. 

Now, where I want clarification and guidance is: does the government have the absolute power to transfer this property from Shimoni Primary School, for example, to an investor without first seeking the authority of the owners of the land? This is where we need clarification. That is how land for schools and hospitals has been given to investors, but the ultimate owner of that land held by Government is in the interest of you and me, the people of Uganda. I seek clarification on whether the government has the absolute power to give that land to an investor without first seeking the authority of the owner of the land. Thank you.

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Speaker, I want to inform honourable members that this Parliament land where we are seated is owned by Uganda Land Commission. The Butabika land, part of which was given away, was given away by the owner, the Uganda Land Commission. Mulago Hospital buildings belong to Uganda Land Commission. The hospital is simply a user but the owner is the Uganda Land Commission. So is the State House.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the former Speaker, who is now the Vice-President, has actually given me greater fear. I was of the view that Uganda Land Commission is run by Government and is a department of Government and is being managed in the interest of the people of Uganda. Can it therefore be clarified even further who owns Uganda Land Commission? Is it the Buganda government, the Lango District Council; who is it? Who owns Uganda Land Commission? Who is managing Uganda Land Commission? I want to know so that I can go there and put my petition before that Uganda Land Commission. 

I was of the view that Uganda Land Commission belongs to the government, is a department of the government and is an institution run by Government in the interest of the people of Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Uganda Land Commission is a body corporate; it has perpetual succession, it can be sued, it can sue in its own name and it can own property in its own names. That is the Uganda Land Commission. However, it is a constitutional commission for the Government of the Republic of Uganda.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have, with great respect and humility, listened to the Vice-President. You and I must have studied the law of trust and what that brings in mind is that Uganda Land Commission is holding this land in trust for us. Where there is a trust, there are beneficiaries. That is why we own a hospital, a school and any other public utility. The Uganda Land Commission -(Ms Nebandah rose)- I will take her information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had risen on a point of guidance.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for that wise guidance again. Where is the interest of the beneficiaries protected if we take the interpretation which, again with great respect and humility, is erroneous, that because Uganda Land Commission is holding the title the beneficiaries are not reflected anywhere? 

I will give an example. We have a provision in the Registration of Titles Act about administrators and executors, that they hold that property and they hold it absolutely. That was the original interpretation. Courts have gone ahead to say, when you go to buy land held by an administrator, you have a duty and you are put on notice that there are beneficiaries whose interests you must protect. 

If our interpretation is going to be that Uganda Land Commission holds the title and, therefore, it must sell anyhow, it must dispose anyhow, the guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is: how are the beneficiaries of this land protected if that is the absolute ownership of Uganda Land Commission? Of course, the beneficiaries of the fraud orchestrated at times by Uganda Land Commission will say, “We bought from Uganda Land Commission” and they will always smile, but you smile and this land is owned for the people. Go to the Constitution, Government does not own land; it acquires land for specific purposes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable asked for guidance. Article 239 of the Constitution stipulates the functions of the Uganda Land Commission - “The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament”.

That is what the Uganda Land Commission does. The land it owns is for the Government. It holds and manages this land for the Government of Uganda. Holding and managing is for and on behalf of the Government of Uganda. Now, the authority of how Government of Uganda uses its land, land that is vested in the Government - because as the Vice-President said, there are distinctions between land that is held by public and land that is held by the government, which is called Government land or institutional land and things like this. There are pieces of land that are registered in the names of Uganda Land Commission. How that land is used is based upon policies of the government, as government directs it to be used. Government, of course, involves all the arms of the government. 

So, if the Government should decide that we want this particular land for this purpose and it is in the names of Uganda Land Commission, it will be used for that purpose. I am not saying in disregard of anything. You have asked about the land in Shimoni, the land in other places that possibly have been relocated; those would fall within that category - that the land is owned by the Government of Uganda, held and managed by the Uganda Land Commission. That is what the Constitution is saying - “Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda”. So, if you acquire it, it becomes yours, in my opinion. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much again for the indulgence. It is important to guide us on the difference between ownership and holding. The responsibility of Uganda Land Commission is to hold and manage. I have been reminded by my honourable friend, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, that this is government land; Uganda Land Commission is only holding and managing. Managing cannot be extended to mean you lease and even give freehold out of those leases. It does not include and extend to divesting itself of that land, and that is the problem we are having. Government wants to-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but hon. Sseggona, the Uganda Land Commission holds and manages land vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda. When you acquire, you own it. The Uganda Land Commission holds that land and manages it on behalf of the Government of Uganda but the Uganda Land Commission is not the owner of the land. That one is very clear. You do not even need any interpretation on that.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought the guidance that hon. Cecilia Ogwal sought was: where does Government derive power to say this land should be allocated for a particular use or investment for that matter? That is the guidance. 

I want to invite the House and hon. Cecilia Ogwal in particular to look at Article 242 of the Constitution. If I may read it: “Government may, under laws made by Parliament and policies made from time to time, regulate the use of land”.  We have the Land Act and other legislations regarding how you acquire and how you utilise land. We have the Environment Management Act. All these are legislations that cover the usage of land. Government, within this mandate stipulated under Article 242, can take decisions regarding investments in this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking clarifications, honourable minister? 

MR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from two people. The first is you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is, if Uganda Land Commission is managing public land and also goes ahead to sell this land, the beneficiaries get freehold titles and that ownership is in perpetuity. In other words, the stock of land diminishes as time tends to infinity. Is that management or is it an agency for selling? This is the clarification I am seeking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Uganda Land Commission is holding and managing land acquired by the Government of Uganda. The authority on that land, the ownership of that land, is in the Government of Uganda. It is the Government of Uganda which directs the Uganda Land Commission on what to do with its land. Ordinarily, that is what should happen. So, the complainant, ordinarily, will have to be the Government of Uganda saying, “Uganda Land Commission, you have not used my land the way I wanted you to use it”. 

Let me give you a very simple example. Hon. Fungaroo might own land and then by owning that land, he gives the power of attorney to somebody to manage that land. His power of attorney does not prescribe any limits on what that person can do with that management authority he has given. I am giving you a scenario. So, should hon. Fungaroo find a power of attorney that says that “you can do anything with this land” and this power of attorney is irrevocable, in essence you have passed on every right to the holder of the power of attorney. I am giving you an example. Essentially, he has passed all rights on that land to the holder of the power of attorney. It is irrevocable so he cannot call it back, and then he has given authority to do anything with the land. That would be the situation in private land and private land dealings.

In the case of government land, let us say the land on which Shimoni Primary School sat was Government land, owned by the Government of Uganda but managed by the Uganda Land Commission. The Government of Uganda then decides that there is need to do something with that particular piece of land on account of its location and it is important to relocate the school. So the Government then directs that the policy should be executed that way by the Uganda Land Commission. Would Uganda Land Commission say “no”? It would not say no. (Interjections) 

You are drawing me into this debate. I am not supposed to be doing this. So, from now on, if you want any clarification, it should not be from the Chair. I have done my best in the circumstances. It should now be across the benches. So, you point out the person you are seeking clarification from, not the Chair anymore. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our attention has been drawn to Article 242 by hon. Kiyingi, to whom I owe and I give all my respect. When you read Article 242, first read the short title; the short title is general. If you want to read it comparatively, you are going to find other short titles - District Land Boards, Uganda Land Commission. Article 242 does not apply to the situation we are talking about because it provides, “Government may, under laws made by Parliament and policies made from time to time, regulate the use of land”. That is the use of land generally, whether it is my land or Government land. That is number one.

Number two, in interpreting this use of holding and management of land, I am yet to find an explanation from somebody more intelligent and experienced than what I am; if Government divests itself of a piece of land and gives it to say hon. Kabakumba Masiko, how is Government going to manage this land in accordance with the Constitution? Government or Uganda Land Commission can only manage it when it is in its hands. So, management cannot extend by any stretch of imagination of the English language to divesting itself of the land and giving it to individuals or even selling it. That is not management. Thank you. (Mr Asuman Kiyingi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe first listen to the clarification points then you respond. You might have to record then you respond more comprehensively. 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think my learned colleague is misleading the House when he says you can only manage by owning. You can actually manage and regulate without owning. That is what governments are there for. You set conditions for ownership. You can have a freehold but you may be unable to construct on that freehold land. The land may be freehold, yours, but this area is for agriculture. So, you cannot say, if there is any freehold given, Government has totally divested of its responsibility to manage and direct the usage of that land. It has not. In any case, I am not even conceding that the Uganda Land Commission has been giving freeholds. What I know-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me now call the House to order. This matter was raised as a matter of urgent public importance. I used my discretion to allow longer discussions because of the interest that was developed. According to the rules, I am limited to 15 minutes. When a matter is raised under this particular rule, the discussion should take 15 minutes. We have exhausted way beyond 15 minutes. Go to the next item.   

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the whole House for consideration of the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the committee resolves itself into a committee of the whole House to examine the amendments to the Rules of Procedure.
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

Rule 11

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the House discussed at length our proposal in rule 11 yesterday and just for purposes of the record, the proposal is that we amend Rule 11 by deletion and replacement in the following terms: 

“1. The nine Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament not from among Members of Parliament representing as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda.

2. The election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly shall be held in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix B to these rules.

3. Members of the Assembly shall report to Parliament on the activities of the Assembly in accordance with Appendix C.”
Mr Chairman, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment as proposed by the chair is clear. It has been restated many times now and we discussed for a long time –

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I am the one who raised that amendment. My problem was, since we have been talking about numerical strength of a political party, and the former rule which we are trying to amend strengthens and emphasises the issue of figuring out the number which each party is to send to the East African Legislative Assembly – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, is the hon. Kakooza James, who attempted to be a minister, in order - (Interjections) – But he attempted to be a minister; you are not aware? Is hon. Kakooza in order to divert the House into an argument which does not arise now because the clause we are debating is cut and pasted from the article in the Treaty? Is he in order not to apprise himself with the latest trend of events in this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we had exhaustively examined the proposed amendments and we had all agreed that this is a copy of what is provided for in the Treaty, which is not negotiable or cannot be amended in the terms presented here. The details of what hon. Kakooza is bringing he knows should have come in the appendix when we come to that matter, and he should have raised it at that time. So, hon. Kakooza is out of order. I put the question to the amendment to replace the existing rule 11 in the terms proposed by the chair of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 11, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 12

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the amendments proposed to rule 12 are withdrawn. 

Rule 195

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to rephrase the entire rule 195 in the following terms: 
“Contempt of Parliament: 
(1) An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a Member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his or her duties...” – (Interjections) – Mr Chairman, this is on record. I read it and there was debate on it. So I beg to move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that we remove the existing rule 195 and replace it with the drafting presented and read over a few times by the chair of the committee. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, you will recall that by the time we adjourned discussion on this matter, our position as Government was that this is a very substantive issue. The issue of contempt of Parliament has not been defined before in our laws. Your attention was drawn, in the last meeting we had, to the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act, which defines the privileges and immunities of Members, the powers of Parliament and how the institution of Parliament should be protected from undue interference. Our view is that these provisions are not bad but we need more time to look at them and codify them in a substantive Act of Parliament. So, I would like to pray that we do it that way. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, hon. Fox Odoi, the chairman of the committee, and the members of the committee were right to advise this Parliament that we needed a provision that relates to contempt of Parliament in our rules. 

We already have a situation where we cannot deal with acts of contempt in the House. To that extent, - I want to talk as the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances - we have had endless promises by ministers that they shall bring this one in the parent Act. The moment we pass the rules, you will stay three or four years without seeing any particular move being made to amend the Administration of Parliament Act. 

Hon. Adolf Mwesige himself, when we were passing these rules, failed to make a commitment as to whether he would bring substantial amendments to the Constitution that relate to the Prime Minister. We had passed the rules and when we got up to ask, “Can you give an assurance to the House when you will bring it”, he refused to commit himself, and it is on the Hansard – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It was hon. Ruhindi.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Oh, most obliged, Mr Chairman. So I would like to plead with Members of Parliament that we have this provision of contempt of Parliament in our Rules of Procedure. We are not targeting anyone. As an institution, we need to protect ourselves from acts which are contemptuous to this institution. Let us not think of the past; we should think of the future because anything can happen. 

I really would like to persuade Members of Parliament; we are not creating an offence. Offences can be created; the Penal Code is clear and so is the Constitution. We are just creating rules which will regulate us among ourselves, and in case anyone from outside pinches one of us, they can also be regulated under the rule. So it is not about pulling strings with anyone. It will not be legally fatal to have it both in the Rules of Procedure and in the Administration of Parliament Act.  So, I would appeal to members, without further opening debate, that we need a definition of contempt of Parliament in our Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I just ask one question: is breach of the Rules of Procedure a criminal offence? Can a breach of our Rules of Procedure have sanctions within the rules of how it can be handled by the House? If you put offences or criminal offences in Acts outside this House, would that process still be handled by this House or it would now go to the courts of law? Are we still talking about the same thing?

MS AMONGI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. When the committee on rules was looking at the issue of contempt - whether or not the Prime Minister acted in contempt - I appeared before the committee and the Acts that I submitted to the committee were from South Africa, UK and Australia. It is true that in all those countries, they define what contempt is; they define what constitutes contempt and they also define penalties. It is also true that it is an act on its own under the privileges and immunities of all those countries. 

If we are going to put it in the rules and we leave it the way it is, we will not have addressed the fundamental issue. We will have defined it, we will have described what constitutes it but as it is now, there are no penalties. So what have we cured in the circumstances? –

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. Our Rules of Procedure adequately provide for penalties in respect of breach of privileges of this House, including the proposed privilege to deal with contempt. One of the penalties is the suspension from the House. So I believe and call upon my colleagues that we adopt this rule as it is important for us. If Government wants in future to come and expound on it in an Act to be made by ourselves again, it is free to do so but let us have this rule in our Rules of Procedure.         

MS AMONGI: I thank you. I am not disagreeing but I am only saying that if we are going to put it here the way it is, it is not as detailed as it should be. In other laws, there is definition of contempt, acts that constitute breach of those, complaints and prescribed penalties. There are, for example, about 15 acts but in each of these 15 acts, in those countries you find what penalties are associated with each one of them. So to me if you just leave it like this, it is not detailed enough. 

Disobeying a resolution of Parliament, for example, in the case of South Africa and Australia was contempt, and the penalty was there; the penalty was an apology. The person who disobeyed would come and apologise and if he opts not to apologise, he would be fined – how much money to pay. For me, the way it is–(Interruption)- You want to give me more information?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving my honourable colleague, hon. Betty Amongi, is that we are just trying to state what amounts to contempt of Parliament. If you breach any of them, then you end up at the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee that will hear your case on its merit and then they can recommend to Parliament that so and so must apologise, so and so must withdraw or so and so must be suspended. We cannot state the offences because this is not a penal law. We are just stating what amounts to contempt of Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MWESIGE: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank hon. Amongi for giving way. Even the disciplinary committee cannot make a recommendation on sanctions that are not codified in the law. So, its recommendations must also be prescribed. They cannot just make recommendations in the abstract. Contempt of court is an offence and I do not see why contempt of Parliament cannot be an offence. Contempt of court is an offence and Parliament is as strong and prominent an institution as court. 

If you say, like hon. Niwagaba has said, that the sanction for contempt of Parliament will be suspension from the House, what happens to non-members of the House who are found in contempt of Parliament? So, I reiterate my position that we look at the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act, study the matter of contempt of Parliament properly, codify these offences and create sanctions. There is no doubt that contempt of Parliament should be punished. I do not see the reason why it should not. There is really nothing to cover but we want to do things in a proper way.

MS AMONGI: I thank you. In the case of Tanzania, for example, if newspapers publish something that is contemptuous, it is defined within the penalties. There are many other cases in countries about people who have acted in contempt of Parliament outside and who are not Members of Parliament and in their laws, the penalty is prescribed. So, in those countries, it has been made very difficult for people to report anyhow about Parliament. It is difficult for people to write opinions or talk about Parliament because it is prescribed. Actually, if you arrested a Member of Parliament without following certain procedure, it is contemptuous and also the penalty is prescribed.  

So, my major issue is that we have not prescribed penalties and this will be empty without penalties. In those laws, there are more than 20 penalties for each of what constitutes contempt. I will plead with the chairman that if we really need it to be in the Rules of Procedure, can we amend to put the penalties here? Will it be okay with the chairman that we amend and prescribe penalties for each of these? What would his opinion be on the matter? (Interruption)

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chairman of the committee because I think we should not forget the genesis that prompted this issue of contempt. The genesis obviously comes from what happened some weeks or a month ago when this august House made a resolution commanding honourable ministers to step aside because of what is alleged to have been done. When this was not done, there was a complaint of contempt of Parliament against those ministers. Eventually, a court of law pronounced itself on this issue, that the command that had been embodied in the resolution was made without mandate. What would happen if the House makes a decision without mandate or an invalid decision which somebody decides to ignore; would he or she be accused of contempt? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: My answer is in the affirmative, and this is the reason: who declares the decision of Parliament invalid? It certainly cannot be an individual. It can only be the courts of law. So, if you want to challenge the decisions of the House or the validity of the decisions of this august House, you have recourse to the courts of law. You cannot on your own declare them invalid. 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to find out from the chairman of the committee whether he has had the occasion to look at the decisions of the Constitutional Court in the matter of Severino against the Attorney-General. If he has done so, don’t you think that that decision has a direct bearing on what you are proposing in the amendment? 

MR SSEKANDI: What would happen if this House is dissatisfied with the way judges, for example of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the Supreme Court, conduct their business and a motion or a resolution is brought here to order the judges to step aside until investigations are carried out and they resist?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the heading of rule 195 is, “Complaints of Contempt of Parliament”. In other words, the concept of Contempt of Parliament is in the rules. If you look at rule 77, it says, “Defamatory statements to be investigated by Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline…” Statements that are construed to be defamatory have a process through which they are handled and there are sanctions that are given to give honour to the way we conduct business in the House. 

I still think that if it is put in an Act of Parliament outside this House, then it is outside the jurisdiction of this House to handle any issue to do with it and it then goes to court. If you put it in the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act, then it can no longer come to the House to take a decision on it. Would it not be proper to remain at sub rule (1) as proposed and take that concept to enlarge what is contained in 195 and leave all these other details for the committee to examine? 

If you took the proper definition of what amounts to contempt - “An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a Member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his or her duties or flaunts the dignity of Parliament or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce such a result shall be contempt of Parliament.” Suppose you agree on this as the -(Interjection)- If you define contempt to be this, it is the same as with rule 77 on a defamatory statement. 

What happens if you say there is a defamatory statement? “Whenever in the opinion of the Speaker or a person presiding in a Committee a statement made by a Member is prima facie defamatory of any person, the person presiding shall refer the matter for inquiry to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which shall report its findings to the House not later than 21 days after the matter is referred to it.” 

Wouldn’t it be proper to say, “if a matter is of complaints of contempt” like under rule 195? Maybe it could be structured this way and captured through that process, so that it is the committee to examine the extent of this conduct. The digression would be given to the committee to sit and adduce evidence and say “No, this does not amount to this or this amounts to this”, and they make recommendations that are decided upon by the House. 

Here under defamatory statements, you are required to render an apology. If you refuse to render that apology, it says, “Where a Member refuses to render an apology in accordance with sub rule (2), the Speaker, upon the circumstances of the matter being reported to him or her by the chairperson of the Rules, Privileges and Discipline committee, shall suspend that Member for the duration of the session.” It is in these rules. If you do that; for example, if you make defamatory statements inside this House, that is captured here. Would we not be perfectly in order to use this and use the same principle to capture contempt of Parliament?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I want to appreciate your guidance. Actually, in the Severino case which touched on this matter of contempt of Parliament, I think court acknowledged that the rules mention contempt of Parliament. However, the judges did say that our rules do not define what contempt is, and that is what the committee is trying to do. 

I think with your guidance, even that first part of rule 195 - the various acts - can be interpreted to mean that contempt of Parliament is now defined. What the Constitutional Court was saying was that our Rules of Procedure do not define what contempt of Parliament is. Now I think even that first part can be understood to mean that this is the definition. I think where the arguments are coming in are the acts which affect strangers. If we leave out part two, then I think we shall be safe and the interests of hon. Adolf Mwesige and his team will be accommodated. 

It is that second part, which talks about people from outside who would be guilty of this contempt, that we do not have offences for. But for purposes of contempt of Parliament related to members who are sitting in this House, the disciplinary measures and the penalties are clearly specified within our rules. 

Therefore, my submission is that we go with your guidance; we just take No (1) as the committee has suggested. Since the procedure and penalties are already provided for within the rules, we shall be covered. We shall have answered the issues raised by the judges in the Severino case. I thank you very much.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to appreciate your guidance especially on this subject matter of contempt. I am still on this issue of the courts especially the internal court. I also recognise the fact that we do not do retrospective legislation, so this legislation may not affect cases that are pending, but it is something that will help us in future. 

Mr Chairman, the very time we appeared before the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges – I agree with hon. Betty Amongi; yes, we appeared before it – we could not define it because it had not been defined as well. In the circumstances, we actually pleaded guilty because we had no definition. So, what is wrong with us Members defining what contempt means, now that it is in the Rules of Procedure?

It is in that regard, honourable members, that I request you to accept that we approve 1, 3 and we leave the question on the strangers to the amendment of the main Act. I thank you.

MR ODOI- OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we have had very involving consultations before coming to a common position that we propose to the House the adoption of rule 195, and I will read (1); “An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a Member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his/her duties or affront the dignity of Parliament or which tends, either directly or indirectly, to produce such a result, shall be contempt.” 

This is agreeable to both sides of the House. I would like to also say that I have been advised to drop the rest for further consideration. I beg to move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And three for the procedure?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, 3, 4 and 5 are actually transferred from 77(2) and (3), which you were talking about. Is that so?

MR ODOI- OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, honourable members, I put the question that rule 195 be amended in the terms proposed by the chairman of the committee now.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 195, as amended.

Proposed new rule, paragraph 94

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I want to congratulate the chairman of the committee for succeeding on this rule.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that we stood over proposal No.94 in the report on the insertion of a new rule. It is on business of committee not to lapse on prorogation of the House. That is paragraph 94.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, I recall it was together with 95 on lapse or reinstate of parliamentary business. Those two are proposed under 94 and 95.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, but Mr Chairman, allow me to give a very brief explanation on that proposal. The two rules are distinguishable. The first rule is in respect to business in the committees of the House at the time the session ends, which is usually in the month of May. You are aware that every May, Parliament is prorogued and new committees are constituted in June. 

So, what we are saying in our proposal in 94, is about business that is before the committee of the House at the time of prorogation. Our argument is that this is resource that we should not put to waste. The next committee can inherit and modify such work. It does not restrict that committee to adopt that work wholesomely.

Paragraph 95, however, relates to business that is in the House at the expiry of the term of Parliament. That is why I said they are distinguishable and that is the advice I got from the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, can I understand what prorogation is?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The committee was advised that at the expiry of every session, the House is prorogued.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but that is done at the end of the session. I thought that Parliament is prorogued at the end of its term. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, prorogation is done at the dissolution of Parliament. This is so because the Speaker, before Parliament is dissolved by expiry of its term, must formerly inform the country that the term of Parliament has come to an end and that it is thereby prorogued. Parliament is not prorogued at the end of every session. When the session ends, the Speaker just sends Members of Parliament on recess and after that, we resume another session. There is a difference between a sitting, a meeting, a session and the term of Parliament. The term ends by prorogation –(Interjections)– no, that is not lapsing. The act of dissolving Parliament at its end is called prorogation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Article 96 is about the dissolution of Parliament after the expiry of its term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, reflect on Articles 95 and 96 to give us the guidance. Is the word prorogation used in Article 95? Yes, I have seen it in Article 95(3) and it says: “The Speaker may, after consultations with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation.” That is at the end of the session. So, you are right, chairman of the committee.

And Article 96 is about dissolution and it says; “Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiry of its term as prescribed in Article 77 of this Constitution.”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, thank you for that guidance. Now that we know what prorogation is, then amendment 94 would serve no purpose. I am saying this because at the end of every session of Parliament, when new committees are constituted – I have not known, in the eleven years I have been here, that the new constituted committees start on fresh work. That is not possible because those committees will be serving the same Parliament. What I know is that new committees start exactly from where the previous committees ended. So, I am yet to be convinced on the value of this amendment. For example, if you have been a chairman of a committee and after one or two and half years they appoint another chairman, does that mean that the next committee starts everything afresh? Aren’t the committees having clerks?

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I think the purpose of this suggested amendment is to make sure there is no doubt left that the business that has been pending in the committees would be taken on simply because the Speaker has prorogued Parliament. That is important because at that time, the Speaker just breaks the session to start a new one.

In the first place, when documents are tabled here, they belong to the House rather than to the committees. We only send them to those committees for analysis and that is why business of that nature should not expire simply because Parliament has been prorogued. I support the amendment.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that you put the question that proposal No.94 do stand part of the rules. 

MR SSEKANDI: I think dissolution is different because it means the regime has gone away and a new regime is coming, starting with its own business. But last time, we brought a motion so that we own the business that had not been dealt with. That is different. In dissolution, the things expire, but provided – (Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Clarification -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Also, while you are seeking that clarification, address the use of dissolution in 94(2).

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and Vice-President. Before I go to 94(2), I would like to seek clarification from His Excellency. When the Chief Justice appeared for the election of the Speaker, some Members raised a question that since this was a new Parliament, we needed to have new rules because the rules were made by the last Parliament. The Chief Justice in his wise ruling said rules of Parliament are rules of Parliament and they must continue. Nobody challenged that.

Therefore, based on that principle, we have constitutional bodies set up by an Act of Parliament. They are required to produce reports. Some of those reports are laid before Parliament and Parliament dissolves. 

The clarification I am seeking is, for example, the Auditor-General’s report under Article 153, Electoral Commission, Human Rights Commission and other bodies, if Parliament gets dissolved, does that mean that the reports also expire? If the reports will not expire and the reports will remain reports of Parliament, does that mean it is only those reports that do not expire but other business expires? Because as we speak now, we are even handling –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, can we deal with that under 95? We need to first clear 94. That is how we are going to be able to move. 

MR EKANYA: Most obliged.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, there is a small correction on 94(2). The word, “dissolution” should be replaced with the word, “Prorogation”.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I was looking at (3) and I thought if we leave (1) and (2), it is enough, because part of what is to be addressed under (3) is already addressed under – because here it says, “A committee which is unable to complete its work before the expiration of its term or before the prorogation of the House, may report to the House that the committee has not been able to complete its work.” So, once you do that, it will automatically be given to the new committee. (Interjections)

That is handover of power. In reporting to the new committee, do you say the chairperson will now go to the new committee to report? I thought that was administrative, Mr Chairman. 

The Clerk will avail the report to the new chairperson of the new committee. So, it is cumbersome to leave it here. It is automatic that every new committee that comes will automatically be availed a copy. So, you really do not need it here. 

MR SSEKANDI: I think this particular provision is to make the chairperson of the previous committee courteous so that he hands over the reports and whatever he has to the new committee. That way, the new committee can look at it and if the report is helpful, then their business will be faster. So, it is a question of instilling courtesy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But still (3) is drafted in a passive way. It does not say who will do this courtesy. Can we modify it to say, “The chairman?” “Any preliminary report, memoranda or note that the committee may have taken – “

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: “…Shall be made available to the new committee by the outgoing chairperson.” (Interjections) Mr Chairman, I am advised –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Should we say, “The Clerk”.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, by the clerk. That is acceptable. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that will be the responsibility of the Clerk’s office to make these papers available to –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear now? With those suggested amendments, of course, “made avail” would have to be changed to “made available” or “to be available”.

Of course, when it comes to the actual numbering of the rules, the number might change. The proposal is that business of committees should not lapse on prorogation of the House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new rule with the following terms: “Lapse or reinstatement of parliamentary business; (1) A Bill, petition, motion or other business before the House or any of its committees during a session of Parliament, lapses upon dissolution of Parliament.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-rule (1) a Bill, petition, motion or other business before the House or any of its committees may be reinstated in the next Parliament by a resolution of that Parliament.
(3) The reinstatement of a Bill, petition, motion or other business before Parliament or a committee shall be treated as a fresh referral to that committee.”

Mr Chairman, the principle we initiated in the previous rule applies to this one with one qualification, that we are not tying the hands of the succeeding Parliament to inherit business from the previous Parliament. They have to do so on their will and by resolution.

I beg to move that you put the question.
 
MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. I rise to propose that this sub-rule (3) is redundant once we agree to carry sub-rule (1) and (2), in light of the debate that has gone on. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, my understanding, in direct reference to what the honourable member is raising in sub-rule (3) is that this might be a new committee which is looking at the matter for the first time. Therefore, to say that this committee must consider only what the previous committee looked at would be unfair. I would like to agree with the committee that once this work is brought to this new committee, they should treat it as a fresh matter, other than saying the last Parliament had a report and so you must take that report. They should be able to look at it afresh. So, I think the committee should be supported. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the proposed new rule 95 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to begin with 94, we are talking of prorogation of the House and the lower one should have dissolution of the House. These are just simple things. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Parliamentary business after dissolution of the House; is that okay? Honourable members, I now put the question that the proposed new rule on parliamentary business upon dissolution of the House form part of the Rules of Procedure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yesterday, I had wanted to make a proposal of inserting a provision in the rules, but when I tried, I was ruled out because you never agreed. But I would like to seek guidance as to what point we can insert a rule in our Rules, because I had a proposal whereby people who go on foreign delegations come back and report to Parliament. When our committees go to the field, they do not report back to Parliament and yet we spend a lot of money on this field work. So, I wanted to seek guidance on whether it is appropriate that I can bring it now and I make a justification. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the difficulty we would have with that is that the committee which was charged with this responsibility has not looked at it properly. So, that will be a fresh debate and we may need to explore all the aspects of it that could have been done when we were still in Parliament. Unless, of course, Members agree that you can bring an amendment which has not been discussed before and adopt it now. 

MR MWESIGE: You recall, Mr Chairman, when you were the chairman of the legal committee during the constitutional amendments, a precedent was adopted that if a matter is very important and relates to the amendments on the Floor, it could be moved. My own understanding of the proposal being moved by the Leader of the Opposition is that it is very important because committees of Parliament which go to the field to do work on behalf of this House, should really be accountable to the House that has commissioned them to do that work. Now that we are dealing with issues to do with committees, I think it is pertinent that we handle it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, indeed, I was in charge of that committee at that time and I remember we were confronted with a situation and an amendment was brought at the committee stage. It was never examined by the committee at all. It brought about the introduction of Article 8(a), which was brought by hon. Chrispus Kiyonga and in effect, it said Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. 

In other words, the implication of this is to make what had been excluded from the Constitution as a guiding principle to now become part of the Constitution. In other words, it now becomes justifiable and yet that was never the intention of the drafters of the Constitution that the principles so declared here should form part of the Constitution.  They should just be guiding principles. Now, somebody can even go to court and sue on the basis of foreign policy objectives, which are contained in this particular aspect. Because we never had the opportunity to discuss this thing in detail; that was the shock we got and that precedent may not be a very good one to rely on; to make changes which have not been considered in good detail.  But we will give an exception to this and then we move forward with the necessary caution I have given. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am rising to seek your guidance. I thought committees do delegated work and often times the trips they go for are part of the work they are supposed to present to the House. I would like to use an example of the committee we gave the responsibility to go and investigate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, have we agreed that we are going to discuss this proposed amendment at the committee stage now and then we can go to the merits of it? 
  
MR KYAMADIDI: That is why I was seeking your guidance. I would like to know whether we really need to bring the issue of reporting back to the House after trips.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now you are going to the merits. 

MR EKANYA: I appreciate your guidance. Unfortunately, the Vice President has gone out. One time, we were faced with a similar scenario here, when we were having an amendment and His Excellency the Vice President, who was the Speaker then, said that if you take a patient to the hospital and he has been examined by the nurses and referred, but during operation the doctor discovers that before he does other operations, there is a tumour, you do not send the patient back when you are already handling the operation, like removing a baby, for example. You sort out all the problems. 

Therefore, the ruling was that once a report comes to this House on a given matter, you do whole surgery on it to make it complete and give it good health. Therefore, based on that and using your powers, you allow Members do some important amendments. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have no objection to that, but I have to give this caution, because it is a living caution. What we did with the Constitution is very well known to us - Article 8(a) now makes something which was never intended to be part of the Constitution. That is what I am saying. So, we need to be careful when we bring things which have not been previously discussed by the committee.
 
MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I would prefer is that maybe we leave the committee stage first and go back to consider other issues like recommittal and get a new amendment, because we need to justify; he justifies his reasons, reads to us the preamble and the amendment, and then we go back to committee stage after debating, because at this stage, I do not think we are allowed to debate the matter extensively.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, if we were to do it, this would be the proper moment to do so. So, there would be two, because initially, we had an amendment that had been proposed by hon. Amongi and had also been deferred. Can we handle hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal, then hon. Amongi’s and hon. Ekanya?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank Members for agreeing. I want to make a proposal that we insert a rule in our rules as we have done for delegations which travel out of the country and come and make a report. The rule would be that each committee of Parliament, which goes for fieldwork shall present to the House a field report within 14 days after return. 

The justification for this is accountability and responsibility because we have taken our money and we must account for it and show responsibility that you did the work. This is because you may take the money and not do the work.

It will also show Parliament that the Members have really gone to the field and done work, which can be of help and we can discuss it here. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I thought this is a substantially clear proposition and very straightforward. I will put the question.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you very much. I think we would also want to decide on which kind of work, because if it is routine work that is supposed to be done by committees in their day-to-day work as a delegated group or committee, then how do you differentiate between work that is supposed to be reported on every time we go to the field and work that requires a formal report to Parliament? I think he should justify what type of work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal is for any field trip by a committee.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Then, we shall always be on the Floor whenever we go to the field, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, now you can see that it is not as straightforward as we had thought.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to comment on the issue of reports. Committees of Parliament go very often to the field for various reasons. The sessional committees go for monetary purposes to see that the money we budget for is being used properly. Their issues are always incorporated in the policy statements when they are debated, and the report of Parliament will always be brought from time to time.

The standing committees always give their reports once or twice a year. So, the issue of saying every time the committees go out they have to give reports, I think will be too much and we shall not have any time to debate them. Thank you very much.

MRS BOONA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Baba Diri has mentioned two types of committees; sessional and standing, but sometimes we have committees in this House called ad hoc and I do not know whether when we talk about committees, we 	are also including ad hoc. I will give an example. In the Eighth Parliament, an ad hoc committee was selected to go and study the situation of the pastoralists in Kibaale. We used to call it the Balaalo committee. It had terms of reference and we went to visit areas like Kasese and Kibaale and the report was never brought to the Floor of Parliament.

I am also wondering – if we are talking about committees, we also need to be wider and move into other important committees like an ad hoc committee. Today, if a similar occasion arose concerning the pastoralists, another committee would be formed called ad hoc to do the work the Eighth Parliament did, but never gave a report on.

So, I feel that when we are talking about committees, we shall be wider and talk about more than our ordinary committees that we have in Parliament. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to agree that committees should report to this House, especially when they make field trips, but I also agree that committees report in this House in form of reports. I wanted to give an example that of late, we have given a task to the Committee on Presidential Affairs who are now investigating a case in Kamwenge. In the seven days we gave them, they will be here to report and that will be in a report.

I am a member of the natural resources committee. If we go into the field and see what is happening around Mabira, we are supposed to report in form of a report. If you insist that it should be that every time committees go out they should come and report to the House, then there will be no case for these committees to give reports to the House. Sometimes, these committees do their field investigations in order to beef up their investigations. So, why should we now distinguish between the field trip and the in-house investigation for purposes of reporting to the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is exactly what I was talking about when I wanted to exclude this discussion. It is raw, not cooked and can cause indigestion because it was not discussed before. You can see that everything is new because it is coming for the first time and that is the risk we run into when we bring things at committee stage. We thought it was a very simple matter, now you can see. You see the point? 

Rules are reviewed all the time. Can we bring this amendment at another time? Please, really, because it has not been - You see, you need to -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have discovered something today that sometimes we do not want to be held accountable. (Interjections) Yes, I have noticed it because even if you came - and I hope hon. Bahati is around, because I want to give an opinion. In auditing, there are three types of opinion. Even for no opinion you can say, “No opinion.”

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am as perplexed about the proposal as seems to be the case because - help me if I got it wrong. Was the amendment seeking a full report or just a progress report? For instance, to come and say, “We have made some progress or we encountered difficulty in the sense that the matter is much bigger than we thought and we may take another two weeks or something like that.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, Right Honourable; it is about the field. The minute you go to the field, you must come back and report within 14 days whether your field trip was in the process of doing a bigger investigation altogether or not. Each time you go to the field – today, you went to Mbarara, you come back and report. If the next day you went to Arua, you also come and report on that and then you come and compile the whole report and bring it.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I just want to inform the Leader of the Opposition and all of us that if you read the report of the Auditor-General, we have financial queries as Parliament. The Public Finance and Accountability Act demands that if you are advanced money to go for an activity, you must account for it. And the only way of keeping the dignity of this House high is that the report must be laid here so that nobody will say, “This committee of Parliament received money…” (Interjections) Yes, it is important. 

Let the report be laid to show that we spent money and we have accounted for it. Otherwise, they will say –(Interjections)– I am giving information. Otherwise, Mr Chairman, as we speak now, if anybody, under the Access to Information Act, went to the Account’s Department and got the figures of money advanced to committees of Parliament for field trips, there are queries of unaccounted funds. For us to save our image, we should have those reports laid here because they are part of the requirements for accountability.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are saying we can lay the reports here. What we are trying to say is that when one comes here and says, “We have been to Kibaale and here is our report; we are still continuing with investigations.” That is one of the processes of accounting. We are not saying that you should bring - You can say, “We are still investigating the matter, but we are now moving to Mbale.” That one shows that you need more resources to be able to proceed. 

Members, we need to be accountable. We are not asking for the final report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We need this clarification; would it mean that one comes here and says, “We have been to Gulu; we went on this day and came back on this day, but are continuing to this place.” Or, would one write the details of what their findings were in Gulu?

MS ALASO: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The information I am giving you is something that may not be pleasant. It is known that committees do workplans and it is against these workplans that we are given money. Unfortunately, sometimes, it is also known that Members get on a bus for a five-day trip but get off the bus after two days. 

So, the reason we need proof and what will benefit this House is that when you set out from here for Kasese, you did not stop in Masaka, but actually, reached Kasese. It is good for this House to be that accountable. I worked in a district local government and every time I went to the field, I gave a report to the CAO, saying, “I went to the field and this is what I saw.” If I did not give that detail, at least I presented evidence that I reached where I was supposed to reach. Why should we, who should lead by example, find this very unpleasant – just to prove that we went where we said we would go? I thought this should be easy. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to move an amendment which would give an exemption to the proposal made by the Leader of the Opposition. And I want to do this by giving the example – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you first propose the amendment and then justify it?

MR AMURIAT: My proposal is that we exclude the accountability committees from –(Interjections)– I will give an example; let me justify it. Please, hold your patience, my dear friends. Let me give the example of the Local Government Accounts Committee. In the last Parliament, this committee decided that rather than witnesses coming to appear before the committee here, the committee would go to the districts. And so, whereas this can be classified as a field trip, in actual sense it is not. To expect this committee to come here and report, saying, “We met the CAO of Katakwi, of Soroti and of Amuria in Soroti…” and yet they have got to come at a later stage to report on their findings, is making the committee do double work. I would like to propose that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put a question to the proposed amendment of hon. Amuriat.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR JOHN MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the spirit under which the proposal by the Leader of the Opposition was brought. I am sure the proposal was brought in good faith and to ensure accountability and effectiveness of committees of Parliament. Not to get out of the caution you have earlier on given, of chewing raw food which can likely cause disorder – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we have passed that stage. Do not take us back.

MR MULIMBA: May I now propose that this matter – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That proposal has been rejected by the Chair. (Laughter) We have gone past that stage already. I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Nandala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Interjections) Okay. I had earlier moved an amendment which reads thus: “Save for the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip and the Shadow Cabinet, which shall be reserved for the Opposition party with the greatest numerical strength, all other leadership positions reserved for the Opposition shall be shared by all the Opposition parties in Parliament, taking into consideration their numerical strength.” That is Rule 134, insert sub-rule (8). (Interjections) No, we have already passed gender. You can see that I have excluded the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip and the Shadow Cabinet because Article 82(a) of the Constitution already deals with the Leader of the Opposition. The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 Section 6(a), (b) and (i) already give those to the leading official Opposition and its functions. 

Therefore, those are constitutional and positioned under the Administration of Parliament Act, which are reserved for the official Opposition. So, the only positions that will be shared according to numerical strength on this side would be, for example, EALA, committee chairpersons – although we have not yet dealt with EALA – at this moment, it would be the committee chairpersons. 

Mr Chairman, the Constitution deals with the issue of the committees under Article 90. I also want to report that last Tuesday, I attended the Opposition caucus and we discussed this matter at length. The principle of sharing according to numerical strength was adopted in the Opposition caucus. We were asked to come to you and we came to you, unfortunately, I do not know what happened in between that time and now. Maybe, the Leader of the Opposition can brief us, but when I appeared before the caucus, it was adopted that since the other position has been reserved, this other position can be shared according to numerical strength. This is already in the Rules of Procedure, where parties in committees give membership according to numerical strength and proportionality, and it is only addressing the matter on this side. Mr Chairman, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members the proposal is clear. It was discussed before and it was stood over. We now need two or three responses and then we put the question. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true that this issue was debated, but I am here to raise three concerns. One is that the proposed amendment by hon. Betty Amongi would be unconstitutional and I will stick to that. Secondly, I will also show this House that it would be an attempt to amend the Administration of Parliament Act through the Rules of Procedure. So, in other words, I will be saying we may stop from proceeding with that amendment.

Mr Chairman, Article 82(a) of the Constitution, which should be read jointly with Article 90 on Leader of the Opposition, reads, “Under the multi-organisations or multiparty form of democracy, there shall be, in Parliament, a Leader of the Opposition.” It continues, “Parliament shall by law prescribe how he or she is chosen...” his status, his role and functions.

Parliament, following the dictates of Article 82 of the Constitution amended the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006 and specifically section 6(e) of the Act; the role and the functions of the Leader of the Opposition. This is following the dictates of the Constitution. One, it says, the principal role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep Government in check. In other words, the Constitution under 82(a) created the position of the Leader of the Opposition. Parliament in its own wisdom in 2006, following the dictates of the Constitution, made it the principle role of the Leader of the Opposition to keep Government in check. In other words, it is not anyone else’s principle responsibility other than the Leader of the Opposition, if my interpretation of this section is right, which it is. 

So, Mr Chairman, the functions of the Leader of the Opposition are various and include appointing a shadow cabinet among others. Interestingly, it is a tradition in this Parliament that the accountability committees are chaired by the Opposition. It is a Commonwealth practice and it is what is stated clearly under Rule 134(7). 

What I am saying is that accountability committees are chaired by the Opposition under our rules and the principle person to keep Government in check is the Leader of the Opposition, which automatically means committee chairpersons, by implication and practice, are commanded, controlled and designated by the Leader of the Opposition. 

Now, to accept the amendment of hon. Betty Amongi, would mean that by default, you would have more than one Leader of the Opposition, which would be violating section 6(e) of the Act, which said the principle role of checking Government is the Leader of the Opposition’s. I would really think the argument hon. Adolf Mwesige has been raising several times is that if you intend to trim the powers of the Leader of the Opposition you have to go and amend the Administration of Parliament Act. We are not going to come and amend the rules and then tomorrow, we have a scenario where the Opposition, which is being led by the official Opposition, is disjointed. The LOP would say this, then the other chairperson, who does not owe allegiance will say a different thing. 

I think we should warn ourselves from doing that, because if we have a situation where, like I am a chairperson of the government assurance committee and I am designated by the Leader of the Opposition, I attend Opposition cabinet meetings by virtue of being a chairperson. Now, if we had a situation where I am the chairperson of a Government committee by the Rules of the Procedure of Parliament, which is already unconstitutional, I would say, I would not be under obligation to attend any Opposition meetings.

So, I would warn this Parliament to desist from any activity, which would sound like trying to create two faces of the Opposition in the House. First of all, being a member of the Opposition is a sacrifice -(Interjections)- in Africa; it is a sacrifice. Now, to make it even -(Interruption) 

MR AKENA: Mr Chairman, I have tried my best to listen in silence, but I am finding it extremely strange that we have been sitting in the Opposition, participated in Opposition meetings and the honourable member holding the Floor is trying to insinuate that some of us are not part of the Opposition or implying that if members of the other parties were either chairing or deputising on accountability committees, we would somehow cease to be Opposition, yet in the Eighth Parliament and partly in the Ninth  Parliament, we had a workable relationship where Members of UPC and DP chaired and deputised on accountability committees. 

So, Mr Chairman, is the Member holding the Floor really in order to imply that other parties in the Opposition are not part of the Opposition? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have listened to the painful submission of hon. Odonga Otto and I did not quite pick the angle where he says other political parties are not part of the Opposition. I was not able to pick that. If he did it by implication, the chair did not recognise the implication of the statement he made.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I did not say that and I do not intend to say that. I know many activities that we have been doing together with hon. Jimmy Akena traversing the country. So, I would be the last to say what he maybe misheard.

But Mr Chairman, Article 83(2) of the Constitution, if I may read it; “Notwithstanding clause 1(g) and (h) of this Article, membership of a coalition government of which his or her original political party forms part shall not affect the status of any Member of Parliament”. 

My understanding of this Article is that Article 83 prohibits an individual Member of Parliament from crossing, but 83(2) allows for joint crossing-coalition like if a party this side decides to join NRM as a group, you do not vacate your seats to form a coalition. So, if Article 83(2) allows for coalition, if we provide for a situation where certain committee chairpersons by our rules are mandatorily chaired by various parties, supposing one of the parties decides to form a coalition, then what happens to that position of that chair which we would be designated by our rules -(Interjections)- it is not a ceremony. 

It is not about replacing, because - let me just develop this point. By implication, before a party decides to form a coalition – assuming, if FDC decides to form a coalition with NRM and I am a chairman -(Laughter)- someone has just said, God forbid. Mr Chairman, in politics, there is nothing impossible. Anything can happen. So, I am saying - okay, let me use DP so that my honourable colleagues are not so sad. 

Assuming DP, under Article 83(2), decides to form a coalition with the NRM Government and at that time DP was chairing one of the accountability committees as it is trying to be proposed now, someone asked, when they form a coalition what happens? (Interjections) Hon. Anifa Kawooya responded that that chair is abandoned. It is not about the chair because before a coalition is formed, several underground negotiations take place.

So, what is the use of having a putative chair of a committee who knows that they are now negotiating with that side for a period of one or two years? The day they cross is just ceremonial. It will undermine the function of Parliament of checking the party they are intending to coalesce with. (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, if hon. Odonga Otto whom I am asking clarification from would listen. The impression I am getting from a very good submission by hon. Odonga Otto is that; one, he is working in assumption that Opposition means the party with the greatest number in Parliament and I might be wrong about that and I believe he is not alone in this House.

At an appropriate time, maybe some of us will raise an amendment not only in the rules, but beginning with the Constitution, when we are categorising ourselves as the Opposition and then the ruling party. That is why sometimes, I see on this - I sit this way, but we are presumed to be opposing everything and the other side, they are supposed to be the rulers. I think in the multiparty democracy, with some experiences, I would like to know from hon. Odonga Otto whether he is drawing this from any known democratic Commonwealth Parliamentary practice, that the Opposition you referred to in the articles here - I thought a Leader of the Opposition first, is not by the party, but declared and announced by the Speaker on the basis of the number. (Interjections)
 
Yes, it is not that, at least, if we went by the rules that are announced by the Speaker –(Interjections)- Let me just come. Would it be fair for –(Interjections)- of course, I do not belong this side even if I sit this side. I risk being evicted but -(Laughter)-  What hon. Odonga Otto is talking about and what hon. Betty Amongi is saying needs a sober look into what the Constitution and the rules say. 

I believe a coalition, which is under Article 83, does not apply in the circumstances and our rules do not provide for it. I think it would be cooperation. For example, in Ghana, there are four parties in Parliament, but incidentally, they call themselves minority and majority, but some minority parties who were Opposition, are cooperating with the majority and those who are Independent are only about four. They are cooperating with the Opposition. So, the clarity I would like from hon. Odonga Otto is, is this a hybrid of hon. Odonga Otto or is it drawn from any other known practices? I would be very happy so that I follow.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. The guidance I am seeking from you is; what we are debating right now seems to be in-house. I am pained that we are discussing this as the Opposition and we are portraying a picture that we are not united as the Opposition, which is really very unfortunate. I propose that we are given ample time to go and clean our house and then we come back here. I believe that that will really give us, the other Opposition, time to really work out our in-house problems and then we sort it out. Otherwise, I am really very touched, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the guidance I can give is that we should be able to finish with this matter unless something else happens.

MR ODONGA OTTO: As I conclude, Mr Chair, my points are just these. The Leader of the Opposition is a creation of the Constitution under Article 82(a). Article 82(a) asked Parliament to make the necessary laws to regulate the operation of the Leader of the Opposition. We made the law, the Administration of Parliament Act, and in the Administration of Parliament Act, we stated that the principle role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep Government in check. 

So, I am submitting, Mr Chairman, that our hands are tied today to start amending both the Constitution and Administration of Parliament Act in our rules and create two or three faces of the Opposition. It is not healthy for this House. 

In the last Parliament, we had UPC; hon. John Odit chairing a full committee. There was no law. It was internal administration; I even protested. I actually told FDC that we are campaigning for the party and you are giving others, but I was told to keep quiet. Hon. Odit was a chair. Administratively - hon. Issa Kikungwe was a Chairperson of the government assurances committee. He was from the Democratic Party for five years.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you. I wish to thank hon. Odonga Otto for giving way. What is happening today in this Parliament is that we have two Members other than those in the Opposition party with the majority in the House holding positions of responsibility at the committee level. The Committee on Local Government Accounts is deputised by somebody from the Democratic Party. The Public Accounts Committee is deputised by somebody from UPC. Moreover, there is an understanding that these committees will change leadership after two and a half years. In other words, mathematically, the positions available to be given away are not just eight but 16. That is the information I wanted to give. (Members rose_)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Let me conclude and you get substantial time. Mr Chairman, I am appealing to the House. As I said earlier, being a member of the Opposition in Africa is a sacrifice. Even among us, we have had situations where the party writes to various party headquarters to nominate candidates. Almost all the headquarters have various factions. The letter goes to this group; the other letter goes to that group. I would not want the House to involve itself in those details which we have had enough of. So, administratively, these concerns can be taken care of. But if Parliament passes the rule the way it is being suggested by hon. Betty Amongi; definitely, it will be challenged. 

Secondly, there will be problems in the house of the Opposition as you can even see the way the arguments are starting, which we should not encourage. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, let me start by clarifying –(interjections)- yes, I am making a clarification. I want to clarify on the matter of –(Interjections)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman –

MS AMONGI: What are you fearing from me talking?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, as far as I understand, a motion has been moved by the hon. Betty Amongi. She spoke to her motion. I would like guidance from you. Is it procedurally right for her to engage in debate at this point yet she is the mover of the motion? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Amongi, you will have a right to reply at the end.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ssebagala, you already spoke on this matter. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: No, I sought guidance from you. To me, the issue is all about sharing, as Members of the Opposition. We know that today, FDC has the majority on the Opposition and as per the Constitution, they are the leaders of the Opposition. I also know – I will not agree with what hon. Odonga Otto said that being on the Opposition is a sacrifice. No, being on the Opposition is by choice. It is not a sacrifice. You are free to go to the other side; you are free to stay on the Opposition. Are we together? Therefore, I strongly agree that what we need to do as Members of the Opposition, is to move as we have been moving in the last Parliament. I know that we had Members from DP and from UPC who were serving. What we must agree on is that maybe, when it comes to sharing, other Members are not confined to being deputies, but also to getting chairpersonship. 

I think that can be handled in our arrangement as Members of the Opposition. It is my humble appeal, hon. Betty Amongi, that we move as Opposition and agree. Other elements among us will be sorted out at a later stage. Thank you. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is true there are many parties in the Opposition. That is a fact. It is a fact that there are many parties in the Opposition in this Parliament but also, under the Westminster Model of Parliamentary Democracy, there is a difference between the Opposition and the official Opposition. It is not by accident that the Leader of the Opposition is not from UPC but from FDC. I do not think that this is a matter that would go for election; that UPC, DP, FDC, JEEMA get together and elect from among themselves, the most competent man or woman to be the Leader of the Opposition. That is not a matter of election. As long as there is a party, which commands the largest number of Members in Parliament in the Opposition, that is the official Opposition. That is why the Leader of the Opposition comes from the official position, which is the Opposition party that commands the largest number of Members in the House.

Therefore, it is not out of the ordinary or out of the law for the leadership of Parliament that is reserved for Opposition parties to go to the largest Opposition party in Parliament. This is my understanding of Parliamentary democracy in the United Kingdom, in Canada and indeed, in the Commonwealth. However, if Opposition parties want to go outside the rules and informally organise themselves and share positions in committees; Government cannot stop them. That can only be done informally. Nobody can stop you. You can go outside this House, have a retreat wherever you want and say, “We shall give five slots to UPC, we shall give two slots to DP, we shall give 10 slots or we shall appoint the Leader of the Opposition from UPC.” That is up to you. As far as the law is concerned, as far as Commonwealth practice is concerned; the official position is the party which commands the largest number in Parliament. Therefore, it is not out of practice or law for the leaders of committees, leadership of the Opposition, to come from the party that commands the largest number in Parliament. There is only one official position. There are no two or three official positions. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Parliament has been facilitating us sometimes as Commissioners to benchmark practices in other parliaments. Recently, we were in Tanzania and South Africa. One of the questions we have been asking the parliaments is on how the multiparty system functions and also particularly, the very question which we are addressing. I want to agree with hon. Mwesige that in most of these parliaments, usually there is a ruling party then the official Opposition. The official Opposition remains the face of the Opposition. It is up to the negotiations within the Opposition led by the leader of the Opposition to share. Hardly, have we found any situation in any of the parliaments where the small parties really take on leadership directly as being discussed.

So, I want to agree that the practice in the Commonwealth setting is that it is the official position, the Leader of the Opposition, who remains the face of the Opposition; but I would also want to urge you that I think internally, you should be able to discuss this and share out, but it cannot be a question of our rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ayena.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, constitutional matters have been raised by my learned friend, Odonga-Otto, and I think that is where I would like to address myself to. 

The reading of the provisions of Article 83(a) in relation to what hon. Betty Amongi has proposed, clearly shows there is no contradiction between the two. Article 83(a) provides for the Leader of the Opposition and it gives the role of the Leader of the Opposition. It is clear that it is not in contest as to who or which party in the Opposition nominates and designates the leadership of the Opposition. It is clearly the party with the greatest numerical strength. 

When a proposal is made that those positions, which are in broad terms given to theOpposition, must of necessity be allocated at the whims of the Leader of the Opposition, I do strongly oppose that. Hon. Adolf Mwesige clearly made reference to practices from Commonwealth countries. I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that the wording of the different constitutions of the different Commonwealth countries is drastically different from the wording of our Constitution. 

I would like to submit further that if you go to the rules and provisions which are attached to the establishment of committees, they portray this Parliament as peculiarly in a completely different disposition from the other parliamentary practices. In the other parliamentary practices, they are constrained by the provisions of their constitutions which clearly state that the Leader of the Opposition shall be responsible for allocating those positions.

Now, as a matter of discipline, it is being suggested and it is very persuasive, in my view, that had there been common sense, common interest and mutual respect on this side, there would have been no need for us to bring this matter to the House. Like I said before, the problem now is the lack of a spirit of sharing; what I call “bad table manners”. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, hon. Otto suggests in a very persuasive manner that what hon. Amongi Betty is bringing –(Interruption) 

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the holder of the Floor, whether in his submission he is referring to FDC as a party that is not willing to share with anybody?

MR AYENA: I mean, without any emphasis that appears to be as clear as daylight. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, it seems to be suggested on the Floor of this House that we have not attempted as Opposition Members to have an in-house arrangement within ourselves. Like hon. Betty would agree with me, there was an attempt in the caucus – this position was agreed upon. But in a turnabout manner, the position has again been changed. That is why we are now calling out the bigger House to come to the rescue of the Opposition. 

I would like my brother hon. Otto to know that what he fears in the proposal of hon. Betty Amongi is exactly what I fear in defeating that proposal because if we are dissatisfied in the manner in which we are being treated as Members of the Opposition, I can assure you that there will be no unanimity in the Opposition. If you put up rules for us to be guided by, we shall be more formidable as the Opposition than if it is left to “each one for himself, God for us all, and let the devil take the hind-most”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ayena, I think you have made your point. I will make only one change in respect of what I said earlier. I will pick hon. Cecilia Ogwal and then I will ask hon. Amongi to close. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I have no intention to make a substantive presentation on this subject. But I just want to draw the attention of this House to the constitutional provision 83(2) which says, “Notwithstanding clause (1)(g) and (h) of this article, membership of a coalition government of which his or her original political party forms part shall not affect the status of any Member of Parliament.” 

What I am trying to say here is that there are two sides to the coin. In the House, we have the Government side and the Opposition side. The Opposition is responsible by constitutional provision to ensure that it takes on the Government. 

Now, if we are going to share the cake, the Leader of the Opposition, who is from the largest Opposition party in the House, must share that position conscious of this provision. If you are going to share with a political party which might be on your side, but can form a coalition with the ruling party, you will have failed in your duty. It is your responsibility to make sure that the Government is put in check –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ogwal, our question is: Should we put that in the rules? 

MRS OGWAL: It cannot be put in the rules because it is a constitutional provision. What we need – the Vice President was here, I do not know whether he has left. If the Vice President was here, he would probably have guided the House better. I happened to have been one of the privileged few that went to study the Westminster system of lobbying and working as Opposition and Government. 

What could be lacking is that maybe the various political parties are not lobbying each other enough to form an effective Opposition and lobby for inclusion. I think that is important, but as far as I am concerned, it is FDC which has the Leader of the Opposition and it is his duty to make sure that he keeps the government in check. Whoever he puts there, he must make sure that is not going to cross the Floor. Thank God there is no law now which allows crossing on the Floor. If you give that position to DP, make sure that DP tomorrow is not going to sign a coalition with the ruling party. That is what I am trying to say and finally, I want to say –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ogwal, just a moment. Are you suggesting that the relationship between FDC, UPC and JEEMA is a coalition under the Constitution?

MRS OGWAL: What I am saying is that it is not a coalition, but they can lobby each other and arrive at a position which they want; that is purely administrative and political negotiation that can be done.

Secondly, I want to say that the Administration of Parliament Act, 6(e)(i), clarifies that position better. Mr Chairman, I just want to say –(Interjection)- there is information.

MS ALASO: I thank you so much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for giving me this opportunity to bring some information to the Floor and the Chair will appreciate that I am the Secretary-General of FDC. I will be quite uncomfortable for insinuations to be made about the party and then I sit here and do not set the record straight. I, therefore, appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal for giving me this opportunity.

The first bit of information I would like for the record of this House to be passed on is the emphasis that we as the FDC are very committed to co-operation and whether in this House or outside this House, we have demonstrated our commitment to inter-party cooperation with all our colleagues who are in the Opposition. We will do that tonight and tomorrow. 

Sometimes, unfortunately, it is our colleagues who abandon the ship, but our commitment to inter-party cooperation is unwavering and I think it is important that you get that on the record.

The other bit of information that is important is that if the House does proceed on as to regulate how the official Opposition conducts its internal business, it would, by implication, mean that we can also proceed to advise or make the same regulations for Government and say, “You, when you are appointing your sessional committee chairpersons, make sure that there are some Independents among them.” I think that would be unpleasant; this should be administrative.

The third bit of information is to really refresh this House. Without any rules in the last Parliament, without any amendments, we were able to comfortably share the positions that are available in the accountability committees. We would also like, as the official Opposition, to be able to disappoint when we are disappointed by performance. We should be able to say that as Leader of the Opposition, if you are chairing a committee and you decide that you will not do this and that, he should be able to withdraw you because that is important; otherwise, if the House does proceed and say that now you appoint on your own merit – if at the end of the day, we who have the mandate to check Government and yet we are uncomfortable about the performance of a Member from DP, where do we get the opportunity to withdraw? It will be the House to withdraw if you think that you have that mandate. For me, it is important that this record is set straight and that the fears of hon. Ayena are put aside and that our commitment to working with UPC, DP and the rest of the Members is guaranteed. We will do that, not because the rules force us, but because we think it is very proper and adds value to the work we do.

Lastly, can I register my disappointment that sometimes I think that we in the Opposition should be working towards getting Government rather than struggling and tearing ourselves down to chair one committee. I would rather sit in the back here and see if I can push you ‘guys’ the other side than struggle to chair one committee. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is that today as the session started, the Speaker of Parliament read a letter from the Government Chief Whip and he mentioned names of three MPs who were moved: One was brought to be a chairperson, another made vice-chairperson and another Member was moved from one committee to another. It was done by the Government Chief Whip. That kind of scenario is also healthy on our side. 

I would be happy tomorrow to hear hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, saying that I have been removed as a chairperson because it is good for discipline. But if you create me by rule and I cannot be disciplined by anyone in this House, then we really have a very bad scenario. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ogwal, please wind up.

MRS OGWAL: Yes, I am just winding up. I am saying that we can make rules, but it will be very difficult for you to make rules and get into our houses to make sure that we have implemented those rules. I think this is what you are attempting to do through this amendment. I think you leave it to the main Opposition or the Government side to see how they spread out their people. It will be very painful for me to expect the Chief Whip of the Government side to come and tell us that in putting in place the leadership of the various committees, we have included so many Langi or Banyankole! It will be very bad because that is purely administrative. It is within the party of the Movement to make sure that everybody is accommodated and that is what –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thank you honourable –

MRS OGWAL: So, I would want you to give us that responsibility to make sure that we accommodate our –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thank you honourable –

MRS OGWAL: I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS AMONGI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to start with the first, that what both hon. Alice Alaso and about two FDC Members stated that in the last Parliament – I would have loved to hear them say what happened in this Parliament because in the last Parliament, it is true that UPC chaired and deputised and DP also chaired and deputised. 

But when they made reference to hon. Odit – let me also put it on record that when hon. Odit was earlier nominated by the Speaker to travel with the President and he was chairing, immediately he boarded that plane, there were headlines from the FDC side and immediately he came back, he was withdrawn – actually, before he came back, he was withdrawn. Why did he board the plane with the President? (Laughter) 

So, Mr Chairman, I want you to understand why an amendment like this came. In principle, in the amendment, I excluded the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip and the shadow cabinet because those are constitutional. It is both in the Constitution and Administration of Parliament Act. 

I have also heard people make mention of the Commonwealth. If you went to the Commonwealth, for example, to the UK, it is true that the Leader of the Opposition, the shadow cabinet and the Public Accounts Committee are reserved for the official Opposition. That is true, but the rest of the chairpersons and deputies of the committees are elected in the House. In the USA, they elect and it is elected not even on the basis of the party; it is elected on the basis of experience. So, Mr Chairman, when I brought this amendment, I recognised that Article 90 of the Constitution separates committees from the articles that create the Leader of the Opposition. It separates committees from the function under the Administration of Parliament Act, which exclusively reserves the position of shadow and Opposition Chief Whip. That one is exclusive both in the Constitution and in the Administration of Parliament Act. So, I want that to be clear because people are talking in generalities, but in these countries I have given you, it is true that the Public Accounts Committee is reserved for the leading Opposition and the shadow and the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr Chairman, I am really at pain because, when a Member I have sat with on this side for the last 11 years starts insinuating coalition, the tone on this side makes you understand how people think. How can you want to disown me, Betty Amongi? For the last 11 years, I have been in this position and defended the position of the Opposition better than some FDCs, and you want to start sitting here because of interests to say – actually, hon. Odonga Otto has even said I campaigned for President Museveni in the last election. So, you can now see the level of blackmail on this side. The level of blackmail is to make your argument look as if I have been bossed and that is why I am moving the amendment. I am moving the amendment in good faith. 

Article 90 gives the power of committees to this House. I want to read it: “Committees of Parliament. (i) Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions….” Yes, it does not say, Government will appoint; it doesn’t say FDC or the leading Opposition will appoint. It says Parliament “shall by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees” and so, I am asking you under this constitutional provision to prescribe for me under the rule that the FDC should get Leader of the Opposition, shadow ministers or the Opposition Chief Whip. But the committees, which are under Article 90, which this Parliament is supposed to prescribe how they function - let me ask somebody from UPC or DP also in the rules to be able to access that leadership. This same Constitution gives a right to access that leadership. This same Constitution gives the right to access leadership. If you are locking DP and UPC from accessing leadership of committees, you are abrogating this Constitution! Mr Chairman, I rest my case and I beg that the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, a motion has been moved that the question be put. I am under obligation by the Rules of Procedure to put that question without delay. I accordingly put the question that the question be put.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for amendment as proposed by hon. Betty Amongi in terms of amending Rule 153 in the terms proposed by the honourable member who made the motion. I now put the question. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Appendix B

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the Rules of Procedure for the election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, Appendix B. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am rising on a point of guidance. Before we proceed to the appendix, I request for guidance. At what level do we do recommittals to the rules? Is it after the appendix or can we do them and the appendices come later? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we will finish whatever we need to finish. You recommit after we have finished what we are doing and still recommit. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to introduce a simple and humble amendment to our rules. Last week, during the debate, I put notice relating to committees of Parliament. Under our Rules of Procedure, the Parliament can only create two committees for purposes of handling official and special duties. That is the ad hoc committee and the select committee. Mr Chairman, I have conducted research and I realise that the head of the institution of Parliament is the Speaker, and the Speaker knows the Members who participate in this House; those who are very active, andwho are informed, and the rule ties the hands of the Speaker to appoint Members even for special assignments and report to the Speaker, and in other countries, the rules are very clear. The Speaker has a prerogative. If you want to conduct some investigation, you can appoint a special committee to conduct investigations and report. Under the current arrangement, ad hoc and select committees are appointed on either the advice of the House or advice of the Business Committee. 

The last time the House moved a motion, there was serious haggling in the Business Committee and with all due respect, constitution of the committee became hard. People were lobbying left and right. I would not wish to amend the current arrangement where the Business Committee or the Government whip or the Opposition whip recommends membership to a select committee or ad hoc committee, but I would like to introduce a new clause that the Speaker, on his or her own volition, can constitute a special committee of the House to conduct investigation on any matter of interest of Parliament and report thereto. I beg to move. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is yet another new amendment that the honourable member wants to move. Yes, it is a good idea, but I think it will put the Office of the Speaker in conflict with the Members. Just as he said, we are not members of the Business Committee, but he is now relaying information that there was haggling in the committee as to who to chose to be a member of that committee.

So, once you decide that it is only the Speaker to do this, you are going to load a lot of pressure onto that Office, which is supposed to be neutral in as far as these conflicting ideas that are coming from the ideas, are concerned. I am saying this because by the time you set up an ad hoc committee, there must be a big issue that Parliament wants solved. But if you say this responsibility should be loaded onto the Office of the Speaker, you will have put problems at the centre of neutrality. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I really want to propose that we don’t handle this amendment because it is not as simple as the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya wants to make it appear. To suggest that we depart from the practice of this House to introduce something and retain what we have, to me appears to have very serious implications that we ought to consider in time.

So, I propose that – you know, it is possible to amend these rules as we go along. If we had had a notice and formulation from hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and given it due consideration, of course, we would be able to debate it now. Otherwise, I think that the meaning, impact and significance of this proposal is much more than meets the eye. We need time to consider it. I would like to propose and suggest to him that we don’t consider it now, but that he can go ahead to table it in the near future because as I said, these rules can be amended any time. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have known the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for quite some time. When he makes commitment, he keeps his word. Therefore, on this matter, I am taking the advice as proposed by him and I hereby withdraw this proposal. I will take it to the rules committee and request them to, at an appropriate time, bring it to the House. I beg to withdraw for now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon.  Geoffrey Ekanya. Honourable members, we now move to Appendix B.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I must state from the onset that we have made some amendments to the text that the Members have. So, I will very slowly read through those amendments for Members to clearly follow. This was necessary because we had consultations with both sides of the House and narrowed our differences to a common position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lugoloobi, on what point do you rise?
 
MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I had the opportunity to meet the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to propose the insertion of a new rule to read as follows: “Presentation of the National Development Plan: The National Vision and the National Development Plan (Medium-term Plan) shall be submitted to Parliament by the minister responsible for planning, for approval and adoption.” The justification is, the National Development Planning Framework has three elements: the national vision, as provided for under the Planning Act, 2002; the Medium-Term Plan; and the Annual Plan and Budget. 

Mr Chairman, these three have got a castigating effect. In other words, they inform and rely on one another. The medium-term plan or the National Development Plan should be the basis for determining our five-year Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). This means that when the development needs of the country have been formulated through the plans, the projections of expenditure for the next five years are worked out and implemented on this basis.

Mr Chairman, I want to note that the Rules of Procedure for the presentation of the budget statement under Part XXIII, do not provide for the submission, approval and adoption of the national development plans, which are the basis for budgeting as provided for under the National Planning Authority Act, 2002. Accordingly, more often than not, Parliament has lost the opportunity of pronouncing itself on how the future of our national economy could be attained through developing planning.

Planning would enable each Member of Parliament to articulate the development needs of their areas of representation. The plan is the basis for MTEF and the annual planning and budgeting. The proposal I am making is intended to cure the problem of short-termism in our development approach and ad hoc budgeting. It will also provide a basis for monitoring progress against set targets within the plan –

THE DEPUTY  CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lugoloobi, you see this is the difficulty I always talk about. If you had outlined those principles at the time we were discussing the general principles on why the rules needed to be changed and what aspects needed to be changed and so on, you would not have made that great speech now. What you would be doing is to propose the actual amendment. But now you are introducing all these things anew yet all Members will want to speak to them. But the problem is, I don’t have the time now. 

But as we said, these rules are progressively amended each time there is need. In the circumstances, why don’t we have this proposal brought in at the right time, you explain it to us for Members to understand it. And that should be done in the committee, which will finally bring it here. Yes, hon. James Kakooza, you have been in this House longer than the walls –(Laughter)– so, let us try to go by the rules. I, therefore, would like to ask you to reconsider your position so that you can bring this matter appropriately so that we can deal with it comprehensively. Your record is already on the Hansard, but we need to move forward.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, but, Mr Chairman, I had attempted, during the debate to present this proposal, but there was no response, whether in the form of reactions or disagreement from any Members. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it had been the committee to bring it here, it would have been a different situation. For example, if the Members chose to keep quiet, we would just pass it because they would have examined it. But now that you have brought it direct to the House, it becomes a challenge. Can we get a proper time for you to come over with this proposal? Otherwise, I may be forced to put the question to it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I choose to refer the proposal to the committee for further consideration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. I would refer the matter to the rules committee for further consideration. (Applause)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, Appendix B: “Rules of Procedure for the election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly.” 

    (i) Insert the following –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Chairman, is it your statement that you have consulted with everybody in this House and that is the agreed position; so that I know what to do immediately.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, I have. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now we will listen carefully to what he is going to read. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We have consulted both the Opposition and the Government and we have agreed to the position I am going to read:

“(i)	Insert the following before the definition of the word ‘election’: ‘Assembly, means the East African Legislative Assembly established by the Treaty.
(ii)	Candidate: means a person who is nominated to stand for an election to the Assembly’. 
(iii)	Delete the interpretation of the word, ‘election’ and replace it with the following: ‘Election includes the process of nomination and voting of candidates to the Assembly.’

(iv)	Nomination: means nomination as a candidate to stand for election to the Assembly.”

We propose to re-draft rule 3 in the appendix as follows: “Election of Members to the Assembly –

(1)	The election of Members representing the various political parties represented in the Parliament to the Assembly shall as much as it is feasible be based on their proportional party membership in Parliament and shall take into consideration gender, the youth and Persons With Disability.

(2)	A person shall be elected to the Assembly who is independent of a political party or organisation.”

We propose to re-draft rule 7(1) in the appendix as follows: “Nomination of candidates: Nomination of a candidate shall be made on any nomination day by each party or organisation and other shades of opinion represented in the House; nominating a candidate and tendering the nomination in writing to the Clerk indicating the following:

(a)	A statement specifying the name, educational qualifications, address and occupation of the candidate.

(b)	A statement under oath by the candidate stating that: 
(i)	The candidate is a citizen of Uganda; 
(ii)	The candidate qualifies to be a Member of Parliament;
(iii)	The candidate is not holding office as a minister;
(iv)	The candidate is not an officer in the service of the East African Community; and
(v)	The candidate has proven experience or interest in consolidating and furthering the aims and objectives of the Community.

(c)	Upon nomination, the Speaker shall proceed to put the question.”

We propose to insert a new rule to read as follows:
“(1)	The ruling party shall nominate at least six candidates from among its Members.

(2)	The Opposition shall nominate at least two candidates from among…” Mr Chairman, the phrase “at least” is dropped. 

“(1)	The ruling party shall nominate six candidates from among its Members.

(2)	The Opposition shall nominate two candidates from among its Members.

(3)	A person independent of a political party or organisation shall be elected as a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly.

(4)	All nominations shall as much as it is feasible reflect and take into consideration the youth, gender and Persons With Disability.”

We also propose to introduce rules applicable to Independents:
“(1)	A person wishing to stand for an election as an Independent Member of the Assembly shall tender his or her duly filled in nomination forms to the Clerk.

(2)	A person wishing to stand as an Independent under sub-rule (1) shall be nominated by a Member of Parliament.”

We further intend to insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: “Campaigns and voting 

(1)	A person nominated to be elected as a Member to the Assembly shall give his or her consent to the nomination.

(2)	A Member making a nomination shall move a motion that so and so be elected as a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly and shall in not more than five minutes give a brief statement of the background of the nominee.

(3)	A person nominated under sub-rule (2) shall be given five minutes by the Speaker to speak about him or herself.

(4)	Voting of the Members of the Assembly shall be done in the Plenary.

(5)	The Clerk shall ensure that the relevant materials for voting are in place.” 

We propose to re-draft rule 10 as follows:

“The Speaker shall announce to the House the elected members of the Assembly.”

Mr Chairman, that is all, and I beg to move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the phrasing of: “A person wishing to stand for election as an Independent Member of the Assembly…” might not carry the spirit of the 
Constitution. Supposing we re-draft it and say, “A person wishing to stand for election to the Assembly, independent of a political party….”

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Conceded. Mr Chairman, “…independent of a political party or organisation….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is the wording of the Constitution. I am just looking at the wording that is proposed here in the rules applicable to Independents. Rule (1) says, “A person wishing to stand for election as an Independent Member of the Assembly….” We can say, “A person wishing to stand for election to the Assembly independent of a political party or organisation.” That is the wording of the Constitution. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Certainly, your formulation, Mr Chairman, is much more superior to the one that was presented by the committee, but I still have a problem with it in light of the discussion we had yesterday. There are political parties which are not in the House. I wouldn’t want the formulation to appear to exclude them.

I think the improvement would be, “…independent of political parties or organisations in Parliament.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that ties it. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the Prime Minister seems to be thinking about political parties outside Parliament, but in the same vein, the Treaty talks about parties represented in Parliament. The way the current formulation has been done would mean that even parties represented in Parliament would not have space to participate. Because they are saying only two will be nominated from the Opposition, but according to the Treaty, the parties here in Parliament now are five. This side has five, but they are talking of two.

He talks about parties outside. Now, if you say parties outside should be given space to participate, you are undermining the Treaty which talks about parties represented in the House. Then what are you curing? You are curing what is not in the Treaty.

DR BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, the submission by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is practical recognition that there are political parties in this Parliament and their participation is important.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, let me help; the point being raised by hon. Amongi supports what has been proposed by the Prime Minister, but her point is different. She is saying that in respect of political parties in the House -the Opposition - you are being given two slots to be nominated by the Opposition and yet there are five parties. I think that is a different point from what the Prime Minister has dealt with. 

DR BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, I am simply augmenting the argument raised by hon. Amongi in support of what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is saying. Practical recognition of the presence and importance of all political parties in this Parliament has taken place, whether they have got one Member of Parliament or whatever the number. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I think the point I am making is that the Treaty is very clear. It talks about parties represented in Parliament and for me the feasibility test in the old schedule would be better, where political parties nominate and it is put to ballot and let the best candidates emerge.  The original was reading as follows: “(i) the ruling party shall nominate at least eight candidates from among its Members from which six shall be elected as Members of the Assembly.” It would mean that there would be eight candidates from Government on the ballot paper and then we vote six out of the eight. 

The second one was reading: “The Opposition parties shall nominate at least five,” which means they recognise in the Treaty that participation of other political parties is important. So, the five were to make sure that each of the parties in the Opposition nominate one Member each and put to vote through the ballot to get the two who emerge as the best, and then it goes to the Independents. So, the argument by the Prime Minister would defeat this cause. Why would you want to protect a party that is not in Parliament and undermine the participation of parties in Parliament? It is going to be an open vote – the way the ruling was that in the last elections there was no voting. We would want to introduce voting this time round. Why would you fear six political parties nominating and the Members vote?
 
So, I would rather go with this because it would address the question of participation of all the parties, which doesn’t guarantee the participant’s success, but let us be able to participate in the ballot and get satisfied rather than being locked out. It is unfair to protect a party outside Parliament lest you want us to go to court, since the Constitution is very clear on the right of participation and access to leadership positions. So, I would agree with the old version and not the new one. 

MR EKANYA: Whereas hon. Amongi is seeking clarification, I think that the formulation by hon. Fox Odoi talks about the Opposition and Government. The Opposition under the current arrangement have a caucus, which is an informal arrangement and not necessary to put in the rules.  I think the Leader of the Opposition could call a caucus of all the parties in the Opposition and they have their internal nomination and present the two to the House. 

Under the Political Organisations Act, parties are allowed to have caucuses, unless I am advised otherwise. The formulation doesn’t say party A, B, C but says, “The Opposition” and the Rules of Procedure know us as the Opposition: UPC, CP, DP -(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the holder of the Floor whether the rule requires that we only bring names to Parliament or we hold elections in Parliament? Because if we are to hold elections in Parliament and we only bring specific names to the representation required, then we wouldn’t be doing anything as a House. We would hold elections in our caucuses and that would be the end. So, if voting is to take place in the House, then what my colleague, hon. Amongi, said is the right procedure. Nominate eight from the Government side and let them compete and we vote for six; nominate five from the Opposition, they compete and we vote on them and take two. That would be adequate.
 
MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to answer hon. Todwong. If you have nine names and according to you, as the voters think not all the nine deserve your vote, you can abstain and if all get zero, then there would have been no election. So, having nine or two doesn’t mean voting all of them. You may decide not to vote. But we just want to make sure that we comply with the Treaty because if we don’t and we leave it open, we shall have 1,000 candidates nominated here. The Treaty says, “Practical and feasible,” I don’t know whether we have the time to have 1,000 people come here and address us. We shall need six months. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, once you say that we have already adopted the principle that parties will be represented on the basis of their proportional strength in Parliament, which has been moved by the chairperson of the committee - once you say representation will among other things be based on the party, caucusing is a must. We don’t have to put it in the rules. The only mechanism through which parties can present their candidates is through their internal caucusing. So, for us in NRM, we wouldn’t want to waste the time of our candidates by bringing nine people when we know at the end of the day we are going to choose six. So, why do we torture people when we know the only positions are six? Why bring eight people for the sake of academics? 

Therefore, the Opposition also has to devise its own mechanisms of caucusing to make sure that they bring two people. Why bring five people to present for the sake of presenting? Then because the Independents do not have a caucus, all Ugandans who wish to stand and qualify to stand will present themselves to the Clerk for nomination and the House will vote on them.

So, really, I do not see any contradiction. Once the names come from the parties to the House and the House endorses or rejects them, that is voting.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Whatever we do must be based on the constitutional requirements in as far as the Treaty is concerned. I stand to be guided because when you read Article 50, “The National Assembly of each partner state shall elect...” Parties may nominate, but the National Assembly elects. “...shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly who shall represent as much as is feasible....” Mr Chairman, as much as feasible means something that can be achieved, here we are not talking about numerical strength. The moment you talk about numerical strength then you are contradicting the Treaty and that is the case for which Mbidde took EALA to court.

I believe that if we are to go with numerical strength, then it will be null and void. What we must do in order to have this feasibility they are talking about is to have nine slots. Each party, regardless of whether you are strong or weak must be represented by one person and we leave two spaces. That is what the Treaty is all about.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the Treaty in 50 says, “Each party shall elect, not from among themselves, nine members of the Assembly who shall represent as much as feasible, the various political parties represented.” My interpretation here is not only the election, but the various political parties represented in the House. So, the question is, “What amounts to representation?” If someone asks an innocent question, “How is the representation in the House?” Someone would say, “NRM has 80 percent.” So, when you are reading the Treaty, do not forget that the word “representation” is there and the manner in which this House is represented is very clear.

So, we are not going to start saying, each party sends one yet NRM has 80 percent in this House. It does not amount to representation in the spirit of the Treaty.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, we are electing leaders or Members not for the Parliament of Uganda, but for East African Legislative Assembly and the Treaty is very clear. So, if we go against the Treaty, and then we go on numerical strength, definitely, we will be ruled out of order.

DR BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to help my brother hon. Odonga Otto. When you are asked about the composition of Parliament, you talk about the various political parties, which have set representatives in Parliament and those are the political shades that you have here. Numerical strength is something else. You may have six Members of Parliament from NRM, but they will be from one political party and one political shade. The rest of the political shades are the Democratic Party, UPC, JEEMA, CP and FDC. You may want to also include the Independents.

You may even want to qualify political parties and their ideological formulations. I am saying you, “may” as well. The political formulations of each of the political organisations are distinct. That is why we exist in various political parties because their ideologies are different. 

In fact, I may not know what NRM’s ideology is, but I know that the DP is a centre right party. I also know that the UPC is a centre left party. I also know that certain other organisations here are centrist. I do not know whether NRM has got an ideology, but if at all they have, it is a separate ideology as well, which is a shade of opinion that can be represented in EALA according to the Treaty.

The moment you talk about numerical strength and you simply throw two positions to five political organisations in the Opposition to share as if they can share them in half, we shall be making a very big mistake.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I have heard my brothers hon. Ssebagala and Dr Lulume arguing that with different shades they get - supposing there were 20 different parties here? Why not? In Uganda we have more than 30 parties and each of them could have a Member here; so you tell us how the 30 would share the nine in your way of reasoning?

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, if I am to correct hon. Byandala, and if we are to go with the word “feasible”, it means if we have more than 20 parties, then it is not feasible. Now we are talking about a situation where we have six parties. We have nine slots and we have six parties; so that is feasible.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is no agreement on this matter. In order for us to take a decision, we will need a full quorum of the House, where there is contestation of this nature. We do not want the lack of quorum to form a basis for litigation in future. I, therefore, find that we are unable to take decisions any further on these matters that are controversial. I request the chair to move the motion for resumption.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.33
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure, in particular, rules: 195 - proposals contained in paragraphs 94, 95; rules 11 and 12 - a new rule proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi; a new proposal on the amendment of the rules by hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Ekanya, and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The one of hon. Amongi was rejected.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I will go through this again. I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure and in particular, rule 195, proposals contained in paragraphs 94 and 95; rules 11 and 12, proposals by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and passed them with amendments. 

The Committee of the Whole House also rejected proposed amendments from hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Ekanya withdrew his proposed amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have this one business and since there is a contest, we need full quorum to take a decision. I am, therefore, asking different whips to prepare the Members for tomorrow’s vote; we will call the vote at 10.00 O’clock tomorrow. We had agreed that we would meet tomorrow and so we need to take this vote tomorrow and we finish with the rules and we move forward. Is that okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 16 March 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
