Tuesday, 16th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued from 11th March, 1993)

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At least, I am really very happy for this opportunity having been here for four weeks.  I also stand to support the Bill.  This is a very important period because, we would like to accept that at least, NRM, not like other regimes which were before - here, are now to deliver democracy - that of the people; because the power which has been held up by Amin for sometime on and on, were really disturbing.  So, it is in this connection that I say if the Movement is very serious, it should give this power generously so that we do not have to rig in one way or another.  For example, people are saying, okay, if time has come mature for the power to be given to the voters, then, the voters should have much say than anybody rigging the voter. I am surprised, if people on last several Debates, people were talking about referendum.  Referendum, how do you give a voter a condition like that one? The voter is not fighting against another voter so that, there is a national referendum immediately; because the voters are remaining to be our judge.  Me, I am saying, that let us be responsible to a voter in Uganda if we are going to be serious about democracy.  In my area, people are asking me why I do not want to come back and ask us for more power?  We elected you, if you are in the Parliament, Kalaki is there!  But I told them that the people are telling us that there should be a secret ballot paper activity. Then, they say okay, if it is so, let us be uniform; because if you are going to take bath, you should wash yourself, not only the face or the back and say you are washed.  

So, if people are very serious about democracy and we are very serious in practising democracy, let us do it honestly so that people in Uganda, outside Uganda accept that, thought the NRM, we are really going back to democracy.  I thank the Government for the first time, has shown that it is willing to come back to democracy from autocracy; because in past periods, Government have been forced to the people of this country.  So, there is nothing wrong, as I see it, but unfortunately, when the Minister by the day he was submitting his Bill, when he told us that, people who elected you, say, you go back and seek a fresh mandate.  This was very disturbing, because, for me, I have no quarrel with my Constituency, they have never called me back.  So, I find it very difficult - what do I go and tell them now?  Has the term of NRM ended so that I go for fresh elections? Because that one is very much disturbing, the voter cannot tell us what is the matter of the day, is it because we have to practice the ballot paper through or what?  Because, already in Uganda, people have cherished the RC system.  It is the order of the day wherever you go and are wondering, is it going to be an embarrassment the moment we shall start doing the secret ballot paper?   What about the RC system, which is already in existence? This is what people are asking.  Otherwise, the country generally is watching the proper transitional element of Government we are now doing up to the last day we shall hand over power to the people.  Maybe, briefly, I am really happy to note that all the parties in Uganda are interested in this Bill.  Everybody wants now to go to the polls and in so doing, it is a credit to NRM because, let us cal upon everybody.  Formerly, some parties would not be willing to listening to the word the new Constitution.  Today, everybody is interested to go and campaign in the village and I am assuring you, campaign is on the ground already, nobody will stop it and I am appealing to all Ugandans who are in power not to fear parties; because, after all, what are parties? They are people of Uganda.  Wherever, you find human beings, these are people of Uganda.  

So, what I am saying is that, let us not exclude anybody so that next time, they will say we were not there.  I was thinking that if it was possible, people who are outside now in exile should also be allowed to come and we participate, we get into one agreement that we shall cherish for yours and years.  For example, if I would want to go back next time and stay in Kalaki as a farmer, I should not like to see somebody following me when I am retiring in my home.  So, is you, Mr. Chairman. In doing so, let us bring these people so that we sit down and we put a platform of law by which all of us shall derive the existence from that very law, so that in future we do not need to come back and make another Constitution.  This is a matter that is vital, but otherwise, everybody in Uganda is now knowing what is happening.  The Constituent Assembly, as some people were submitting that, it might be very expensive if we start saying, okay, it is a county, nobody disagrees, but when shall we register for 1994, the promised election? The people are questioning that one.  Why did we not arrive at a decision where - I would like to share with the hon. Kiyonga that there should have been Constituencies themselves ready, by this time so that the Constituent Assembly which should register the voters and the same registers would be used during the 1994 election, if there are no delaying tactics. There are questions like those. Because now, when you register the counties, next time, within the next four months, all the voters will come and register again for fresh election of 1994.  This is a duplication.  The voters are not happy. Today in Teso, we have a lot of problems surrounding the honourable farmers and the citizens of this country.  We are very poor, we cannot raise money to pay school fees for our children because the Government has jumped away from protecting the farmers.  Farmers are just left there.  There is nobody who is standing on our back to say, this is your price. Today who is standing on our back to say, this is your price.  Today, a Minister says 300/=, in the village we are buying 250/=.  Now, who will protect the farmer? We have remained terribly - lost people in this season as farmers.  The farmer is really a cheated person in this country.  I call upon Government to revisit that decision, although it is liberalisation, but it does not protect the farmer.  It is terrible, even though I would not like NRM to end up this interim period, when it has not addressed its developmental interests throughout Uganda. For example, we can now go back to East.  The moment you reach Jinja, and now step from Jinja almost to Kalaki, where is the new road for tarmac? There is nothing.  Why is that? People are wondering.  At least, when I came to this House, I expected a road like that one, fro Iganga-Tirinyi-Mbale to have been tarmacked.  I expected that one from Soroti-Lira to be tarmacked, so that would show, we are one people, otherwise, other things are fairly good but the roads are a problem.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, wind up, please. 

MR. ELYAU: I will wind up, but Mr. Chairman, these are the imbalances, which are causing us a shame; because how will I be proud of NRM if I go back? Because all of us now, are cherishing, that we are one people here and I am one of them. I do not want the Government to ignore this House; it is because of this House that the Government has been recognised throughout internationally. So, let us not be departed like a woman who is divorcing at the last minute.  (Laughter)  As I am winding up, I would like to send my appreciation to Government, which has been able to tell internationally, that, we need assistance.  And, it is through this assistance that some of us are getting our industries developed.  Our areas are getting developed because the donors have come in, in the form of NGOs.  We are building schools, we are building hospitals. This is very great, because some Governments would have feared to declare the position of government, but here, we can now progress with friends.  One of these days, I am getting my area a bit developed without Government assistance.  It is because the government has provided for the facilities.  With those remarks, I thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KIZITO MUWANGA (Nakifumba County, Mukono): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to express my contribution on this very important Bill.  I stand to support the Bill.  And having toured my constituency, and carried out consultation with my people, I intend to submit our observations and recommendations in the following areas of the Bill:
	(i) Composition;
	(ii) The Appointment of the Chairman, Deputy Chairman;
	(iii) Demarcation of Constituencies;
	(iv) The language;
	(v) The referendum
	(vi) The possibility of co-existence between the NRC and the Constituent 
                    Assembly and finally, time allowing, finances of the Constituent Assembly.

On Composition, this Bill stems from the Governments determination to restore popular democracy in this country.  It follows, therefore, that whatever we do throughout the process of making a Constitution, the will of the people must be seen to prevail.  The Constituent Assembly must not be made to appear as if it was serving the interests of one individual of Ugandans, but the entire 18 million people.  The law we are engaged in making, is the supreme law of the land, before which everybody, every Ugandan, woman and man, child, young and old will be expected to be equal.  If this principle, has to be of any meaning to us, as the Ugandans of the generations to come, we must appear to be equal in the making of this Constitution.  We should stop at nothing, in our endeavour to establish the legitimacy and credibility that this new Constitution will need to command in order to stand the test of time. Against this background, it is recommended that the Constituent Assembly should be made up of exclusively, constituencies democratically elected delegates and that, any other considerations outside democratic elections, should be discarded.  Consequently, it is proposed by the people of Nakifuma, that Section 4, Sub-section (ii) (a) and (b), which relate to specialised agencies - bodies and presidential nominees should be deleted. It defeats all human understanding, that having acknowledged the supremacy of the people, that we should be seen to be turning around and say, that the same people should be entitled to elect just part of the Constituent Assembly and that the rest of the seats should be filled in a manner over which they have no control or part to play, at all.  The 1967 Constitution, has been subject of quotation and criticism, because we know, the legislature at that time, transformed itself into a Constituent Assembly to enact that Constitution.  The question now, is how different is this Bill, if the NRC, which is the legislature now, creates the Constituent assembly, the enormous part of NRC of which will appear to be its own representatives.  I have in mind, for example, the representatives of the NRC that attempt proposed representatives from NRC to go the Constituent Assembly.

I now turn to demarcation of Constituencies.  Democracy is after people and their representation, that is how I understand it.  They recommend it, therefore, that the people of Nakifuma, that the demarcation of Constituencies be based purely and exclusively on the number of the inhabitants in a given area; where an area with between 50,000 and 70,000 should be designated a Constituency.  Going by the existing counties, municipalities and the City Divisions, it is dangerous because it will lead to overpopulation and under populated, that is, if it is done regardless of how sparsely populated or how densely populated an area is.  And this will lead to obvious consequences, the worst being that the decisions of the Constituent Assembly will be unrealistic, unrealistic in that, where you have the majority opposing or supporting an issue, it may not necessarily mean that, that majority is representing the majority of Ugandans on the ground; which means that, if that prevails, the majority on the ground will be expected to go by the wishes of the minority on the ground, but who happens to have a bigger representation in the Constituent Assembly.  This will be a mockery of democracy or democracy in divestiture and we should not allow this to happen.

Language; Section 14 of the Bill which relates to language was critically examined and found counter productive.  If an academically handicapped delegate is provided with an interpreter, the section does not provide that this same person or delegate will be provided with an interpreter when he is contributing.  It is therefore, wondered, how such a delegate would be of any meaningful use to the Constituent Assembly.  It is, therefore, recommended, that the language be English and that the minimum academic qualifications be Senior Four. 

In addition, it is recommended that any intending candidate should be devoted - should be prepared to sit for long hours and should be interested in listening and learning from his Colleagues; because if we are going to have in that Constituent Assembly delegates who are only interested in making their own contributions and after that they disappear, like it is now a tendency in this House, the Constituent Assembly will need not months but years to accomplish the task.

On the referendum, the issue presented itself as one of the rare occasions where the people of Nakifuma came out with divergent ideas.  Some thought that it was unfair to vote the referendum now and the reason they gave, was that political parties have been out of sight for seven years and, therefore, they are a disadvantaged group to contest in the race.  This view was ably counteracted by those people who argued that the political parties have enjoyed an aggregate of 17 years in active existence, that is between 1961-71, that is 10 years, from 1979 to 86, seven years, that is 17.  On the other hand, the Movement has enjoyed only seven that means that if anything, it is the Movement that is disadvantaged in this race and not the political parties.  Secondly, the others argued that it was unjustified to hold a referendum now apart from being of course, pre-emptive.  Eventually, after all has been said and done, we came to a consensus that a referendum now is electable and it is pre-requisite factor, if we have to get to the Constituent Assembly stage following what is now being heard, bearing in mind what happened recently in Arua and Nebbi.  Then the nasty instance that we had read about from the news papers here.  The Monitor reporting that the District Administrator there have been kidnapped.  That is very unfortunate, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up please. 

MR. KIZITO MUWANGA: Mr. Chairman, even without these incidents, still it is necessary to hold an earlier referendum because it would save us the headaches related to elections like - as to whether we should have supervising campaigns or free and open.

Finally, just one point, on the co-existence of the NRC and the Constituent Assembly.  A lot has been said in this august House to indicate or to prove to the hon. Minister the Mover, that the two bodies cannot co-exist, and at the same time, efficiency is maintained.  Suffice it for me to pause just one question.  I do not know whether the hon. Minister intends to arrange for by-elections that should those of us who remain this House fall short of the quorum.  Alternatively, can he tell this House at an appropriate stage what administrative measures does he have in mind that we are sure, that the two bodies can co-exist and operate simultaneously. I say this because, when the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister was contributing here, he urged this House to go ahead and create the Constituent Assembly and added that how they co-exist is purely administrative.  This was also echoed by the hon. Mover, the hon. Minister when he was recently addressing the Press Conference, he said how they co-exist is administrative.  This is like requesting somebody to be in Jinja and Masaka at the same time. I think, what the order of the two hon. Ministers or hon. Members of this House had in mind is that to have the Clerk to the National Assembly and the Commissioner to the Constituent Assembly will meet and work out the modalities as to how these bodies can co-exist and function smoothly.  It is very dangerous and quite unfair for the politicians to make decisions that are obviously unworkable and expect the implementers or the civil servants to work miracles.  So, it is very important, that this issue is resolved in, otherwise, I conclude that we shall have no alternative but to go with hon. Butagira’s Amendment. (Applause) I find it very accommodative and convenient to our situation.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI (Nominated Member): Mr. Chairman, I thank you for allowing me to participate in this very existing Debate.  First of all, I would like to make a confession. In 1981 I think it was 81, Mr. Museveni had even warned to start the war and the government of the time, because it had rigid elections.  If I had heard in 1966 April 15th  -(Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  For us of knowing what to say, we do not hear the hon. Minister and we think it is very important to tell him, we ask the Serjeant-At-Arms to organise the microphone so that we can hear. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The microphone is working.  Proceed please, it is working.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I was saying that I want to start with making a public confession that is that, I had heard, only half of the military capability of Mr. Museveni as he then was in 1981 when he started a war against the government of the time because it had rigid elections.  We would have started a war in April 1966 when the same government rigid the Independence Constitution.  (Applause) I am saying this because, I want to show the Ugandans that the issue of how a proper constitution before the table of this country is so important that we must clear the way from any sameness of a pigeonhole constitution such as one we had in 1966.  So what do we say?  We say against the majority of us here and outside of this Hall that let the people speak, let the people on this occasion, let them speak on this occasion of making a mother of the laws in this country. (Applause) Some people asked a question; how do you know that people want a new constitution? I asked, how did they know in 1966 that people wanted a new constitution? I asked that question.  Some people say this constitution is being made by the RCs, perhaps it has been made by the RCs, where were you not to put in your memorandum? (Applause) 

So, we say, if it is true that the constitution is behind made by the RCs, we say, go to the people, involve the people let the people speak after all, how more suppose you compare the numbers of RCs and the population of this country. Are there many more RCs than the people? If you say, you prove that. Some people say, ah!, the NRM are under conservative, but NRM they say has no support in that process.  The NRM is saying, go to the people even if we have no support. Now that is your problem?  I say, let us involve the people. Let us have this constitution this time stamped by the will of people and if we had in this country like we have in Switzerland and Canton, small organisations, will have been moved everybody in the making of this constitution.  

Now, what is the problem? The problem is that the hon. Members here are not capable of making a Constitution.  I can tell you, I can just mention a few names here two or three, four, five who can make a constitution for this country. The question is, is it proper? Is it proper, is it suitable for us to do so.  The answer is quite clear, if you are going to talk about the law of the causion for the people of this country who are going to suffer under the laws made, under it, the people must be involved as much as possible.  So, we said, let us go back to the people and if any one of us says, he is so capable, so popular with the populace, go to the people they will tell you, you come back here and participate in the Constituent Assembly.  The question is this.  We have most of us/me, I have people mandate here, everybody knows I am a presidential nominee.  So you say we want to fix a specific mandate to do a specific job.  The sort of short coming of the present election system is that most of us, we go before the RCs, whoever these electoral colleagues; what do we say there, he has got this and that he is a handsome man so let him go in.  We hardly say here what we are going to do here; what I am saying, Sir, is this, most of us who are here, we never elected to this Assembly this time on the process of specific manifestos, specific saying, specific programmes we are going to do so. So, when we here what we have is a general mandate legislature.  I am saying the occasion is so important that we need a specific mandate to come and do a specific job. Let people know this time; and I am requesting you to go and do that and nothing else.  Let us not come around and say because I was also elected yesterday I must go now.  Incidentally, I think that we are agents of the people.  Where is sovereignty? lies in the people, with the people, with the people.  How can we say here we have the absolute sovereignty, I think we do not have it; when I hear people saying about the individuality of that sovereignty.  The question is, but we are here to legislate nobody else can share. We cannot share this power to legislate with people, the answer is this.  As a matter of law, is not true that all the laws of this country that affect people are made by this House.  

There are bye-laws, made by municipalities, there are  cases laws made by the courts which affect the rights of obligation of people, there is also a body administrative law which is done in NEC by the executive with the administration. So, there can be no question of saying, this is sovereign in every case, in any case, I say that the question of sovereignty by definition a sovereign can delegate his power and once he has done so, those powers can be used fully, this is why because sometimes we have the Ambassadors called Extra-Ordinary and plain potentially, in other words, he has got full power to Act. (Applause) Then there is a question of special representation; I have been hearing this thing, I have heard people saying but you see while you have women there, while you have youths there, while you have the army there since they say, and the previous speaker has been saying this is going to be an attack on the supremacy of the people. But of course, if you argue that way, where are you going to have the representation of minorities in democracy? I f you are simply going to go by a simple majority.  We sometimes know, majority are not the cleverest nor the most wise.  

So, I am saying, there is scope for this particular type of exercise for the President to see who has been not opposed full or who could do something clever to say or wise to say all this issue who has not been represented or who has not put himself or herself up to come.  So, the President should really appreciate.  The people have had their say, no one will gain nothing they have elected the people they want to represent but if anybody, any group of people left, who can have something to say, something to say useful on the matter of this constitution.  I may at that time; I think the President should be allowed to appoint some people to this body.

Then there is a question of referendum: Referendum has been a proposal it is an amendment coming, they say movements against multi-parties, I think that is a wrong question, the wrong question because the right of a people, the right of two people at least, to associate politically or otherwise, that right is not negotiable. That right is not negotiable if I can associate with the hon. Minister here as matter of right, as a matter of law, of whatever, you do not go to the bus park there and say, 1,000 people who are here, do you like Mayanja Nkangi and honourable whoever associate. That is a delegation of my right to associate.  So, the question should be, not whoever on work there should be multi-parties against the movement system, the question should be, in 1994 general election, should elections be on party line?  Or should they be on the movement system? That question might sound or it will distinguish him as far and better should I say clever? Because you see, the question whether they should go on and on their right to associate cannot be attacked. You cannot impurity it. I am not talking about those organisations that are against the public interests. We have a law Sir, on the statute books, criminal law, any organisation be it a political or rather which is against the people - which is criminal, we have got a law or the Statute books now to ban that society.  I am saying any organisation, any people two or more who associate closely, this must stop, let them go on.  

So, what is the point, what is the issue at any referendum the issue should be, in 1964 should elections be conducted on party manifestos, or on the other system, and I think then people can say yes or no.  Then after sometime in 1999, we might go to another question to be proposed as far as I am concerned I would advise that the right to associate should never be put for a referendum. Because that right is fundamental. (Applause)  Then we have the question, suppose we want to have a referendum, when? Before the Constituent Assembly or after, or dully?  My own answer would be, Sir, that since people seem to be killed up on this issue, and so claims to witness some circus recently in Arua, since people seem to be killed up on this question. You could just as well have it out of the way.  You could have a referendum and then move forward to have the Constituent Assembly. (Applause)  Provided of course, those who stand for the right of comparative politics are given time to give in their case for electorate, Sir, I am saying; I support the action.  It is natural because the contents of this Bill are collective responsibility of Cabinet and I am a Member of that Cabinet. But this is the type of spirit.  I end up saying, Mr. Chairman, let the people speak. (Applause)  

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to continue my contribution.  I had promised my contribution by saying that we are privileged to be discussing this Bill, we are privileged to be charting a course for this country, and therefore, we have historical responsibility.  In case we lose sight of the entire exercise, we are about a process of creating democracy.  We are trying to build values, to build institutions to build a system that can guarantee people’s rights. Democracy is not the same thing as people’s rights are there even in the absence of democracy.  Democracy happens to be a form of government that so far man has involved that guarantees more of human rights than other forms of government.  So, therefore, the challenge of building democracy faces us unlike one of the speakers this afternoon who talked of restoring democracy, I am of the view that for Uganda the challenge is creating democracy, and that is a bigger challenge than restoring because if we knew what democracy was and we were only going back to it, perhaps we would not have gone into a competition.  The constitution we are building now is primarily because to have a basis of a democratic system; and it is from those pennies that I go to the issue of the Constituent Assembly, and its composition. The whole process of democratisation in Uganda since 1986 has been to try and build piece-meal, with those possibilities available in democracy.  It is not the case that democracy can be delivered at once; it is not like a human baby, or indeed an animal child who comes out of the womb as a unit.  Democracy is a process and there has been absence of democracy before even when we had elections, hon. Mayanja Nkangi has just pointed out that had he been in position to challenge the government then he would have done so in 1986, because  - 1966, thank you because the conditions favouring democracy had been abandoned.  Democracy was not yet there, the conditions were obliterated.  

So, what has been happening has been the question of improving, a qualitative improvement on our journey towards democracy.  So, we have had nominations, we have had historical Members, we have had elections, based on some kind of limited mandate because all of us who are here, including me who was nominated, were not elected by universal of suffrage.  Therefore, the need and the desire and the history comparative that we go even more to universal suffrage the sooner the better.  Since 86, we have had wide spread electro processes in 1987 we had elections, in 1989, in 1991.  

In 1989, returned Members to this House, including those of us who were nominated as part of that exercise.  I believe that was not the highest level of democratic attainment that we wanted to achieve, I believe that today we can do better and the chances have rendered themselves to us.  It is rather interesting if you look at Uganda and compare it with some of the neighbouring countries.  In some of the neighbouring countries it has been the government to resist elections, they have felt that, if they go elections, it will be somehow cause of instability, a cause of uncertainty.  Here, some Members in this House said, no, no, it is not in the interest of democracy to go for elections.  That is rather interesting to say the least.  Historically there are interests and one of the achievements of democracy is tolerance especially when one is not talking nonsense.  Historically there have been interests and interests have been strong and have articulated their strength and have taken over the powers of the state.  When those interests have been challenged they have resisted change.  It is rather interesting now that the government seems to be more democratic; it seems to be ahead in democratic demands and participation than some of us.  It is rather interesting because if any Members of House like this representative House says he believes in the population, says he represents the masses and there is a chance for a renewed mandate, how can that person not take the advantage of it?  Therefore, the composition of the Constituent Assembly historically, must have far ahead of the apparent reality now where some of us would want not to leave the House.  It is so happens that the elections tomorrow, if it happens for us tomorrow that we do not come to this House, after all we are here because of changed circumstances.  Many of us were not here before and we might not be here tomorrow and the world will continue and, therefore, this is precisely where history must judge us and judge us critically.  I am saying that we are saying a Constituent Assembly which is going to discuss the supreme of this country should now be debated by people who are newly elected directly using the universal suffrage and we are saying and many people talk here in this House that we extended our life here and therefore, we are being undemocratic and some of those are the same ones who are saying now we must continue. I find a disjunction in argument. (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker that we are not talking about election of 1994. We are talking about the constituent Assembly which really has nothing to do with coming to this House. 

PROF. KABWEGERE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the correction is taken because I have referred to this House as if it is a Constituent Assembly.  I accept the correction.  I am saying the Constituent Assembly specifically to discuss a Constitution should be a separate body, elected by universal suffrage and, therefore, attain a higher proclamation of democracy than all of us here are.

I now turn to the Bill.  Within the Bill, on page 5, we are told of the composition, the elected members and then those selected from specified bodies and then 15 delegates.  I want to make a comment on those. One of the problems of democratic governments is that you have a state, you have a government and you have the people.  The problem as usual is for the government to use the state against the people.  Now, the state is what? It is the army, the police, the judiciary; it is all these institutions, which are independent of individuals.  But which are used by the government to oppress.  
Now, many people have talked against including army representation in debates, it is even here in the Council or in the Constituent Assembly.  Those people do not realise that the more you domesticate the arms of the state the more you tame them, the better they will be instruments for governments for solving problems of the population because the state as a machinery can be inhuman, it is just like a gun; if a gun is in wrong hand it can be terrible but a gun left alone or in the hands of a defender is a good instrument.   

So, the issue of taming the state institutions, the bringing in of the army I would even go further to say the police could as well be represented.  Even the Prison could as well be represented because we are not only talking of a people’s army, we must also talk of a people’s police, we must also talk of a people’s prison so that the prison is not just merely a punitive institution but it is also corrective and facilitative and society therefore, must be geared towards using the state institutions to the advantage of the population rather than to their disadvantage as has been the case.  

Therefore, I am for that representation.  More importantly also the representation of the different groups like women, like the youth simply go to underscore, to underline the inclusiveness of democracy, the is part and parcel of a democratic revolution.  It is utter myopia for us at this point in time to say we can ignore the population of women when in fact they are more than 50 percent and their involvement in any programme guarantees you 50 percent of the contribution. So in the process of building democracy here, which we have not attained and many democracies have to be built. We have got to produce democracy that is why I can publicly respect hon. Mayanja Nkangi, you may not agree with him but he stand on his principles even if he is alone.  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I will wind up, Mr. Chairman.  So it is really the issue of inclusiveness.  The issue of inclusiveness is to try and bring in all the different interests and that has been the mark of achievement by the NRM, that anybody who has a contribution and even if you do not have a contribution you have brought in that in itself is a democratic stand which must be protected and must be encouraged.

If I can conclude with one small point - there are many more that I could talk about.  This is the secret ballot.  We are going to have - the Bill proposes that we should have universal suffrage and that we should have a secret ballot.  Apart from the expenses involved, the costs involved, especially when we do not have that much, I would like, to inform this House that in the study I am doing and I have done, I am now in a process or writing it up, the people who have been interviewed do support in a large numbers the idea of open voting, that is lining up.  (Applause)   And they say, like other people who have been saying their constituencies say, but the research findings I have shown that the people say that you will at the very voting day and when they are counting there one, two, three, twenty, everybody will hear and can defend a decision that they have made there.  There is one shortcoming that there are some enthusiastic candidates and there are very many around who would want to threaten and many of them would even want to give money; in one case in Bushenyi the person had his money refunded after (Laughter) I am just concluding.  My personal view, given what I have gathered through research, voting by standing behind the candidate, behind a photograph, because a candidate would not be everywhere, a big photograph of a candidate at RC I level would solve these problems, one of expenditure, second, of a problem that we have now where be it in Togo, be it in Ghana, be it where, the people think the ballots in a box tends to be cheated.  I would myself strongly recommend that we have that method rather than a secret ballots.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA (Women Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Before I go to the Bill I am requesting that we have a group photograph of the Members of this House because we are dying and dying very fast.  (Laughter)  We always sat in this House on very many occasions in a closed Session.  We sat in this House in a closed Session in 1989, when we extended the NRM lifespan.  On all occasions we have sat in close Sessions we have torn each other into pieces but at the end of the day we have come to a consensus.  I am sure that it would have been easier than may be it is now if the suggestion that the hon. Members of this House step down and we have a Constituent Assembly, it would have been easier if we came here in a closed Session tore each other and at the end I am sure we would have come to a consensus rather than being told that it was the overwhelming majority which suggested that a Constituent Assembly be instituted when it is not true according to this Book.  

Turning to the Bill, the Bill is not very clear on page 5 whether the special groups and the special nominated delegates are also paying the deposits. It is not clear about that.  Section 5 talks about the delegates as having attained the age of 21.  Now we are talking about special groups and in the Bill for the youth we said a youth is from 18.  Supposing a delegate comes, sent by the youth, and he or she is 18, is she or he going to be sent out? The people of Luwero say they have no quarrel with the President nominating or selecting the Chairman.  When you look at Section 22 (2) the Commissioner to the Constituent Assembly seems to be over protected.  Sub-Section 2 of Section 22 says; “for the purpose of performing the functions entrusted to the Commissioner under this Statute the Commissioner may bring an action before any court in Uganda and may seek from the court any remedy which may be available.  When you read down there seems to be suffocation of the rights of both the voters and the delegate because Section 24 seems to suffocate the rights of the delegate and the voters by over protecting the Commission and the sentence in Section 24 on top of page 16 says, in the middle of the sentence at the top says: Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such remedy as the court considers appropriate and just in the circumstance.  That is very vague.  On page 19 where there is a list of special bodies I would suggest that the war veterans be included because, may be that you will bring back our historicals whom we are almost kicking out.  

People of Luwero were suggesting that let the electoral area comprise of 70,000 as a cut off point because 80,000 is too high and they were giving an example of Katikamu county where there is 140,000 and that if it was 70,000 they could be able to send in two people. (Laughter)

The Bill talks about the Parish Resistance Courts.  I remember we never finished with the RC courts.  Now, I do not know which courts they are referring to in this Bill on page 25. So that one is not clear either.  The people of Luwero were suggesting that the money to be deposited was too high so they suggest 50,000/= and whereas the Bill is very clear about the citizenship of the voter, it does not mention anything about the delegate’s citizenship.  If citizenship is the one which is going to be talked about in the constitution then I do not know how they are going to base the citizenship of either the voter or the delegate.  

On page 28 the Bill is not very clear and it seems to be giving the Returning Officers and the people in charge of the voting too much powers and it is very vague because it talks – say in Section II - it talks about on page 28, Sub-section 12, in the middle it states, ‘Provided that where it is deemed by the Returning Officer to be convenient’, how convenient can it be because that leaves it to be very vague.  We have experienced very harsh Returning Officers who can manoeuvre the election and I think it should be a bit clearer than saying at his convenience.  And this drawing up of a candidates’ meeting where Returning Officer is supposed to draw up the programme and say liaise with the nominated candidate for the electoral area where it says: The Returning Officer shall allow all candidates reasonable time.  What is reasonable time? On page 28 it states, ‘Reasonable time to arrange their attendance’. These times should be specified to be clear.  And in 5 it says: In each parish, each candidate’s meeting shall be chaired by the presiding officer for that parish or by a person appointed by the Returning Officer for the purpose.  It does not mention what calibre or what status the person the Returning Officer should appoint.  So that one leaves a loophole.

On page 29, there is another vague one which says that at every candidates’ meeting the presiding officer shall introduce the candidates one by one and allow each candidate reasonable time but in each case not less than twenty minutes.  At one time I was a victim where others were  given five minutes I was told to stop when I had tasked for three minutes. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA: Mr. Chairman, this time should be specified because the Returning Officer can decide who can take an hour or twenty minutes.  Whereas one person can be given only twenty minutes another one can take a whole hour depending on the taste of the Returning Officer.

Mr. Chairman, another one is when the -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up please.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA: Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. TUMWESIGYE (Historical Member): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. There are so many things to talk about in this Bill but I will confine myself to two issues. One is whether a new Constituent Assembly should be established and secondly I will talk a little about the referendum.

An impression has been created in this House that this Bill we are debating was based on the proposals of the Constitutional Commission.  This is not true.  This is a Government Bill and the proposals belong to the Government and the Government must defend the proposal and it is not even correct for a feeling to be created that we are free to go along or not to go along, the Government does not mind.  I think the government should mind because these are the proposals of the government.  I remember these matters were debated on in NEC for a very long time.  In fact, a lot of proposals of the Constitutional Commission were rejected.  After this, these proposals went to cabinet and they were thoroughly debated.  I was not there I was informed reliably that they were thoroughly debated.  So these are very serious proposals of the government and the government must be ready to defend them not to just say if you want you can oppose them, if you do not want you can support them. I think that would not be right. 

We should know where we are.  If we are to seriously debate this Bill we should know where we are and where we are coming from.  It is only a few years when this country was in turmoil and thanks to the NRM Government, it is not that peace and sanity has come to this country and we should, therefore, not assume that this situation is obvious and should be taken for granted, I think we are still in a rather transitionally situation and we handled it with care that it deserves.  Since 1986, the NRM Government has been on a steady course of democratization in 1986 that is when the RC system was established and that is when the elections were conducted, free and fair elections.  In 1989, new elections were held expanding NRC, I remember, even that time it was not quite certain whether we should have elections or not because there were also invested interest at that time.  We had some Ministers, for example, who had just been appointed Ministers, and when they were told that elections were going to be held for all NRC positions except Historicals; some people were not happy about the elections, they were not happy because they were mindful of the fact that maybe, the election may not return them and indeed some Ministers did not come back, some of you may know some of the Ministers who were not re-elected, I do not want to mention their names but they were very important Ministers to the NRM Government. Some did not even have the opportunity of being nominated they were very, very important to the NRM but in the interest of the democratization process in this country, NRM said no, we must have elections to expand NRC and elections were conducted and that is how many of you hon. Members came to this House.  I think in the same spirit we really must agree to the establishing of a new Constituent Assembly to debate this Constitution.  If this is not done, they will call this Constitution, NRM Constitution, which would be most unfortunate.  You should remember that NRC is the supreme organ of NRM, according to Legal Notice No.1; power was taken from NRM and handed over to NRC so NRC is the supreme organ of NRM Government, we should not forget that.  Now, if NRC the organ of NRM is going at the same time to debate and pass this Constitution, I am afraid future generations may not distinguish clearly the difference between the Constitution of 1994 and the Constitution of 1967. Because the 1967 Constitution was also passed the same way by Members of Parliament who their terms had already expired and they sat and debated the Constitution and passed it.  We have been in fact the main reason why we are saying we should have a new Constitution is because we believe that the manner in which the 1967 Constitution were passed of course, I do not even mention the pigeon whole Constitution of 1966.  We believe that there was not sufficient involvement of the people in the making of these Constitutions, I may concede that there was a little more involvement of the people in the 1962 Constitution. But in the 1967 Constitution, there was hardly any involvement and of course, the 1966 does not have to be mentioned.  Therefore, it is incumbent on all of us that we should avoid the pit-holes which these other Constitutions fail into that they did not involve the people, that they did derive their legitimacy from the people.  I think, this is what NRM has been trying to avoid all this time that is why the Constitutional Commission has been getting the memorandum from RCs; from RC I up to the highest to make this Constitution of the people not a Constitution of NRM not a Constitution of Museveni, because Museveni is not interested in having a Constitution called after him. If we make a mistake of debating and passing this Constitution as NRC, I think, we shall not be forgiven from this accusation.  

So, I appeal to hon. Members that we deprive ourselves off this power give this power to a new body and let this new body debate and pass the Constitution -(Applause)- this Constitution will be the Constitution of the people and it will have respect and it will have legitimacy.  It is the same reason why the Army Council sat and decide that they should not debate and pass this Constitution, because the Law also gives them the power to debate and pass the Constitution. Sometime we forget about this, but the Army Council has the legal power to debate and pass the Constitution and they could also urge that we do not want to be deprive of our power we shall exercise this power and debate and pass but we did, be in the interest of the Constitution order that we are trying to establish that the Army should debate and pass the Constitution, in my view it would not.  I think it is enough if the Army can elect 10 Members and they become part of the Constituent Assembly and they debate and pass the Constitution but not some - you may forgive me I do not know the exact number it could be 300, they could be 4 I do not know, but if they were to sit with NRC and debated and pass the Constitution would that Constitution really have a good future, would it be durable, would it be long lasting? I do not think so.  I think the Army Council rightly decided that the business of debating and passing the Constitution should be the business of a body elected by the people though with just a token representation.  

So, I appeal to Members that we should also agree like the Army Council did, we should also agree to deny ourselves - I myself would be in that body, I have got an interest in debating and passing the Constitution.  I think really, in the interest of the long of the stability peace and constitutional wise in this country that we have not had, we should allow a new body to be established to debate and pass the Constitution.  I have read hon. Butagira’s Amendment and he has now amended his amendment, I hope he is not going to amend the Amendment of the Amendment, but I think that, that amendment is not based on what principle whatsoever, this is my believe, it is not based on any principle if it is legalism that is the main point of hon. Butagira’s Amendment.  Then let us go to legalism and say NRC and the Army Council debates and pass the Constitution because that is what the Law says.  But if it is another principle of making the people elect their body giving it as hon. Mayanja has said, a specific mandate a specific assignment to debate and pass the Constitution then the Amendment does not have any basis whatsoever it is one thing or the other, because you cannot say a compromise, a compromise must also be principled and I think really that this compromise has no principle in it, say: let us combine now it was 180 but now it has increased from 180 to 300 why 300? Maybe tomorrow it will be 500. No, I think we must be principled let us decide here to establish a new body because the people must see that this Constitution is theirs -(Interruption) 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman, I wanted to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor that the heart of politics is the heart of compromise.  Thank you, Sir,

MR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, I thought I said sometimes compromise is good but compromise must never be at the expense of principle, it must be principled compromise.  Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, I admit that, human as we are, it is not always easy to deprive yourself of power this is human nature it is not always easy. I was listening to the radio where President Yelstin of Russia and People’s Congress are involved in a target of war about power no one wants to lose power.  But I think the situation we are in really is completely different, and in any case, this is a Constituent Assembly that is going to be in power for some three or five month to do some specific job and after they have done the job they will go back, they will go back and we shall continue with our power at least during the interim period -(Interjection)- yes, we shall continue with our power passing Laws, passing Resolutions for one and half years this is not little power.  But if we are going to urge that the Constituent Assembly is going to be more supreme, now where is our supremacy?  It is not going to take us anywhere.  The truth is that the sovereignty.  So, I think he was dividing sovereignty in four parts, legal sovereignty, military sovereignty, I think really there is one sovereignty and it lies with the people -(Applause)- not with us, we are just representatives driving our legitimacy from the people but not outside the people.  The people elected some of us here and they have the right to say, we do not want to elected you again, as the Bible says, like the good lord the people give and the people take away praise be to the people -(Laughter.) We should accept that, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

MR. TUMWESIGYE: So, Mr. Chairman, I do not think we really need to die just because we are not in NRC I think really we should accept if the people want to re-elect us here or to the Constituent Assembly that is up to the people.  If they do not, I will comfortably go and do my duties either here or elsewhere, I do not have to die for it, there are so many things in this world to do.  So, honestly I do not think that we should spend so much time urging over this to me relatively simple issue.  I will talk a little bit on the referendum and the referendum - not as a lawyer as a politician.  This is not the first time that people’s will be hijacked in this country, in 1980 I was part of a body a supreme body which debated the issue of whether this country should conduct elections on the basis of political parties or on the basis of the umbrella, at that time even people were concerned about - politics they were as much concerned about partisan politics as they are now.  We debated some of my Colleagues here remember that every well, we debated and the NCC passed the resolution that election were going to be conducted on the basis of the umbrella not at the basis of - immediately after there was a - we were overthrown, it was decreed that elections were going to be conducted on the basis of parties and what followed disaster for this country, and actually the same actors are still the same actors today who are trying to push us in that direction.  I think we must resist this, if the people of Uganda say, wait for another five years before party politics come why cannot we listen to that, why can we not accept it?  If the issue is whether people are saying so or not let us ask them.  let us ask the people and they will say whether they want election to be based on parties or on the Movement and then we shall do something else.  You will get a feeling that some people -(Interruption)

MR. MATEKE: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member addressing this august House to say that this NRC should do the work of the Constituent Assembly?

THE CHAIRMAN: Quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr. Chairman, that is very far from what I said.  I said that let the people be asked what they want and we as servants of the people will follow whatever decision they make.  Lastly, I want to talk briefly about freedom of association.  To my understanding no one is against freedom of association and as I am talking people are freely associating. I have not heard anyone who is saying that there should be no freedom of association in this country.  Some of us are saying that the country has the right to say that for purposes of elections, elections shall be based on this and that, that would not be hampering or in any way curtailing the freedom of association.  I think we have got a different perception of what freedom of association actually means, say, that associate as you will but for purposes of elections you are not going to be allowed to associate, it is not necessary against the freedom of association I know many European countries which have provisions in their constitution which say, for purposes of elections we shall not associate in this way. For example in Portugal, they say, for purpose of elections there will be no regional parties, regional parties are not allowed in Portugal in some countries I have heard they have prescribed parties based on religion and probably we should do the same because it seems the only way our people can do election - can politics through the church and probably the mosque they know no other way of going about it  -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up.

MR. TUMWESIGYE: So, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for the time you have given me and I support the Bill.

MR. KASUJJA (Mawogola County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand here to support the Bill, yet even as I do so I have obliged to point out few issues.  We are all here because we have the people’s mandate and since this august House came into being we have done a lot of work passed man Bills and so on.   As you may recall we extended our terms of office up to 1994 and we all remember that a number of reasons were raised to justify this extension of turmoil.  One of the many reasons was re-constitutional making process. Government now, however, seem to have made around-about turn saying that we are not fit to debate this Constitution.  Yet we have been instrumental in most of the decisions made the peace that has facilitated the making of the Constitution is in part of our credit.  If the Government wants a completely new body I would suggest that these new elected persons simply come and join us, I say this because, we came here in this House we found some Historical Members who are with us up to now, up to date.  That is why, those of us who came here as people’s representatives are now - became historicals. Then, like we joined these Historicals, let us in turn be joined by this group of people - join us! I believe, this way, we shall have very fruitful deliberations.  

Mr. Chairman and Member of this House, we shall not forget that however, we will be elected in this period before the 1994 election will be regarded as Historicals.  Even they will be elected before 1994, they will be regarded as Historicals.  It is therefore, my sincere belief, that it would be wrong for us to abandon the ship at this stage; to abandon an issue such as gravity as a Constitution and leave it to a completely new team to debate.  This would even enable us to guide each other, ensure full representation of the interest of the people of Uganda and to enable produce a document that would ensure posterity in this beautiful country of ours.  There is another point.  This is about the 1962 Constitution.  Hon. Members as we cannot change the day when we got our Independence.  I, likewise feel, we should not completely avoid the 1962 Constitution.  We should simply modify it, add what we see fundamental to our present Uganda and subtract what does not tally with our development plans.  I believe, this way, we shall even eliminate possibilities of yet the new Constitution  Drafts by other Government that will follow.

About parties, I would like to request hon. Members to go for a referendum to decide whether we want multi-party or we want Movement.  Thank you very much.

MR. RUTAROH (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman to give me an opportunity to give my views on the Constituent Assembly Bill and the views from my Constituency.  First and foremost, I would like to say that I support the Bill, because this is, I think, the only way to consult the people in the name of democracy.  When we extended our term of office, one of the several reasons given that time, was to strengthen the pillars of Government and I think, submitting ourselves to the will of the people is one way to demonstrate or one of the practices of the smooth hand-over of Government.  And the more often we do that, I think, the better.  When NRM came to power, a good number came in with guns, the population joined.  At that time, the NRC was very small; some 38 Members - original Members. When they came, they expanded by appointing Ministers and various other people.  Then, they realised that there was need to expand the NRC and hence, we came in.  To me, this looks like, starting from an apex of a pyramid going down, where the base of the pyramid, is the people themselves.  And I think, if we move down to that base of the pyramid, it will be best for this nation.  I have some problems with a few things that have been said in this House.  Unfortunately, they have been said by the same people who have always said the same things; since time immemorial.  Our history, if it is good, our political history, then we have every good reason to follow these people and if our history is bad, I think, we have no business continuing to listen to them.  The conduct and results of elections of the Constituent Assembly, I believe, will go along way to making the resultant Constitution credible or incredible.  If the elections are conducted well, then we can expect good results.  But the conduct of those elections, itself, will largely depend on the way we deliberate on this Bill.  I am sure Ugandans will be very, very tired of people who start wars they cannot finish.  We have had of people singing freedoms and freedoms they cannot quite define. Allow me to quote Frederick Albert, who was the first Post-First World War Germany, and he had this to say.  I quote, “Liberty and justice are twins.  Freedom can only evolve within a stable system of Government.  The first commandment for those who cherish freedom, is to protect it and where it has been violated, to restore it.” While serious people, fight for their freedom, these old hands at politics in this country have only been talking and talking and reciting the same thing all over and over again.  This demonstrates to me, the shallow level of appreciation of the same freedom that they sing.  They are the same who are largely responsible for our political history that I have already talked about and I want to insist on saying that if our history is good politically, then let us follow them.  But if it is bad, hon. Members, like I know it is, I think it is our duty to chart a new course, go to the people as often as practicable.  And I wish to insist that we go to the people in spite of the sympathies that I have for my Colleagues who would not like us to go to the base, but insist on retaining NRC Members; but going back to the people does not remove the freedom of our participation.  We are being asked to go.  Hon. Kabwegyere did say that even if we wanted to stay here, one of us will either pass away, somebody else will come in because of our bad governance and remove us and life will still continue.  So, the earlier we move ourselves to the people, I think the better.  It is in the interest of the majority that we go to the people even if we all do not come, life will still continue.  It may be even worse if we all come back in my view because statistically, it may indicate some unfair play at some stage.  It is not normal that you all go and all come back the way you have gone.  Turning to the main body of the Bill, the constituents that I consulted had an objection to the election or to the nomination of a chairman of the Constituent Assembly by the President.  Personally, I am of the view that after the experiences, I have personally passed through and a few Members I have consulted, it will not be very easy, a week after we have been brought here as Constituent Assembly Members to be able to evaluate the credits to individuals to be elected to that Chair that you are sitting in.  I would therefore, suggest and appeal to my fellow Members and Colleagues that we support the idea of the President nominating a Chairman, particularly if we guide the Cabinet as to how to advise him.  What we can do, for example, is to make an Amendment, ask him to give the Assembly some three names and then you can let him from the names at that particular time.  The President has not only the powers, but has all the ways of knowing most of the people - most of the population and it will be unfortunate if we do not utilise the knowledge that he has.  If the Nominated Members are unacceptable to the Assembly, that would be unfortunate.  But to pick on anybody, just like that, may make that Assembly bad in itself.  I had difficulty agreeing with my people on the idea of political parties.  They were of the view that political parties should be represented.  But me, I have one or two interesting questions.  Was the proposal, and I am now asking the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, to include political parties based on the results of the talks between the political parties and NRM? Because there was that discussion which faded away, I do not know whether it is still continuing, but it would be interesting to know what the parties said, and what NRM said, so that we know whether the parties are worth supporting or not.  The other question is, why would you like to have both UPC and CP represented each by two people, when UPC had many Members in Parliament and therefore, a reflection of its popularity, as of 1980, while CP had none; a reflection also, of the unpopularity at that particular election? Why would Government today, assume that other parties have not been formed, although not allowed to register because of the present suspension?  Why would you like to think that those who are not legible to vote in 1980, have not matured and think differently from the UPCs, the DPs, the CPs and UPMs?  I do believe, after all these questions, even before I get to your answers, that parties should not be represented.  Besides, in the course of our debates here, we have had people standing up, to confess their partisan positions.  They belong to either this party or the other in which case, when they are asking us to go and seek specific mandate from the people, they are asking those partisans to go and seek that mandate.  That is, the parties will invariably be represented in the choice of the people.  If they think they are worth presenting anything, the people will naturally elect them and they will be in the constituent Assembly.  I wish to enquire from the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs, whether or not he has given a thought to giving a referendum as hon. Mayanja put it, to ask the people, whether we follow the umbrella politics from 1994 or the partisan type of politics; before we get to the Constituent Assembly because the process of campaigning for the Constituent Assembly should have already given people direction if they want to contest a seat on multiparty, they will have already been directed and if they want the umbrella, they will also have been directed, so that at the time we go for the Constituent Assembly, people already know which method they are going to follow and the likes of my brothers and sisters who go out saying the people want parties or people do not want parties, will have been silenced.  At that time, I had a good debate about representation by the Army. A number of people have stood up to say, if the Army debates this, then, it will be called an NRA Constitution, if it does not debate it, I do not know what Constitution it will be called.  I was very, very unfortunate not to know what the gentleman meant by an NRA Constitution, because NRA has participated.  Why would you not conclude that this Constitution is going to be called a Rutaro Constitution, because Rutaro has participated in debating that Constitution?  Why would you not conclude that the population of Uganda, particularly has been deprived because it is being debated by few? It is not possible to have everybody coming here to debate that Constitution, not at all.  So, there must be people to represent sections of the people, interested parties, and I think NRA should be represented.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.

MR. RUTAROH; Finally, I would like to talk about the President nominating 15 Members.  Revolutions, particularly violent ones, have been a result of failure to recognise minority interest. The minority of today will be the majority of tomorrow. We have a live example, in NRA.  They went to the bush when they were only 27 and they came back in very, very, very big numbers.  In this connection, I would like to lend support to the proposal that the President uses his discretion to appoint 15 Member to fill these small interest groups.  I had lots of trouble with the other groups, because they are all represented already, but in case, after election, it is realised that there are certain interest groups that have not been represented, we should give somebody mandate to fill those - or to plug those holes and in this case, I would like to support the proposal by the Minister, that the President does nominate 15 people to the Constituent Assembly.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In my contributions, I will refer to a great extent to this report, the interim revised report and will also, as much as possible, convey the views of the people that I represent.  The discussion we are having here, is very important, is beyond sectarian lines, it is beyond parties and if you look at paragraph 13, the Commission emphasises the importance of the constitution making process in that second part of that paragraph.  It states that, ‘it is crucial for the acceptability and legitimacy of the new Constitution that its adoption is handled in ways that will ensure the majority of people believe in it and accept it is their own.’  In other words, the majority of the people of Uganda, at the end of the day must believe that this Constitution is their constitution, and I take it that whatever interest we represent, we all should believe this statement.  I was a little bit disturbed by three statements that have been made in this House.  The first statement was made by hon. Sibo when he said that the figures that appeared in this report were not the figures that originally were collected.  In other words, the figures in this report do not really represent the views of the people.  The Minister was here, other people were here, and I thought the Minister would clear the air by either confirming the statement made by hon. Sibo or by coming up with other information, but he did not.  The other statement which Mr. Sibo made was in respect of the fact that according to him, this Bill represents what donor countries want and really if that is true, then it means that we are wasting our time, we should pass the Bill as it stands.  Now, the third disturbing matter which was raised this afternoon was by hon. Tumwesigye that the constitutional commission submitted various proposals to NEC and many of these proposals were rejected by NEC I take it that those proposals by the Constitutional Commission were based on the findings of the Constitutional Commission, and I do not know what basis NEC used to reject those recommendations.  So, Mr. Chairman, when we talk about legitimacy -(Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, as you all know I am a Member of NEC, and NEC did not discuss anything short of this report.

MR. NJUBA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I am a little bit disturbed whether I should give information at this stage or reply at the end, because everybody says it seems the Minister is keeping quiet, but I cannot answer each and every point raised at this stage.  I can give an example. I told the House that Government had reconsidered its position on the provision about the requirement for residence but up to now people keep on acquiring answer on the same question.  I beg to be allowed to reply to all these points, at the close, at the winding up, it is a normal practice.  But there is a serious point, hon. Sibo, referred to the figure in that report, there were 1901 memorandum that supported a Constituent Assembly.  They were 581 that were for the NRC and all the figures we had in consideration before, and those are the figures still are in this report.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate those comments by the Minister, I quite agree that the Minister needs not to answer everything but I think there are some comments which have got to be answered in order to clear the air at that material time.  I am glad that he has answered those questions.  I like other people, also made an extensive tour of my county with a view to establishing the views of the people of Bugweri concerning the Constituent Assembly.  I must say that I was overwhelmed by the response of the people, because at every Gombolola Headquarters, a lot of people turned up and Gombolola halls were filled to capacity by RCs, elders, opinion leaders and so on; and we discussed this Bill at length sometimes lasting two-three or even four hours, and this Bill as it stands, is viewed by the people of Bugweri as representing what would be an ideal situation.  However, the people believed that this Bill if it was to be implemented as it stands, there would be a number of problems.  First of all, in their view, the very moment you invite people for an election, that is an invitation to campaigning, and the system that is being given within the Bill, to have these meetings at Parish level, these meetings cannot be regarded as campaign, and people know that there will be campaigns whether we like it or not, whether we pass this law in its form or not, campaigns are going to go on even at night, and therefore, people will not be stopped from campaigning that is point number one; point number two; again once you bring about elections, it is inevitable that people will not actually campaign according to their parties, and therefore, the major fear is that, if parties are permitted to campaign and as indeed they will campaign, the party which will win the elections is the one which will have the majority of people in the Assembly, will be the party which will make the Constitution for the people.  Okay, that is a fact.  Now, if you carry it further the belief is a that then the constitution might be diluted, might be changed, some of the aspects which the Constitutional Commission put in the Constitution on the basis of the opinion of the people may not actually be eliminated from the constitution.  Once this happens, people will be divided. Already campaigns are taking place on the basis of parties; and therefore, if one person representing a given party, were to be elected to the Assembly, the others who do not belong to this party are wondering how they will reach him and give him their views, and consult him on how the constitution should be made, and so on and so forth.  The people of Bugweri do not object to parties, they are very active-party people, but they are saying that to have elections at this time, is untimely.  Because it will definitely bring in party-politics, it will divide the people, it may result in violence because many people will go ahead and conduct party campaigns whether they like it or not.  There are people in fact, who are willing to be arrested because they have been found publicly conducting party-politics; okay! What will happen is that government will be all the time having to fight parties, and what a most unfortunate time for that to happen.  

So, much as people believe that, the only way to have a constitution which will be legitimate, will be by having a Constituent Assembly which will be elected by the people, that legitimacy could be undermined if it is found out that, in fact, it was one party which was predominant in the Assembly.  They will give the Constitution the name of that party; just as we fear that the Constitution could be named NRM Constitution.  So, that will undermine its legitimacy.  Furthermore, if elections are characterised by violence, and already there are signs of this, again the legitimacy of the constitution will be disputed.  So, I get surprised when hon. members here are arguing that, the only way to get legitimacy of this constitution is through elections, it is not the only way.  In fact, in its own way, is not enough, the legitimacy of the constitution can still be questioned if all these things we are mentioning do happen, and indeed they can happen, and already there are signs that they might happen.  There are indications that not many people in Uganda and outside who would like us to succeed in making a new constitution.  These people will fight tooth and nail to make the whole constitution making process come to nothing, and there are fears that money can even come from outside to affect the election process so that the whole thing is derailed.  

So, much as people may believe that, the only way to get legitimacy is through elections, this may not be so as you can see.  All of us want at the end of the day to have a constitution that will be accepted by everybody in Uganda. But in the Bill itself there are built in weaknesses that can actually undermine the legitimacy of the Constitution.  Of course, Members have made -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek information from the speaker on the Floor that what the people of Bugweri, his Constituency, thing of this House.  Because I am a bit confused.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. was reading my mind, he wanted me to get to that as soon as possible, but the people did not come up without a formula, we have seen the formula outlined by hon. Butagira, that formula would be okay, but it cannot deal with some of the major fears the people expressed.  That is dividing the people in terms of these elections and so on.  The possibility of violence and so on, and so forth; and what people have, actually, proposed is that the National Resistance Council in its current form, should be married together with the various interested groups and social forces in order to make a constitution.  What it means basically is this, that since the National Resistance Council has elected Members though not in the way the Bill wants it to be, it has the nominated Members, it has historical Members, it has the army in addition to women and both the youth and workers. What we want now, and what was actually proposed, was that parties should actually be definitely and independently represented regardless of the various party members who are already in the NRC and with a much bigger number, rather than the numbers that have been proposed in the Bill so that the parties feel they are not marginalised, but fully recognised as separate entities going to have an opportunity to discuss the constitution together with other people.  In addition, the religious bodies were mentioned by the Constitutional Commission in their report here.  The Minister did not mention why in his view they should not be included.  We know very well that religious organisations have followers sometimes in bigger numbers than some of the parties and therefore, as a social force, it will be wrong to simply ignore this group of people when you are formulating a constitution. Now, in addition to the army, it is also proposed that, the police and the prison’s services should be represented.  Then there are also smaller minority groups which tend to be marginalised which are under-privileged, which are sometimes neglected, and these are the disabled, the old, the weak, and so on, and the proposal is that these people should be represented.  The Constitutional Commission also proposed at least one representative of the disabled.  The Minister did not find it fit to include a disabled person in this Constituent Assembly, but I think we should make a provision to present those minorities.  

So, the advantages of this kind of arrangement would be as follows: (Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, whoever represents a county and that county is in Uganda, includes members of the armed forces, includes the women, includes the youths, and includes nearly any person you can think of.  So, what are we following in Uganda when we create special groups to represent special groups to represent different categories, are they going to be on another planet connected with Uganda, or is it a round way of doing things?  

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, the question by hon. Wanendeya, arises from the recommendation of the Constitutional Commission itself, the Constitutional Commission recognised that in addition to county representatives interested groups, and social forces should also be represented.  I think he wants further information he could seek it from the Constitutional Commission.

The proposals that I have made have the following advantages; one of the advantages is found in paragraph 36 of this report.  The report gave as one of the advantages for the option of NRC doing the constitutional making exercise was the experience of NRC.  The other one was broad baseness of the Assembly; another one was saving time, because you will not have to go through all these elections.  The other advantage is that it would include various political parties and finally, that it will be less costly.  So, those advantages are not my advantages they are actually given in the report.  But much more than that, there are other social forces and different parties that would be included in the Assembly that originally are not mentioned in the Bill.  So, that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, wind up please.

MR. MWANDHA:  Yes, and also most importantly is the fact that the problems of elections as we know them, such as rigging as hon. Mayanja Nkangi mentioned; and problems of violence which characterise elections in this part of the world.  All these problems would be avoided and these, in my view are the most important advantages.  

Then when we have that kind of arrangement, there will be no single force that will claim the constitution as being their own constitution.  But my final point, which is being recommended by the people is that, as much as possible, this constitution must be distributed widely and extensively in the country and must be discussed by various people at all levels so that, as a matter of fact, the people that will be coming will know with no doubt what the people are talking about, and that will ensure legitimacy of the Constitution because everybody will know what is in the Constitution.  Nobody will say it belongs to NRM, it belongs to UPC or it belongs to DP because everybody will know what is contained in the Constitution and every delegate will know what to support because he will have heard what the people want and therefore in this kind of situation we shall be sure of legitimacy.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Luwero): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to say something about this Constituent Assembly Bill.  I have a message from the people of Buruli or Nakasongola County and also a message from the members of the Luwero Triangle War Veterans’ Association.  Both these groups support the Bill very stoutly and they asked me to request the hon. Members to give it every possible support.  The Bill, is looked at as a process towards democratisation.  Particularly the Veterans, they say; they went to the bush to make sure that this country would at one time have proper democratic rule.  They therefore, see this Bill as a step in the right direction.  Soon or later the dream they had when they went there will be realised.  Therefore, every effort should not be spared to support this Bill. 

Generally the people of Nakasongola are happy with the composition of the Constituent Assembly; as the Bill provides. They do not see anything wrong with it.  It is very good and therefore, it is worth supporting but while I was listening to the contributions of various Members in this House; I got persuaded also to think that the women should get more representation in the Constituent Assembly.  It would be very, very appropriate if every district pushed or elected one-woman representative, one-woman delegate to the Constituent Assembly. 

In Nakasongola we feel at ease if the President appoints the Chairman of the Assembly as provided for in section 9 of this Bill.  This is because we have confidence in the President and because of his Historical role in contributing towards the democratisation of this country.  We can say, for almost more than half of his lifetime he has been crusading for democracy.  Not only here but even in the region -this region of East Africa as a whole, therefore because of that we have no doubt that he is capable of choosing a Chairman who will not in any way derail us or who will not have other ulterior interests but he will choose a Chairman, who will actually steer the Assembly very well and make sure that we come out with a proper Constitution.  A Constitution, which will be liked by the people.  More so the President will not make this choice on his own.  He is also going to do it with the advice of the cabinet and this is the only really practical way of solving otherwise this tricky issue.  We have had an example here; we elected NEC Members but then there were complaints.  If people who are newly elected come in - they do not know one another, other undemocratic and unorthodox criteria might be used for electing a Chairman and then later on the country will live to regret.  This has happened.  It is likely to happen again but if the President makes a choice, it is a practical way of solving this problem.  We do not know what people might turn up in the Assembly.  We might have democrats, congress people, and a motley collection of various people who might not know one another.  How shall we fare if for instance we have a congress person/woman, let us in the name of Cecilia Ogwal being elected as Chairman? I do not know.  So, we feel that the President should choose the Chairman of the Assembly.  We see no contradiction in having a Constituent Assembly and the National Resistance Council operating at the same time, really.  Therefore, there is no reason why we should talk of dissolving the National Resistance Council during the lifetime of the Constituent Assembly.  Dissolution really has far reaching implications and it might open certain forces for which the country is not prepared at the moment.  So, we feel that it is possible to have two bodies doing their respective jobs; if for instance some Members find themselves in the Constituent Assembly, then a way can be worked out.  

Somebody talked of time-tabling.  Actually, appropriate time-tabling can be done so that the two bodies work hand in hand.  They work together and discharge their duties without necessarily dissolving the other.  When I look around, I am very confident that if we went for elections, I am sure we would be returned.  I am very sure of that.  We would be returned -(Interjection)- yes, there should be no fear over this. When I look around at the various hon. Members in the House, I see we have Professors, we have doctors, we have consultants, we have seasoned politicians.  We have a wide group of people.  We have Professionals, we have even those very, very old politicians who were there in the 60s in the LEGCO.  They are here and I can say with confidence that I think this is the most professional, most highly learned Parliament that this Country has every had.  So, we cannot really get worried that if we went to present ourselves before the people we would fail to come back.  I wish to challenge those people who are saying that we have no mandate and that we are not representatives. -(Interjection)- Yes, we are representatives.  We have the mandate. To prove this, I think it is better we go back and stand with those people who say we do not have mandate and I can bet here that very many of us will be returned and then those people who have been saying that we do not have the mandate will be ashamed.  We cannot imagine where they will be.  So, for us, I think the question of going back should not be really a big problem. 

Article 23 gives a lot of power to the Commissioner to the effect that he or she shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.  This is indeed a lot of power; but not withstanding this Commissioner is going to be appointed by the President, probably we are going to have a very good Commissioner but I thought having the Commissioner with so much power without anything trying to regulate the use of this power in the Bill; could lead to power being misused, I do not know.  So, I would request the Minister for Constitutional Affairs to revisit this Clause and make sure that there is a way in which the Commissioner can be answerable to the authority of the people.

Article five, Section four in the third Schedule talks of the Parish RC Court handling some election complaints.  There would be nothing wrong with this but before this can be achieved, I feel that adequate preparation should be given to these RC people so that they can handle these complaints effectively.  So, as the Bill stands now, I would be reluctant to give my consent to this kind of Article unless something is in-built to ensure that these people will handle the complaints quite reasonably well or legitimately well.  

The nomination fee of 100,000/= in our opinion, the people of Buruli and Veterans is bit on the high side and we would request that it be reduced a bit to let us say 50,000/-.  Why?  Really you know the economic situation now.  It is not really very, very pleasant to very many Ugandans and we might lose some very useful Ugandans just on that issue alone.  Secondly, we should, I think avoid as a matter of principle creating a plutocracy.  We should avoid pushing people to positions of power or decision making just because they are rich or because they can pay.  We know that not very many rich people are really very democratic or adhere to the principles of democracy which this Constituent Assembly Bill is try to seek or which even the Constitution is going to bring about.  So, to avoid that pitfall there is no reason why we should not put the fee at 50,000/=.  In 1989, very many of us came we did not pay but if there had been a tag of some money of even 50,000/- at that time, then probably very many useful Members we have here would not have appeared.  

So, we should really think twice about this reduction of the amount of money to something that people can manage. We agree with controlled campaigning.  Why? We are still not yet there.  This is a process.  We are just walking to that road.  We have hope that at one time in future we shall be there.  Now, if we behave as if we are already there, by allowing this uncontrolled campaigning then we might mar the whole process.  We might spoil it.  Our condition is like a lady pregnant -(Interjection)- yes, we know, Uganda  - a lady, is pregnant with a child; the Constitution, democracy. Why should we at this particular moment try to induce labour pains so that this lady aborts?  We should wait at the appropriate time.  We know, nine months or so later, uncontrolled campaigning is going to happen.  As for now, let us have this controlled campaigning.  We have a very recent example where our Colleagues, the UPC people had problems in Arua and Nebbi.  That was a very small thing but what happen there is not an isolated case, it could happen even here in Kampala.  It could happen in Rukungiri. It could happen anywhere.  To avoid this confusion and turmoil that might arise, I see nothing wrong with controlled campaigning. 

In trying to wind up, on the issue of referendum, I think the hon. House should think about it now.  Let us have the referendum now people are saying that they are very popular.  Parties are very popular everywhere.  The NRM Government is saying people do not want parties.  Some of us have gone around and we know what people say.  To remove confusion let us have a referendum now.  The people must be asked individually whether they want this Movement or they want political parties.  Then when the decision is taken, the people’s decision will be final.  Then we shall know and say to our partisan colleagues, ‘you are right.  You defeated us’ or ‘no, NRM was right’. Let us have this referendum now, and I think there is every reason for it - it will contribute towards a proper Constitution debating process.  It will be sober.  It will be controlled and we are likely to avoid some of these nasty incidents, which are beginning to crop up.  We are likely to avoid even the confusion that is coming up - bribing and so on.  Let us have the referendum now. With those very few words, I strongly support this Constituent Assembly Bill and I ask hon. Members to give it stouter support.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

HAJI SSERUNJOGI (Kineme Division, Kampala): Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for having given me this opportunity to contribute to this important Bill.  Before I make my comments, permit me on behalf of the people I represent, to convey our condolences to His Excellency the President who is the Chancellor of Makerere University, Vice Chancellor, Members of the Staff of Makerere University and all Ugandans for the loss of Professor Midol and Dr. Kidubuka in such a brutal manner.  I am appealing to security organisations wherever they are and people/individuals to give all the necessary information to arrest the culprits.  I say so because the two people who were murdered, were murdered actually in my Constituency and Makerere University as well is in my Constituency.  So, this is why I am appealing to all Security Organisations to assist wherever they are and arrest the culprits; and also I am appealing to City Council, the Kampala City Council to enforce Bye-laws regarding off-liquor licenses.  

Turning to the Bill, I support the Bill with some comments. Dear Members, I want to remind you all that we came here as elected Members and while we were here, we were given a Bill on which we extended our stay here for another period up to five years. This question of extending our stay actually brought a lot of confusion in our Constituencies.  Wherever, we would go, we are being told that you extended your stay in Parliament, now we have no proper confidence in you discussing the Constitution.  You better come back to us, you stand, you get a chance of going back, you convince the electorate - you will go back and discuss.  This is why, when I was here, we were discussing the extension, I told Members that we are setting a precedence; if things come to worse it will be very bad for us to go back to the people and seek fro fresh mandate.  That is why most of us fear to go back and face the electorate.  I am appealing to you, hon. Members, to face the reality.  Let us go back to the people, explain to them what is actually going to happen; if they are convinced, definitely they will vote us back.  Those who are interested will definitely come back. They will be able to convince the electorate but I am not buying the idea of constituting the Constituent Assembly within the National Assembly, it is terrible and I would not hear this again.  

On Composition of Constituent Assembly, it appears that there are some districts, which are under represented, and some districts, which are over represented.  Allow me here, to give you a few of the districts which I think have been under represented - not all but a few of them. Mpigi has got a population of 910,000 has got six representatives and each representative is actually representing 152,000 people.  Masaka 831,000 with six Members of National Assembly, each one of them representing 138,000 Kisoro has got one representative with 184,000 people and those in my opinion are under represented.  Then districts which are over represented - Kapchorwa has a population of 111,000 people, three representatives - each one representing 38,000. Moroto - 171,000, five representatives each one representing 34,000.   From the above figures Mr. Chairman, I would suggest here that, each delegate should represent at least a population of 60,000 people.  Special categories, Mr. Chairman - the people I represent -(Interruption) 

MR. MORO: Point of information. Otherwise, spoken and mentioned a few districts which are under-represented, but I have not heard him speak of Kalangala.  Could he also say something about the representation of Kalangala, please.

HAJI SSERUNJOGI: Kalangala is a special case.  It is in Island, we cannot actually marry Masaka with Kalangala so as to adjust the population.  From the group of the special categories, my people recommended only two groups which should be represented.  Women should have at least one representative or delegate from each district and NRA.  As regards, the NRC there is no need for us to have a special representation as long as we are going back to the people to contest.  Whoever will win, will come back here and represent his people. Trade Unions, political parties, youths, there is no need.  All those can contest very well and come back. I will give you the reason why women should have special representation.  You know very well that Uganda has more women than men.  But when time comes for elections, women cannot vote for their fellow women.  They go and vote for men.  That is why I am asking for a special representation. (Laughter)  This is very clear.  As regards, to 15 delegates to be appointed by the President, I do not see the logic in this.  The President is also a Ugandan, the President did contribute to the constitution making; the President did appoint the Constitutional Commission.  Therefore, his interests have already been catered for by the Constitutional Commission.  So, I do not see the reason why he should have 15 members.  I want Members to understand that we were here - historicals should understand that this is the time for them to end their term of office. Whoever is interested and is historical should go back.  We do not want this question of twalwana  (we fought.)  This must come to and end, because we were here between 1980 and 1985 when NRM was in bush.  Many of us were tortured; many of us were detained without trial and many of our Friends like hon. Ssebugwawo were killed.  So, we did also contributed.  Those people who never went to the bush also contributed in their own way while we were here in Parliament and outside Parliament.  So this question of twalwana must come to an end.  

As regards the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, it is quite clear that when the President appoints a Chairman, surely the delegates will not have confidence in the Chair.  But when the delegates, themselves, assemble here, they will be free to get their Chairman and Vice-Chairman from within themselves and whatever goes wrong here in the Assembly will not be charged to the President.  It will be the duty of the delegates to see that whatever goes is done here in a proper manner.

As regards the quorum, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs here gave us during his opening speech that the Constituent Assembly will be performing from 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 and from 2.30 to 4.30 and from 6.00 to 8.00 p.m. and at the same time, if the National Resistance Council is also in process, it will be working from 2.30 p.m. to the time when the Chairman desires to close the Session.  Now, I am wondering how if a Member comes as a delegate and at the same time is still a Member of the NRC, are they going to perform the duties at the same time? So in this way, I am suggesting that at least we should suspend the NRC Session for a period of five months to allow the Constituent Assembly perform its duties effectively.  By suspending this, the Constituent Assembly will be able to perform its duties quite well.

I now turn to my last point of election campaign.  NRM went to the bush to fight against injustice.  Makerere had elections recently of the Guild President.  These chaps were allowed to campaign freely from hall to hall until the time of elections.  I am wondering why people who have got the national interests at heart are not allowed to campaign in that manner. I wish to remind the Minister for Constitutional Affairs through him to the Government that we are national figures responsible for the well being of this nation. My Constituency embraces Makerere, but Makerere students traveled up to Kabanyolo and Galloway for the sake of campaigning.  They did it very well and elections took place with very minor problems. we talk of transparency.  Now what creates fear now if we are allowed to campaign freely?  Political education has taken root since NRM came to power.  People have been taught how to behave; people have known ho to solicit votes.  In that way, I see no reason why we are restricted from campaigning.  At the same time, I want to add on that even members contesting should be allowed even to print T-shirts so that they can be identified. (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: It is allowed.

HAJI SSERUNJOGI: Mr. Chairman, time welcome for us Ugandans to play mature, clean politics and it is time now for us to come up in true colours and identify as a politician.  Members should not be intimidated that if you do this, this will be done to you.  Let us have free time to campaign so that when you are elected, you have really persuaded the voters to give you from what you have explained to them. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BENIGNA MUKIIBI (Women Representative, Kibale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this Bill.  I wish to express the views of Kibale first.  It is very hard in Kibale to hold a meeting without people expressing these ideas. First of all, Kibale is an island within Uganda, because of the poor roads.  Now that it has started raining, we are going to be cut off completely.  My people wish the Minister of Works to know this so that something can be done.  Secondly, I wish to express the dissatisfaction of my people about the poor marketing of tobacco last season.  Some of the tobacco is still lying in their houses and people are contemplating whether to burn it or not.

Contributing to the Bill, first of all, I wish to commend the good work done by the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  (Applause) They really created awareness about this supreme law to the people of Uganda.  Although we have had more than one constitution, many people of Uganda did not know the contents of these constitutions, and this in my way has already gone a long way to legitimise the coming constitution.  Because now the people know that there is such a supreme law and they have participated in making of this law and I think the people will rise if anything is done to this constitution, because they are aware and I thank the Government for having created this.  Beside that, the people of my area would like to see the Draft Constitution.  I am glad now that this Draft Constitution is out.  But I do not know how it will reach the people in the rural areas.  I think something will be done so that the people are availed these copies and they are allowed to discuss the contents of the constitution. That is not a secret; it is something which is available.  If you want to buy it, you can buy it or the District Administration will be availed from copies so that they teach the people.  Alongside this Constitution, I also wish to see the other constitutions.  As I have already mentioned, these constitutions have been a secret to the ordinary people of Uganda.  In order for them to contribute to the coming one, I think they also need to know what the previous constitutions had and if also these copies could be availed, I think it would help the people to collect more information and also to compare notes.  Having said that, I support the Bill and I support the idea of choosing the representatives by universal suffrage.  There has been a lot of talk about indirect elections.  Some times a representative is identified with a certain group of people.  But with this universal suffrage, I think every electorate will identify with the representative.  I also wish to see that the representatives are based on population as much as possible.  Because it is very hard when you are given a very large constituency to consult the people, especially the heavily populated counties.  I think it will be a relief if we considered a population of about 50,000 or 60,000 and such a population sends a separate representative.  Although I support that the county should be a unit, because that is already working and the people have already identified with it.  But where the counties are very heavily populated, more than one representative was elected. Representatives by special groups is good to a certain extent.  These special groups should be limited as much as possible, because this denies the people to elect their own people. I support that the women be represented per district, but there should be formed a way of electing them by the people so that they do not come through this Council, but they go back to the district and they undergo an election by as many people as possible because the logistics might be had but there should be a way tried so that at least they come through a sort of election.  This will again teach the women to face the people to seek the mandate of the people.  As this representative by women was started by NRM to encourage women to participate in politics, they should be given practical and this one of the ways and this one of the ways they can practise how to solicit for the mandate by the people.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, this is in regard with the election of women.  There is a circular by the Minister of State for Constitution Affairs and I think it is out there.  He is proposing that one-woman delegate from each district elected in each case by an Electoral College comprising members of the District Women’s Council and the District Resistance Council of the district.  So, Mr. Chairman, I think it is important for the Members to know this.  This circular is out now and it contains Amendments which the Government has accepted and this is one of them.  Thank you.

MRS. MUKIIBI: I thank the hon. Member for that information.  The House will study it further.  On the army, I support the representative by the army, because the army forms part of the formula of the governance of this country. But at the same time, I wish to re-name it ‘the Armed Forces’ so that it includes the Police and the Prisons Departments.  At the same time, I wish to see a situation where the army men also go to the people, because they come from the people.  We have here hon. Members who are army men by profession and they have come here through people’s representation.  So, the army people should not stop here, but they should also seek mandate of the people on their own.

Representation by political parties, in my view, is unnecessary. Because the political parties are not formed in a vacuum but they are formed by the people. Therefore, they should come through as people’s representatives.  This will give them even better stand because they will have come into the Assembly through the people but not by just special nomination.  As we have them here, we have got political leaders who are sitting with us and they came here by representing the people and parties are made of people and they do not exist in a vacuum.

There has been a lot of talk that this constitution is NRM, it is a hidden agenda; it was made in the bush.  When I see in the Bill that the President is going to elect the Chairman, I still feel that this might cause some misunderstanding.  So, I am suggesting that the Chairman should be left to the delegates so that they feel free and they debate without fear or favour.  Because the people who will be coming to this Assembly, I think can be able to recognise a leader.  On campaigning, the idea of guided or supervised campaigning is good, but it is not enough.   The intending candidates should be given some flexibility to express what they stand for and I am sure certain logistics can be worked out so that it does not turn out into violence.  But is a stop forward to allow the people to express their views without much supervision.  Nominations by the President are welcome but they should be strictly to fill up the gaps, which have been left out.  In my view, as we want this constitution to be more of the people, especially now there is a lot of talk that it has been a bias in the making of the constitution and to stand the taste of time, these nominations should be limited.  In my view, 15 is a bit on the high side, because I see most of them will be able to come through by the laid down procedures.  I am suggesting that not more than ten be allowed for the President.

On the issues of contention, I do not see any issue, which is local that is likely to come in the making of the constitution.  Once it appears there, it should be a national issue, because we are identifying as Ugandans.  Now if you start localising issues -(Interruption) 

MR. SIBO: Mr. Chairman, on the nomination of the 15 members, the Minister has suggested an Amendment to read 13 members instead of 15 and of the 13, one will be himself -(Laughter)- the other one will be his Colleague, the Attorney General and the their will be the Chairman of the constitutional commission.

MRS. MUKIIBI: It is useful information but as I have already said, I would even like them to be fewer than that but not more than ten.  On issues of contention, as I was saying, once that issue comes in the constitution making, I think it should be treated as a national issue simply for the other regions to bless whatever is going to happen in that region.  They should be aware because Uganda is small.  We are always traveling from one area to another and we should know what kind of laws are governing that area.  With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you.

MAJ.GEN E. TUMWINE (Historical Member): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for finally allowing me this opportunity to play my historical role.  I am saying I am going to play my historical role because I have for a long time been waiting for this opportunity, not this time we have been discussing the Bill, but for many, many years.  I feel very proud, first of all, for being a Member of this House a House I have seen right from the beginning, starting as a very small group of people into the present NRC which up to now has not even been able to be divided, although we passed even a Bill on the possibility of dividing the House.  I am very proud of this that up to now we have kept this House as one.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his timely interventions to save such moments when they appear to be coming -(Applause)- and save the day even when some of the officials push unattainable positions.  I would like to contribute on this Bill by supporting it strongly as part of playing my historical role, not because I am historical, but because of what that history has enabled me to see and experience the different stages of the struggle believe in things that I commit myself to.  For example, I believe in Jesus Christ strongly -(Laughter)- and I have a reason for it because he has seen the test of time.  He has led and transformed people’s lives from what they were to better people. He has transformed people’s lives from what they were to better people. He has transformed groups of people from better groups to better lives.  I believe in the National Resistance Movement, because it has been and been tested by time.  I am saying that the time has come when history should be put correct, when time like this should be taken -(Interruptions)- the National Resistance Movement has gone through many stages and for the hon. Members who are here who I call historical, whether they like it or not, is that it is not the issue of whether some people say some people came through the window or through the door.  In Parliament I do not see windows.  The question is only at what time did you come.  Did you come early or did you come late? But what is most important of that is when you came, what did you do.  Did you unite the people or did you divide them?  

So, I am proud of this House, I am proud of the NRM progress and history of dependability of being a dependable movement for the people of Uganda; of growing and progressing as it promises and purifying itself with the time.  I regard this Bill as a stage in the purification of the NRM Movement.  Why am I saying this?  I would like to give a short history of how this House has come to be what it is going to be the NRC in which the Army will just have a committee. Many people would have said, why these people are not fighting, why should you bring these civilians to head us or just make us a committee.  But we discussed that point and even as early as that, the army was willing not even to take 50 per cent of the membership of the NRC.  It actually took 40 per cent.  That was in the recognition of the role and the importance of the people in the determination of the future of Uganda. In 1982, Members who were on the NRC were increased and we added on what we call political leaders came up and they were also added on the existing NRC. So, the expansion started some time back.  In 1983 that is when we named it a politic organ and most of the Members form the different areas and counties of Luwero were added to the NRC.  In 1985, when the half of the country was liberated, more Members were added on in accordance with the original provision.  Because up to that time we had not even had enough time to fill the NRC as it has been filled until 1985.  That was the political organ, which came here in 1986 and was reinforced by Members who were Cabinet Members and Deputy Ministers.  So we could say that was the broad-based political organ.  The time came when there was a question of expansion.  We debated this seriously in the political organ.  There were views that were saying that perhaps when the NRC expanded the NRM might be swapped, they were those fears, but I would like to inform the Members, that those fears were said, that as long as it is a democratic process, if NRM is swapped then it would be a democratic right of the people of Uganda.  That is why I was happy to say that up to now, NRM has not been swapped instead it has been re-inforced, strengthened and concentrated. Time has come for us now to purify democratic process, and the demand of the people has come that there is need to elect some more people to add or to discuss the Constitution or to form the Constituent Assembly. Some of us during the NEC discussions, a number of people were on the same view that has been moved here of saying no, it should the continuous additional expansion, but after a long discussion, it was discovered that you see, this expansion needed some basic elements of democracy.  Examples being like the universals suffrage.  It was not possible because of many other reasons.  Now, time has come when we can elect people by universal suffrage.  A start ahead in the democratic process.  

Now, come the question of now, do we need to add that new people to the NRC?  I would like to say that I feel I do not see the difference between the two, why?  I am confident that most of you are going to be returned, unless if you are not working.  Why I am saying this again? Members of this House have had an advantage to play their role in the field much more than any other person, provided with transport, facilitated with the experience of this House, given all the information from Government and debated the different Bills that we have presented in this House therefore, they stand a better chance, to stand in the people as individuals in this case, because the question here is not the organ, the question here is not the institution, and what I wanted to differentiate here, is what we are discussing or what we are bringing out in this Bill is not the question of which individual has mandate, I think what is more crucial now, is which institution has mandate or has the right to be on the Constituent Assembly, and that one has been answered by the first step.  

One of the most legally entitled organs to be on the Constituent Assembly is the Army Council, and I definitely feel they have the right to be part of this process, but realising that because we are very many in the Army Council, realising that there are enemies who want to always use the Army, because you know the armies in the past have had bad reports and bad records, the enemies are always interested in using Army to say; oh, it is because the Army is the ones which is ruling this country, the Army Council discussed this subject and said, we do not want to be used as an excuse.  It is in the same spirit that it was brought up to bring out even the question of the cultural cites, because always people would like to use the Army as a negative element of the contribution in the society which is wrong.  So, the NRA came out to prove that it will always be on the side of the people at every point, and on this point it said, the Army Council is willing for the good of the people of Uganda to be represented by few. If you realise, that while Members of the Army who are Members of the NRC would as much as possible would like to be here everyday, it is not possible, it has not been possible for them to present, mainly because, they are more committed to some special other important special task which they think is more important to give us peace so that we can continue debating, and I have confidence in this House, that whatever decision is passed in this House, they will support it, and it is in that same spirit that some of us are not bothered whether we have the honour to be Members of the Constituent Assembly or not, because there are other important areas in which members of this Country or citizens of this country can contribute and, therefore, I would like in that spirit to inform the hon. Members that really, what is happening here is that we are selecting people through this Bill for a specific task; a task like that one, if we let us say are attached from outside, just to give an example. I am sure even if we have this House here, and if there was an attack on our country, we would have a special session, even if we are in recess, if there was something agent we will put aside what we are doing.  

So, what this Bill is trying to bring out is that we are selecting a group of people representing the whole country and what we are ensuring is that, the national organs which must be there are covered, and I see it really taking recognition of even areas which people would like even to ignore like political parties. You see some people would say why are you bringing in political parties at this time? The whole purpose is that while time has not yet come, or while is it not yet the subject to discuss political parties in this Bill, it is necessary to involve them, because they played a political role at one particular time.  So, it is not a question of NRM trying to pass its own constitution, it is the method of reaching at a national acceptable and recognisable Constitution.  Now, I separate the principle from the individual.  The individual here, a Member of NRC as an individual he is a hundred per cent right to choose either to remain in this House continue debating and contributing to the national development and the national policies of this country or to try it out of he feels strongly that he must be in the Constituent Assembly, I think it is not a bad thing, but at least the organ which is the supreme organ of the Movement should stay; those who are advocating that we dissolve the NRC, I think they do not know what they are talking about, mainly because it means that if you dissolve the NRC now, it is as much as saying let the NRM Administration stop now, and we start afresh, and that time is not even far, we are saying 1994, let us lead this country to that stage in a few months to come and that stage will decide which stage we will take next.  

So, I would like to appeal to hon. Members that we forget the question of resolving a national supreme political organ of our country now, by just trying to react to allegations that people are saying or you have no mandate, there is no credibility and things like that.  I think that one is not correct, the principle should be, let us keep the institution as they are, now where the institution must be represented, is where we should get concerned, if the argument was that perhaps the representatives of NRC are few, I think we could listen and really discuss the subject.  But in a situation where you are all free, to go all of us, citizens are free to go and stand for elections, where you are free to stay, and keep your mandate of leading this country to join elections, I think, I would appeal to Members that, that is a continuation of building up.  In a situation where a hon. Member might say that, I think, if for me I am not elected to be on the Constituent Assembly, then it means the people have no confidence in my, I think you should feel free even to say, I think I leave, since you people you do not have confidence in me, I can even resign and go and dig or do something else, there even that right, you are free to do that.  

So, I would like to say that on the point of dissolving the NRC, I strongly oppose it, because it will be breaking the process and the continuation of building up of this important resource.  Because to me what we have gone through in this House, cannot easily be achieved by just establishing a new House all over a sudden to lead us to new stage, it must have roots which are keep, and they must grow and be replenished with time.

On the question of the referendum, I have been strongly feeling that in the same spirit of trying to say that let us do things at the right time slowly by slowly,  I had been convinced that even the referendum of deciding whether multi-party or not should not come even right now.  I was of the view that it is interrupting the whole process; it could come perhaps at later stage, because I believe, that the matter of parties or no parties should not be an issue to be decided by a representative. I feel strongly that that should be a matter that is regarded as national matter which every citizen should have a say in, knowing what we have gone through.  

Now, on the question of timing, I would have preferred originally that it take place after or during the Constituent Assembly, but after I had carried out some discussions, and consultations, fortunately for some of us we really consult nationally, because we go addressing most of these seminars across the country.  They would like to inform this House that, the people are worried of one thing, they are saying if we go into the Constituent Assembly, when we are not sure, where we are going that leaves some area which is a gray area, we are sort of blind, we seen as if we are going, we do not know where this Constituent Assembly is not even going to lead to.  While we would like this Constituent Assembly to discuss or national matters on this matter, since there has been a lot of talk, because also that has been a result of what has taken place mainly in this House.  For the people of Uganda, most of the people in the village they are saying this question of parties, to us is not even a major issue now, most of them are saying that, they are saying well we thought that one will be sorted out with time, our concern are other things, but because this House has strongly brought out the question multi-parties, the people are worried, they are saying now, is there responsibility that in a few months we are just told that parties are back?  

So, with that view in mind, I think I have reconsidered, I have even discuss with many Members here that while I had not thought that it is not appropriate to have the referendum now, because what the people are saying, they are saying, it will leave a gray area where we are going, and that is very dangerous for our people to know which direction they are going.  If it is found necessary and if Members of the House support it, I think I would not see any problem with having a referendum before the Constituent Assembly, so that we are clear right from the beginning.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption) 

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, that the question and confusion about a referendum, arises because, it has been an misinterpretation of the interim period, which we legalised in October 1989, which the Government, if the Government had proper information to sell to the people, could have been corrected.  But the people have been misled that they were going to be elections next year 1994, so therefore, those who come as political parties or otherwise into the stream of the campaigning will be in position to influence the making of the Constitution.  Therefore, if you see, our information services and particularly the Minister responsible for the Constitutional Affairs, if they were in the position, for example, to sell this interim report, the Draft Constitution and sold it to the people, more particularly to the Members of this hon. House and Government itself, the Minister, the position would be clear.  But that the referendum has been confused because they think that this is a time to get into elections. But instead of that we now have an interim period, and we must be sure, because in October, 1989, this was legalised and Attorney General here me, the brains are here, they keep quite they should tell the country that it cannot happen now for the whole country now is going through the interim period.  That is why we have this broad-based Government, to go through it, beautifully to strengthen the constitutional making, the security forces so that we have a self-government.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that if you hold a referendum now, will actually have done the main job of the Constituent Assembly.  Another point of information is that the question of belonging to a political party is an individual decision, and therefore, nobody can vote and decide for me to belong or not to belong to political party.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman; the information has clarified the situation further, because we now can see who is confusing who. I support the information from hon. Obwangor that, actually, if people allowed the situation to go through as it was originally planned, things would be smooth, but because of this stampeding that is taking place, where even somebody he or she want to sand for a person like Cecilia Ogwal wants to stand, she could come and stand and be elected as district woman representative.  She has that right; but unfortunately she cannot even wait for that right to mature but she now goes and starts making people feel that this is now the time. I think that what has happened and you can see that in this House, that is where Members are confusing and are even bringing in the idea of saying if that is the matter, let us dissolve NRC that will you have?  Because I believe that really let things go step by step as planned and I would not like to spend much time, I think situation has been clear that, if this House is clear which I strongly believe it has been and that is why I told you that even where there have been mistakes or methods of work in Government, this House has supported, and understood and said no we think there was a mistake here, but in the interest of the nation, let us pass this Bill, but this be corrected. I have seen that progress taking place, and I have never seen an opportunity in Uganda when people can have that freedom here.  And, people fear what either they have seen or what they have not seen.  People have seen division in this country, people have seen good opportunities being taken away, people have seen good efforts of people and blood spilt for the nation being hijacked, people have been cheated in elections, and on that. 

I wanted to refer to the method of elections. People are saying we have seen both things now, and I have told you, I have spent some time really discussing with many people.  The people are saying; for us we have not found any major problem of this lining business, and it is you who are there who are telling us, that is the international accepted method of secret ballot, but they are saying we have ever seen secret ballot here.  It has been tried many times, and even in other countries and it has also left doubt or clear indication that either the ballots were stolen or there were some rigging and they are saying while for this one, really why you people are fearing international credibility we feel confident that this is the only fair way as of now.  When we shall have got educated, we shall have been able to identify the pictures properly when we shall have had properly thorough condors who will tell us the exact truth perhaps that time will come when we can feel confident, that we know what we are doing.  What happens in whose international countries is that all of the people know how to read and write. That is one of the major handicaps of our people; ignorance and that is where I think we need to rethink about this method while it is now universal suffrage; to clarify of whole picture I am going to stand behind or I am going to vote for should be made a priority so that at least either if this House decides that let us use that method contained in the Bill, either the pictures are made ahead of time and sent to the RC IIs and explained in public or otherwise the people will feel free to know but whom we are standing for, so that he can ask whom I am standing for, and he is told here that, this is for so and so, and then he goes and stand, or you hang the picture of that - So, I would like to propose that in  view of the that fear of our people knowing they are not yet qualified enough, we do not have an easily machinery to educate them to the level of them to know where to tick, the lining might be a solution.  I am glad that the question of the women at every district has already been considered by the hon. Minister , so I will not spend time on that, and also go to the question of municipality many people have talk about the municipality, I think it makes sense that I am that, that one also has been amended.  I am glad that even the number now has even been reduced, but I do not have a problem even if it remains 15, why, not every person every useful person in this country is interested in politicising, and we have had an experience here in this House, that a person might be busy with his own things, he is committed to the nation, but he has no time to go to the village to campaign and to be faced with a buses and all sorts of things, but on his own as an individual, is every person and could be very useful for even a specific purpose like discussions in the Constituent Assembly, so that if the President who I am confident to say that at least he has not let us down in this who process, in appointing the right people to contribute to the nation building I think he has enough wisdom now to look mainly for things which unite Uganda. I think, that is the principle, that is the main reason by the way these additional individuals selected from the different interest groups are brought in, I am sure specifically to continue the unity and the progress of this process.  So, I would have no objection, and I will think Members should feel free that it is not for overseas, because that is the fear, if we are to say the truth, people are thinking that perhaps the NRM, the President is putting in their own people, so that they change the decision, I think that is not what we fought for.  People did not die so that they can rig elections in the Constituent Assembly.  It is very hurting, when you hear Members saying that; even the Army should not be represented, and the confusion should be changed from the Army that you might want to talk about, because that is why sometimes even mixed with the Police and the Prisons.  We are talking of an army with historical role, in the whole process, and army which has been tested with time with democracy, with not only facilitating it but dying for it and the army feels very strongly that if you decide in the interest of the people of Uganda, they will support it and they will defend it.  So, purposes of allowing these representatives that have been put in, it is very hurting for the army offices and men to fear that some Members here are even not happy with army representation, and look at it as something that should just be thrown aside.  

So, I think, I would like to say that apart from exercising our moral and legal right as contained in Legal Notice No.1, apart from demonstrating that it is not the power we are interested in but the benefits of the people of Uganda by very many Members here are saying that the army gave power to the NRC. It is not only giving power to the NRC saying even let the country at large discuss the national Constitution without having an excuse of the army being too many.  So, I would like to say that on that, we feel very strongly that we are not ready just to neglect our right, even when we are not allowed to go for elections, we are not considering that.  We do not care we would have said all of us should compete, but we are saying no, because we are serving a special role in the country, let those other feel free and continue with our struggle of liberating our country.  

I would like to wind up by saying that on the choosing of the Chairman, I think again it goes to the first point that I made.  We have a history of dependability of being dependable, that to choose a person, to choose a Chairman of an important Assembly like that one, should really, not to be left to the vote of the people somebody of the audience somebody is going to chair, because of the history, what happened.  My fears are that it should be the majority vote that passes the Chairman, and that Chairman will have a bias and will not have the freedom to exercise his right as a Chairman because if the Assembly votes him, it can throw him out.  Other countries do that. Why? Because they have sorted out all their process. They have purified their methods of the democratic process. They have reached a stage when they say; whoever is chosen will have the principles, will take care of the legal aspects, will take care of the national interest and we do not care who goes. So, I think, we have also not reached a stage where we just leave things just to end up.  By saying that, there should be no doubt about the NRM defending democracy and the right and the will of the people of Uganda.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT
THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 18th March, 1993.)
 


