Friday, 16 March 2012

Parliament met at 10.47 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we adjourned the House to this morning to deal with one specific issue, and if we finish it and Members are willing to continue with business, we will continue, but the purpose of coming here this morning was to enable us finish the rules and we needed good numbers to deal with this.

Let me report to you that our colleague the honourable Hussein Kyanjo was operated upon in a Dubai hospital yesterday and he was speaking with difficulty; they worked on his jaw. His condition is not worrying, but he is not very stable. He is going to undergo a second operation next week on Thursday. He called this morning and informed us to pass this information to you. We hold him in prayer and hope that everything will go properly. He will join us when he recovers.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, yesterday, I stood on the Floor of the House and raised a matter of great importance regarding the danger facing our national heritage symbol, the Uganda Museum. 

Member after Member supported the clarion call about the need  for the land and building called the Uganda Museum. When one comes with such, it is always the procedure that Government responds on the way forward. With humility, I continue to demand that Government produces a comprehensive report of about the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi. Honourable members, you know sometimes you raise matters and expect appropriate action. If you see a person that is not closed, all you can say is that you are not properly dressed. You do not have to go and hold the zip yourself. Sometimes you just point it out and they take appropriate action; but that has been raised and I think if Members of the front bench have something to say on this particular issue of the Uganda Museum, it would be proper. The discussions went beyond the issue of the Museum and touched on the land held by the Uganda Land Commission. That is more comprehensive, but the specific issue that was raised, related to the issue of the Uganda Museum.

11.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I rise to state the point I made yesterday or the day before. I am worried by the trend in this House where Members simply raise issues without notice and they expect answers from Government. I think this is not in conformity with our practice. It is not in conformity with practices in democratic Parliaments.

What you do is raise a question for oral answer so that we go get the facts, come here and inform you. This matter was raised yesterday by John Ken Lukyamuzi and for him to stand now and say, “I raised this matter; it was not responded to; I want it to be responded to..” please, this is not consistent with our rules. We will take up the matter, go and find out the facts about this land, come and inform this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter was handled yesterday. I am satisfied from the chair that the matter has been taken up by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. So, we expect a response within what timeframe Right Honourable? By Thursday next week, we should have some report on this matter.

MR TODWONG: While reacting to what Hon Ken Lukyamuzi said yesterday, we made mention of the issuing of certificates on customary land ownership. The Executive should help us with some explanation. As I speak now, in my constituency, more than 500 families are homeless because of inter-clan conflict which could have been raised by issuing of these certificates. So, we request that we need to understand the method which is being used to give out the customary certificates because it is already causing problems in our areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think all those things were captured. They will extract the Hansard and prepare appropriate responses from it.

MR OMACH: I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and Colleagues. I wish to report that the body of the late professor Anthony Ginyera Pinchwa will be arriving today from India where he died three days ago.

Tomorrow at 9 O’clock there will be a requiem mass at our Lady of Africa Mbuya Church. Thereafter his body will be brought to his home in Luzira and will stay overnight; and then on Sunday morning, it will be taken to Pakwarch and burial will be on Monday 19th 10 O’clock at Pachego village, Jonam County where the professor hails from.

Professor Anthony Ginyera Pinchwa has taught many of us here in this Parliament including me. When he was at Makerere University, he reached the highest level of Deputy Vice Chancellor, Makerere University and I think he was the first person from Northern Uganda to reach that level at that time. When he retired from Makekere University, he then went to lecture at Kampala International University, from where he died. 

I would like to invite you to come for the service tomorrow and also for the burial in Pakwach. At an opportune moment, I would like this Parliament to pay tribute to Professor Anthony Ginyera Pinchwa. He has not only been a scholar, but an academician with distinction in Uganda and in the whole world. He was also a politician.

Permit me to thank his Excellency the President who has acted very promptly to pay for bringing his body from India to Uganda and also given us substantial amount of money for the burial. We received USD 8,000 for bringing the body here and Shs 20 million for the burial expenses.

We have requested the President to come and we hope that if he is not able to come, at least he assigns somebody to represent him as the chief mourner. I thank you all and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

11.09
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you Mr Speaker. Mbale Municipality is a beneficiary of the loan for constructing markets, which is being undertaken by Local Government.

The vendors who were in the main market were displaced and relocated to different areas in Mbale such as Lorry Park, Kumi Road and Pallisa Road. Unfortunately, early this year, the Lorry Market caught fire and the vendors lost all their merchandise. The day before yesterday the Pallisa Road market caught fire. Now what is disturbing is that the fire engines did not even have water to put out the fire.

We have known about fires that erupt in markets all over this country. Owino market caught fire two times and the fire brigade should be on standby in case of fire outbreaks.

We know that all over the world the fire hydrants are always with water to put out such fires that one cannot predict. My people are mourning because they lost everything. All the merchandise was burnt down. I am appealing to Government to come to the rescue of the people of Mbale and assist them to put up new stalls and give them some ntandikwa so that they can take off like we have seen happen in other places like Owino and Jinja. 

This is the trend, when these markets catch fire; there is no water at all. I am calling on Government to come to the assistance of the people of Mbale because they pay taxes and they contribute to the national economy of this country.

11.13
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): I want to seek guidance at a risk of being misunderstood, but nevertheless I think I have to be corrected.  I have always asked myself whether we as parliamentarians are not making ourselves gods to the communities. 

I know that this country has structures which are supposed to make interventions every time there is something that requires that intervention. I want to admit and declare to the House that I always get mixed feelings when everything has to be brought to Parliament before we even give chance to the structures to really do their appropriate interventions. For that matter, I do not want to feel sorry about what hon. Wamanga-Wamai has presented, but in so many cases, I ask myself whether we are not becoming gods to our communities or whether we are giving time to the structures which we ourselves created to do their work.

I want to say that the food you bring to the table portrays the amount of time you spent in the kitchen. How much time do you give to these issues to be sorted out first by the other structures before Parliament can appropriately come in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is usually what should happen. We should always give opportunities for interventions that have mechanisms for dealing with those emergencies to deal with them first. But some matters are urgent and that is why a slot has been created in everyday’s sitting to allow matters to be raised that are of public importance. This means that information can be passed on. The requirement is that you come to the Speaker; you do not write a note to the Speaker. 

You come to the Speaker and justify the emergency which requires you to move under this rather than any other rule, for example asking questions for oral answer or moving a motion. What makes you think it would not be proper to use the other processes provided for in the rules, but to resort to this particular one. But this has been largely abused most of the time and we are trying to move towards making that correction such that Members start to use the other provisions of our rules of process to access the House and raise matters that they think should be addressed.  But some matters are actually urgent and should be responded to quite quickly. I would like to have a response if any from the Frontbench.

11.16
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I would like to thank my honourable colleague, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, for raising this issue. We have already received a report from Mbale and the ministry has tasked the town clerk to assess the damage and give us a report in order to see what interventions Government can make.

I express my sympathies to our people, the market vendors, in Mbale. As the honourable member did say, it is true Government is reconstructing the Market in Mbale and we had got funds to help to relocate to some other place. So, it is unfortunate that this has happened in the place where we had helped them to relocate. We shall make the assessment and see what intervention we can make. One of the reasons why most of our markets are being caught by fires is really poor planning when constructing of markets.

There are some markets like Owino where even when the fire brigade equipment is available, it is practically impossible for a truck to enter the market and put out the fire. 

Part of the reason why we have decided as Government to reconstruct markets in Uganda, is to make sure that they are properly planned. If you look at the architectural plans which we are using to construct markets in major towns in Uganda; they have made provision for fire-fighting; provision for movement within all parts of the market; and provision for water hydrants. 

Like in the case the honourable member has given, the problem was not lack of fire-fighting equipment, but just lack of water in a tank. That can’t have been the fault of the Minister of Local Government or the ministry. Somebody somewhere simply did not do his work, but even if the water had been there, I am sure it would have been very difficult to enter inside the market and put out the fire. So, the long-term solution is that we have a plan to reconstruct all the main markets in the country and we have started already with some of the markets, Mbale being one of them, but in the immediate, we are definitely going to make an intervention to help the market vendors in Mbale. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the clarification I seek from the minister is that don’t you think it is pertinent for the local government which deals with markets to liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs because much as there is poor planning in the markets, always when the markets have caught fire, the Police normally comes in and carries out investigations, but we don’t live to see the reports of the Police, and actually, I will give an example of Jinja. 

Jinja Market has caught fires in the past and the Police comes in on time and investigates but they don’t release the report. So, it is also important that the Ministry of Local Government under which the markets fall should also liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to get the reports so that we find a long-lasting solution to the cause of the fire. Thank you so much. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I agree with the minister that the current market being built in Gulu is actually following those requirements you have just stated. However, in your statement, you said it does not fall under your armpits that there was no water in the tank. I think this is a very serious statement that some minister should get up to tell this House and the country, why there is no water in the fire-fighting equipment of the Police. This is serious. We need an explanation –(Interjections)– yet we have enough of teargas. If it is teargas, you can have enough of it during Walk-to-Work, but we don’t have water to stop fires from burning. Mr Speaker, I think in the absence of the Minister of Internal Affairs –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA KASULE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way, and the information I want to give is that we are all taking these matters for granted. In as far as water is concerned, I think if we tasked any Member here to show us where there is a water hydrant outside of Parliament, very few people would know where the water hydrant is. It is abnormal for the Police to carry water to stop fires. I used to work with national water as a junior officer and we at least tried to advise every facility to have a water hydrant. The water hydrant is just a tap from where water can be drawn to stop any fires. 

So, I think this should be a precautionary measure for every facility, including markets. Much as they are temporary, there should be a water hydrant where water can be drawn by Police to stop the fires; but to carry it in a vehicle, run to Bwaise then back to Kampala then to Bwaise, is very abnormal. That is the information I wanted to give.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for that information. Mr Speaker, I think someone should explain to this country why, particularly in Mbale at that particular moment, the Police lorry which should be carrying water was without water; because I have noted that in Gulu, they even use those trucks to ferry water for commercial use. If you have a construction site, you can call them and give them some money and they will avail water on your site for construction using Government and Police vehicles. 

So, we need an explanation from the Prime Minister. Since you are a prefect of the ministers, now that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not there, we should be told why there was no water in the tank. Was it an omission or was it negligence on the side of someone?

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way, and thank you, Mr Speaker. I think with this issue, we could go deeper and really get to know why many things do not work in our context, because we might just put to task the ministers and forget that in Uganda basically, we have a very big problem when it comes to planning and preparing for the future, and it is a cultural problem. So, I think this should really make us reflect more and maybe the Executive should really think through it deeper. How can we really build a much effective mechanism that we can deliver, because if we look at the education system we have and the people we entrust to provide services to us, you find that many of these people are just short-term oriented and they are not very serious on the jobs. So, it is across the board. It is a major problem that we should really look at as a country. I just wanted to give you information on that. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Again, the minister responsible will take up that question and come up with an appropriate answer to this House. I just want to make one point, just to emphasise what hon. Ssebunya said. 

I hope the case in Mbale is not the same as we had in Owino. As you will recollect, we had a fire in Owino market and Owino market is literally within a stone throw from the headquarters of the fire brigade. So, why didn’t the fire brigade manage to put out the fire in time? It is because  Owino market was of course unplanned and in effect, they had not only built over, but in fact they had blocked the fire hydrants because as hon. Ssebunya said, normally you have in a city, fire hydrants at strategic points where you are supposed to draw water from, and because of this lack of planning - and some of us in urban centres have been party to this practice because I saw one of our MPs in Owino saying, “You people, you are right to build over –(Interjection)- I don’t remember which gesture he was using; I better not make any. Let me remain like this. (Laughter) It was wrong. 

The President, of course, responded to the calamity that had occurred. As the President, he was duty-bound to help the people that had suffered. I am just making a point that we, the political leaders, should give guidance to our people, for insistence on not building over fire hydrants because of the obvious dangers and risks that this poses –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I think there are some weaknesses on the side of Government; whenever we have fire outbreaks, investigations are carried out but reports are not really published for the public to know the findings. Today marks two years since Kasubi Tombs were burnt. Up to now, the report of the commission of inquiry that was set up by Government is not yet published.

I would like to think that if these reports were being published, the public would get to know the causes of all these fire outbreaks but the moment we do not get –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point had hon. Ssebagala risen? Wasn’t it information too? Can you allow him to finish before you seek your time to give that information?

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, in order to have a permanent solution to all these fire outbreaks, it is very important that whenever investigations are carried out, reports should be made public so that we can get to know the root causes of these fires. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, are you allowing hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to also seek clarification?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to what hon. Ssebagala has articulated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have two members holding the Floor.
 
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for giving way for me to make a clarification in defence of the Government. The clarification I am seeking touches a very important area. (Laughter) For many years, people have been waiting for the report on the fires that broke out in Kanungu, where the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes from, but up to now that report has never been published. What about the report on the Kicwamba fires? What about the report on the fires that broke out at Buddo Junior? How about the whereabouts of Mr Kibwetere, who we hear is still at large but Government is not doing anything? Where are these reports? 

If Government cannot give us those reports now, they have got a charge that we must pursue. This is a serious matter. It means they are either incompetent or they do not deserve to lead Government. We can take measures, including impeachment. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker -(Mr Deogratious Kiyingi rose_)- What is your name? (Laughter)

MR KIYINGI: The further clarification I would like to seek from the Rt hon. Prime Minister – (Interjections)– my name is Deogratious Kiyingi, MP for Bukomansimbi County. (Laughter) If I heard you properly, you said that Owino Market does not have a plan. But as far as I am concerned, I recall that while I worked with Kampala City Council as a councillor in 1991, that market was financed by World Bank. So, the clarification I seek, Rt hon. Prime Minister, is whether it is true that Owino Market does not have a proper plan.

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: The clarification I am seeking from the Leader of Government of Business and the Minister of Local Government relates to the setting up of markets. We have laws in this country, one of them being the Market Act, which clearly provides that no person or group of people shall establish a market other than – markets are supposed to be established by the local authorities and the Central Government.

Two weeks ago, I also lost a market in Mukono through fire. You realise that these are markets that have been constructed by ordinary people outside the law. Most probably that is the reason why they are not well planned. People just come up to start markets. I do not know what happened to this particular legislation. Did we do away with it? Are we still supposed to enforce it in our local governments? Is Government making sure these markets are properly planned with water and security systems being put in place? I am saying this because at the end of the day when these people lose their merchandise, they turn to Government before you see Government officials coming up to contribute tax payers’ money for reconstruction. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If I may start by responding to what hon. Betty Nambooze has said. Yes, I agree with you; from the evidence available, the law is observed more in breach than in compliance. Government has expressed its concerns about it. 

I would like to appeal to you, especially you, because the last time when I was campaigning in your constituency in Mukono, I actually found you holding a public campaign at an illegal market place. (Laughter) No, it was a rally. Now that I hear you stating very clearly that you are conscious of the law, and being a leader, - because you defeated me that time - then it is your duty. I hope that from now onwards - You see, in enforcing the law, this Government tries to persuade people to act in compliance. We only use enforcement as a last resort. So, I am appealing to you to persuade the people of Mukono not to engage in breaches of the law.

As for my honourable friend from Bukomansimbi, I did not say that there is no plan. I was only making reference to Park Yard Market, which is actually outside the planned Owino Market and it is not planned. That is where people have built over water hydrants.

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, my old friend –(Interjections)– I do not know about “the man” -(Laughter)- I have known hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi very well, for a very long time, from when he was a young man. One day I will tell you his story. The question he raised and the question the Mufti of Parliament – (Interjections) - Imam; sorry, I beg your pardon. I did not know I had demoted him by calling him Mufti. He raised a question on the same point and I do not have an immediate answer to that. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be responsible for this. However, I will take it up and we will come back with an answer on those commissions - Kasubi, Kanungu -(Interjections)- We know the Kichwamba one – and Buddo Junior School. We will come back to this House and give –(Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for allowing me to seek clarification from him. When we had that catastrophe of fire at Owino Market, I recall that the Head of State visited the site and was extremely sympathetic with the business community there. You are aware that most of those small businesses depend on SACCOs. We have to do everything possible to make sure that we support them. 

For some of you who do not know, Mbale is one of the biggest towns in this country, except that Mbarara has grown a bit too fast. (Laughter) I think Mbarara has jumped the queue but for those of us who have lived longer, we know that Mbale is a historical and very big town. I have visited that town quite a number of times. That market you are talking about is a very crowded market, and there are very many small scale businessmen who depend on that market. 

I would want to know from the government whether there are any steps that have been taken to rescue the business community there. Everything was lost! The SACCOs will want their money, the banks will need their money; so definitely, Government should not just sit there and wait. I would want to know from the Leader of Government Business whether the same thing that was done for Owino Market will be done for Mbale Market. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, maybe my relative, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, had not come in when that same question was answered by the Minister of Local Government. I can only add to what he said. We can find out the reason why Mbarara is growing faster. I can see from the size of my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, the market for milk and beef has grown. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I do not know why the previous speaker was talking about me in respect of milk, which I do not take. Hon. Ogwal said Mbarara has grown a little too fast compared to other towns and she did not give us the reasons for this. Is it in order for the Prime Minister to connect me to the growth of Mbarara when I do not come from Mbarara and I do not drink milk? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would need to appoint a committee to verify the statement by hon. Oguttu that he has no interests in Mbarara. I do not have time to do that before this ruling. The statements made do not violate any provisions of our Rules of Procedure. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There must be economic reasons that explain the growth of Mbarara, the growth of Kampala, the growth of Mukono. Mukono is now a huge municipality. The last time I visited Lira Municipality, it was the headquarters of construction. You cannot believe the level of activity of construction that goes on in Lira. When I last visited Dokolo during the campaigns, I was amazed that not only did Dokolo have a tarmac road but they had incredibly beautiful permanent buildings. I understand they are coming up with a good hotel in Dokolo. I think it is a good idea to find out why there is growth in Uganda. However, the fact is that growth in Uganda is general and there is no part of Uganda that has not felt it.

Mbale, certainly, is a historical place. I am very happy that Mbale is also coming up. Its catchment area has been decimated by ambitions of people like hon. Nandala-Mafabi. This is because he has tried as much as he could to pull away from Mbale to Sironko, which is alright but this is the explanation – (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point do you rise, honourable member?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clarification, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because these negotiations that go on without involvement of the Chair are not proper. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry but maybe my voice was not audible. First and foremost, a small background to our life; Bugisu was a big place and it was called Mount Elgon. The people of Kanungu and Kabale all came from Bugisu. They ran away from Bugisu because of circumcision and one of them who fled is hon. Amama Mbabazi. When he ran away, he took away everything we had. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my Prime Minister. He is saying that that we have taken things to Sironko - of course districts were created - and Mbale is now coming up. I would like to know, where had it gone first of all and who took it there? All of you know very well that Mbale was the cleanest and the best city in Africa –(Interjections)- You may laugh, but it is a true story that it was the cleanest and best in Africa; I can say that without any fear or favour. Hon. Kiyonga who stayed there for some time when he was still a young man knows what I am saying. 

Ever since this Government came into power, it has been talking of equitable development but what happened to Mbale? Who took it to where it is now? –(Interjection)- He took it to Fort Portal; by the way, I must congratulate the hon. Adolf Mwesige and my brother there because Fort Portal is now the cleanest town in Uganda. This is unfair because how can a whole Minister of Local Government only clean one town where he comes from and leave the others. (Laughter) That is a very serious matter, which raises the issue of conflict of interest. However, what I wanted to ask my brother, hon. Mbabazi, is: Who took Mbale where it is and where it is coming from?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please conclude.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am concluding, Mr Speaker. I just want to conclude by answering my good friend, honourable colleague and young brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that yes, that is a legitimate question but the answer lies in the history of this country - the decline and dictatorships that NRM, through a hard struggle, rescued Mbale from. That was the problem. 

In about two weeks’ time we will be able to come and give a report about all these inquiries and what has become of them. If they were concluded and there are reports, why haven’t they published them? Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have business to continue with. I will, at an appropriate time, allow the Leader of Government Business to move under rule 25 to give us the statement for business to follow next week. 

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

11.52
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Onywelowo): Rt hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the whole House for consideration of the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

Rule 11

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we had substantial discussions on this subject. We were to take a vote on the matter that had been presented by the committee. I am ready to put the question. Can I put the question now? Honourable members, we had finished with rule 11; we are dealing with the appendix.

MR AKENA: Mr Chairman, I would like to go on record before we take the vote on the appendix. Much as we are all agreed on rule 11, which is taken directly -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Akena, let us first read what is there and then you respond appropriately to take care of everything. Let him state it first for the record.

Appendix B

DR BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, you deferred this vote yesterday because there was no quorum. I am again raising the same issue of quorum. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we do a quick count and ring the bell. If we confirm that we do not have quorum, then we shall ring the bell. We could in the process allow hon. Akena make his statement.
 
MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I had wanted to refer to the redraft of sub-rule (3) taking into consideration what we had agreed on rule 11, which basically comes from the Treaty. The principle in the Treaty is that the Members of EALA representing Uganda will be representing as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the House. 

In the sub-rule, we have brought in the issue of proportionality. I thank you, Mr Chairman, for the matters you raised on guidance on what happened in Kenya. However, I think the Kenyan situation is quite different from what we have. In Kenya, there are 23 political parties in Parliament and as such the feasibility of electing nine from the 23 parties in Parliament was not possible. The largest party in Kenya has less than 50 percent of the seats in Parliament. So, they had to come up with a creative formula in order to be able to get the representation across the parties in order to get the nine members. 

I think an example closer at hand is that of Tanzania, where we have a similar situation of Chama Cha Mapinduzi having over 80 percent of the seats in Parliament, and there were three other parties - one with 31 Members, another with 11 Members and a party with a single Member. The Tanzanian formula was, the two smaller parties each nominated three members and the whole House took the decision and elected one from each of the parties. The combined Opposition in Tanzania essentially, doing the mathematics, is actually less than one or slightly over one member for EALA, but the Opposition managed to get two members. 

The principle which was raised concerning the Independents is that the right to associate is enshrined in the Constitution, and that right to associate also takes into account the right not to associate. The Independent Members have taken the decision not to associate. 

In the formulation which we are coming up with, we are being compelled to associate as the Opposition and yet the Treaty talks about political parties represented in Parliament. Now, we have an issue where the Opposition must now forcefully accept to associate and come up with the two members - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I wanted to give to hon. Akena is that whatever argument we are fronting must be based on Article 50 of the Treaty. This article talks about political parties as individual entities represented in Parliament.

When you look at our representation in this august House, we have NRM, JEEMA, CP, DP, FDC and the Independents. That gives us almost six posts. When you look at the Treaty and it says, “as much as it is feasible”, what rings a bell in my mind is that we first consider the five parties. The NRM take your one slot because even if you are many, it is the same shade; DP take your slot, CP take your slot and then after that –(Interjections)- No, in the Treaty we do not have numerical strength.

Mr Speaker, we respect their numerical strength but they must respect the law. The Treaty is very clear that each party must be represented. The information I wanted to give is that the framers of the Treaty realised that there are so many political parties in East Africa. That is why they wanted to have this kind of arrangement where all parties are represented. So NRM, be comfortable with your one seat and then - We can even give you three seats so that the parties divide the other seats and each party gets one and we move on. Otherwise, if we go like this, we are most likely to be challenged in courts of law. Let me be on record.

MR AKENA: Thank you, honourable member. On the question of the parties represented in Parliament, I would like to refer the members to rule 13 of our Rules of Procedure, which talks about the whips and their functions. The Parliament of Uganda has four whips recognised within the establishment of Parliament and its functioning. 

Let me just refer to the functions and I will start with the Government Chief Whip, and this is rule 13 sub rule (2): “The role and functions of the Government Chief Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the ruling party.”

Come to the Opposition Chief Whip: “The role and functions of the Chief Opposition Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the Party in Opposition to the Government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.” In other words, the Opposition Chief Whip is to organise the Forum for Democratic Change. 

On top of this, we have two other whips recognised within this Parliament who are the UPC whip and the DP whip. The functions of these whips are in sub rule (8) and they deal with the members of their particular parties. 

So, already the Parliament of Uganda has, in its proceedings and procedure, recognised four whips representing four different political parties. Each whip is concerned with the matters of that party. The formulation we have means we are not going to be able to participate as a party. 

The strange thing is, the way the rules stand, I as a member of UPC I can nominate an Independent candidate but I cannot nominate a UPC candidate. I feel we are here on slippery grounds. If we are bending or going out of our way to recognise the right not to associate, we are also stepping on the right of those of us who have chosen to associate and are represented and recognised within the workings of Parliament - (Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The honourable member has referred to Article 50 of the Treaty, which also talks about shades of opinion. In this House, we have 43 shades of opinion represented. I have a shade of opinion and all other Independents here have a shade of opinion, each standing on their own. There has been this argument that every Independent MP is independent of another. Therefore, if we are to stick to the Treaty, it means that I should have somebody to represent my opinion in EALA. 

Secondly, the issue of numerical strength does not also apply here. If you look at the members that constitute this Parliament, we are 43 Independent members. We can also demand numerical strength, if we drive away from the issue of shades of opinion standing on its own as independent. My argument is, CP has one representative here and JEEMA has one representative here, so if JEEMA demands to be represented, I should be represented as a shade of opinion in EALA. 

Therefore, I would want to appeal to this House that we devise means that are going to facilitate our country to have good representation no matter who is not represented. I will forfeit to be represented as a shade of opinion but have someone representing Uganda, not my opinion as a representative of Butambala. So, hon. Akena, I think the slots that we are going to divide amongst ourselves are not just for parties but for the country. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank hon. Akena for giving way. The additional information I want to give the House and hon. Akena is that we need to borrow from the experiences of the other partner states within the region. 

In determining representation, especially with respect to shades of political opinion, you do apply both the qualitative and quantitative tests. This can be done in the sense that the various parties, for instance, participate. So, what would be expected is that when we say two members from the Opposition, the Opposition should provide an opportunity for the various parties in the Opposition to participate in generating the two members. That way, they will have participated.

When you talk of political shades, if you take it literally and you use a pie chart and you are looking at the political shades in Uganda, you will say 80 percent of the shades are NRM, so the numerical strength remains very relevant. This is true for all the partner states. Actually, you hardly find the small parties represented in EALA, and we have asked this question in various countries.

So, as you give arguments, you need to read and borrow from the practices of Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Kenya for you to make an argument. Let us not argue for the sake of academic gymnastics - (Interjections) - The Prime Minister is saying for once he has agreed I am legally qualified. That is the information I wanted to give, that you need to look at the practices in the other partner states. The way we are doing it is the way it is done elsewhere in the region. I thank you very much.

MR AKENA: Honourable member, I raised clearly that Tanzania, which has a similar situation that we do, followed a formula which recognised the parties in Parliament. There is a member of EALA from Tanzania who represents a party with 11 members in Parliament. There is another one who represents a party with 31 members. There are other seven members who represent CCM with 280 members. I am not getting away from that issue but the party with 11 members and the other with 31 members are represented. 

In this House, as I brought up, we have whips to organise us. The rules specify that the UPC whip deals with UPC members, the Opposition Chief Whip deals with FDC members, the Government Chief Whip deals with NRM and the DP one deals with DP. That is where I raised the issue, around the whips. The honourable commissioner is aware that the Parliamentary Commission has provided offices for these whips. In other words, these whips and their functions are fully recognised in this House. 

The Treaty talks about political parties represented in Parliament. The formulation where you are saying “Opposition” - the Treaty does not talk about Opposition; it talks about the various political parties in the House. As a member of a political party represented in this House, I also would like an opportunity to participate in EALA. 

Historically, UPC played a role in the origins of the East African Community. There is a history behind the “various political parties” and not the Opposition or Government. I am, therefore, appealing to honourable members that within our own rules and within the workings of Parliament, we have clear guidelines which show us how various political parties have been interacting in this House. I ask you not to ignore it and not to drift away from the spirit of the Treaty, which is captured in rule 11, and undo it with sub rule (3) of the Appendix. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we adjourned this matter to this morning to take a decision but I have looked around and we cannot take this decision now. I have a shortage of about 17 members. Therefore, I will ask for the motion to be moved for resumption and thereafter I will suspend the House for 15 minutes. The bell will be rung and we will take the necessary procedures. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.10
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.11
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered proposed amendments to Appendix B and deferred decision on the same.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.11
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules require me to suspend the House for 15 minutes and the bell will be rung. Members who are present, please do not go away so that we can come back and take this vote. It is important that we do this today because we have a case in the East African Court of Justice that is dependent on what we are doing today. We need to facilitate the workings of the court also by taking a decision on what we need to do. House is suspended for 15 minutes and the bell shall be rung. We resume in 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 12.13 p.m.)

(On resumption at 12.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will use my prerogative under the Rules of Procedure while we wait for the final numbers to come to amend the procedure on rule 22, to allow the Leader of Government Business proceed under rule 25, statement of business by Leader of Government Business: “Every last sitting day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the House regarding the government business of the succeeding week.” 

12.40
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI): Mr Speaker, this is the statement of Government business for the week starting 19 March and ending 23 March 2012. Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform the House that the following will form part of the government business for the week from 19 to 23 March 2012. 

Bills for First Reading

1.	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009
2.	The Retirements Benefits Bill, 2011
3.	The Regional Governments Bill, 2009
4.	The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill,2007
5.	The Pharmacy Profession and the Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006
6.	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010

Bills for Second Reading

1.	The Company’s Bill, 2009
2.	The Public Order Management Bill, 2011
3.	The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010

Ministerial Statements on:

1.	The progress of the implementation of the Parliamentary Resolutions on the Cotton Sector by the Minister of Agriculture.
2.	The performance of PLE and the USE and Government commitment to increase teachers’ salaries by the Minister of Education.  
3.	Financing of roads by the Minister of Finance. 
4.	State of the economy by the Minister of Finance. 
5.	Youth Venture Capital Fund by the Minister of Finance.

Motions

1.	Motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow $150 million from the International Development Aid Association of the World Bank Group for financing the municipal infrastructure development programme in selected municipalities by the Minister of Finance.

2.	Motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the supplementary schedule No.1 for financial year 2011/2012 by the Minister of Finance. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.44
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Mr Speaker, I think some months or weeks ago, I raised the issue of this business of announcing Government business by the Leader of Government Business. The structures we have here as far as business of the House is concerned are, the Business Committee where even the Leader of Government Business has a representation. It is the one to look at the business and line it up for handling in the House. We also have the Order Paper for indicating the business of the following week, which should be issued on a Friday. So, by Friday, we should know the kind of business officially that will be handled in the following week.

I doubt whether the announcement by the Leader of Government Business for business of that week will override the business that we arrange on the Order Paper. I think we need to re-examine it because I see it really as a formality which has no merit. It is high time we examined and saw how we reconcile the work of the Business Committee and the powers of the Speaker to set the business, rather than just hearing and then you find that the Order Paper reflects a different thing.

12.45
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need to know the intention of this particular rule. I do imagine that the Leader of Government Business works closely with his representative on the Business Committee and with the Office of the Speaker. After they have worked together and reconciled the businesses they think are priority, then the Leader of Government Business will come up with this sort of statement to inform some of us such that we know vaguely what business will come next week, because as the practice has been, we are faced with an Order Paper sometimes an hour or two or three before the sitting, and we end up not getting prepared for business. But now from this, I know the Anti-Money Laundering Bill business is coming next week and now it is upon some of us who are so interested in this particular business to go and prepare, do research, consult people and when you start contributing, you contribute from an informed position. 

Really, it is not about the Business Committee, the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business. This sort of rule allows some of us the backbenchers, to vaguely have an idea on what business is coming next week and then we prepare, because the most important thing is to prepare since some of these bills need research and consultations.

We have been accused of not being prepared. We sometimes just jump on the Floor without having the necessary facts; we embarrass ourselves and eventually embarrass the House. So, my humble view to His Excellency the Vice President is that, this thing is sort of helping us to prepare adequately because we now have some idea of the business next week. I thank you, Mr Speaker and His Excellency the Vice President.

12.48
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Today is a Friday and it is coming to 1.00 p.m. and the Muslim community is supposed to be going to the mosque to pray, and we are supposed to be here as well. I am raising a point of procedure if we could break off so that some of us can go and pray and then we come back.

If that is not the case - we have never had a meeting here on a Saturday nor on a Sunday, but today, we are sitting and we are obliged. We were here right from 10.00 a.m. up to now. I am seeking a point of procedure from you on how we proceed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it looks like the purpose for which I had suspended the House has not been satisfied. I specifically suspended the House and the bell was rung so that we could realise quorum to enable us take a decision. I have done a quick head count; I still do not have the quorum to continue with business. This House is, therefore, adjourned to Tuesday 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 12.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 March 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
