Tuesday, 12 March1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.                 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA BILL, 1995

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members since we are going to the Committee stage we need to realise a substantial quorum, but as I told you last week, I am reminding you again that I am going to be forced administratively to take certain and qualitable measures to the extent that hon. Members of the House will only be paid when they present themselves here.  On that note we are adjourning for 15 minutes.

(The Council adjourned and resumed after 15 minutes.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, according to our Rule number 28, seek the adjournment of the Council to enable us to discuss the issue of national importance that is the Pakwach Karuma incident whereby we have lost a lot of lives, many buses have been burnt and several people have been abducted, Mr Chairman, I move -(Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order; that will be done after the Motion has been moved and then we come back to you.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA BILL, 1995

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, I seek the substantial of the sitting of the Council to enable us discuss a matter of national importance that is the unfortunate Karuma/Pakwach incident whereby we have lost a lot of lives on the Karuma/Pakwach road as a result of rebel attacks on that road.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Seconded discussion continues.

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, on Friday 8th of this month, this country had a tragic  incident whereby buses with passengers and several vehicles under UPDF covey were heading to West Nile were attacked by Kony rebels.  In the incident  -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, much as I have seconded the Motion would it be really proper for the Minister for Defence who is responsible who is not here should we move ahead without him or?  I seek clarification, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, there is no restriction.  In our rules of procedure there is no provision which says that, Minister a,b,c, is not here the House should not proceed that kind of regulation is not here.  We can proceed.

MR TIVU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise guidance.  Mr Chairman, I was saying as a result of that occurrence several people got their lives lost, properties were burnt and as I speak now the exact number of people who have died is not yet established, the people of West Nile are worried as to whether all the people who were there have not died, so it is in line with this worry that, I wish this wise House to express their view on matters of this nature so as to enable or to give suggestions to the Government to stop occurrences of similar nature.  This occurrence has ever been happening and I remember this House has ever been asking the Minister of Defence to give the magnitude of that Kony, they have told us Kony is a person and he is a small thing that will be captured.  But the persistent occurrence of this event shows to me that Kony is not a small thing probably Kony is a movement.  

Mr Chairman, therefore, it is important that the Government has to come up with a correct analysis and a correct statement of what Kony is really is, unless that is done if we get this impression that Kony is a small thing and yet every week we see on papers eight people died, 20 people died,five buses ambushed and then we shall take the Government as a lier. 

I commend the UPDF for having tried their best, because in many occasions I have travelled on that road, but the way the Government has also abandoned the UPDF and their struggle to cap that rebel activity shows me lack of seriousness on the part of the Executive.  On many occasions in our Budget proposals and debate we have ever been very sympathetic to the Minister for Defence by giving good budget, but it is very pathetic to see that these incidents are occurring. So, we need a full explanation on our budgetary explanation as to why these things are occurring if they say Kony is a small thing.

May I take also this opportunity, Mr Chairman, to express my concern to the leaders of Northern region.  I am really very perturbed I am yet new, but I soon expect politics to be managed in a way the politicians of Northern region are managing themselves.  Since I have been here for the last two years I have never heard any leader of Northern region calling a meeting of Northern region people and yet there is an incident occurring in the Northern region, I will want them to sort out themselves and give their views to the Government on what is happening. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like first of all thank the hon. Tivu for raising his concern on what happened on Friday on Pakwach/karuma road.  What hon. Tivu is saying is correct, political leaders in Northern Uganda had better start examining themselves.  If the report we have received that the former constituent Assembly delegate for Arua Municipality is true, if it is true, Mr Chairman, if Atavako has joined rebels in Northern Uganda then politicians in Northern Uganda had better start examining themselves otherwise this country has had enough.  Thank you.

MR TIVU: I thank him very much for that kind of thing.  What I am meaning is, there must be consulted efforts and united front from the politicians of Northern Uganda to assist Government.  Somebody was saying that, it is sectarianism I must assure you when you go to Northern region we know who are fighting, we know how the soldiers are suffering, but we are saying as a Northern region group let us also try to come because some of the rebels are our sons and daughters, why can we not sit down and come up with a solution to the Government this is what I am saying.

Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that, there is need for you if you are a Prime Minister or a Chairman of the Council to call a meeting of this Council, you are not appointed as a Prime Minister or to be a bureaucrat. I am concerned leaders of Northern region are appointed on positions of responsibility they become bureaucrats other than representatives of the people and it is one of the unfortunate thing whereby the problems on the ground are not analyzed and, therefore, circumstances take us as it has befallen us.  We should assist Government and we cannot assist Government by talking here we should have our own meetings.  Mr Chairman, I wish to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform this House that I have just come from Northern Uganda yesterday, that I had intention to travel to Atoa division which is part of my constituency and which has been hit a day before the Arua incident.  When I arrived in Gulu, I was told I could not travel to my constituency because the rebel were in that place, so I did not move, Mr Chairman.  The issue raised by hon. Tivu, is quite in order.  While the UPDF is doing a lot of work it appears to be that they are not being properly support, they are not being properly facilitated and, therefore, they are not in position to do their work successfully.

Two, I would like to say, that the rebels now have much room all over the district of Gulu and Kitgum and unless something very immediately is done there is every possibility that the rebels will soon over come the position.  So, I would move very strongly that the Government takes immediate steps to see that this thing is corrected immediately.  I beg to support the Motion.

MR AKURE (Jie County, Kotido):  Mr Chairman, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important issue.  Mr Chairman, I think Government is taking Kony to be very simple fellow.  In many occasions we have heard 50 people being killed, we have had buses were burnt, we have heard Kony was being ambushed, but I think the Government is not taking serious step.  If they think the Kony’s group is small I think it is not correct, if we keep losing people one by one, then there will be a time when we shall regret more than this now.  Why do we allow a small use of people to destabilize all part of Northern?  And there areas where some of these incidences take place, there is this place called Kilak, each time you hear Kilak, a vehicle has been ambushed at Kilak, but don’t we have soldiers?  I am sure, Mr Chairman, we have a good number of our soldiers each time I see them being moved to the North, now how does Kony come?  If the soldiers are at the border, now if this Kony group has come in what is impossible with Government to cover up this thing?  There are so many soldiers and so many LDUs all along from Kitgum, Kapchorwa up to Karamoja they are many if the forces may be, our ‘askaris’ are not able to fight these, why do they not increase manpower so that this place the Kona-Kilak and this place where a DA of Gulu was ambushed these are areas where we normally hear Kony has killed people, he has ambushed so many vehicles and then this Karuma/Pakwach road and I normally believe before the covey moves the soldiers should have reached the place.  I think the intelligent system is also poor they do not foresee what may happen in future because you cannot really allow a covey to move with 20 soldiers as if you the place is safe,the 20 soldiers is small, we have lost over 130 people just because we were not responsible of actually ensuring lives of people must be there.  

The Government be charged responsible of this, because how do we each time lose a number of people?  They are dying, but they say, Kony has run away back to Sudan after two days you hear Kony has attacked an area, but what are we doing?  Is the Government serious on this matter or we take things lightly?  I think it is the concern of this House to tell Government that this thing must stop for how long shall we continue losing people?  What is the number of Kony anyway?  How many are they?  If they are 1000 or 2000, our soldiers I believe they are more than 20,000.  If we took about 10,000 to that area don’t you think this problem will have been solved.  I do not know how bushy that place is - (Interjection)- it is in the National Park where they normally hide, if we surround that park for one week and they are there I think because of hunger they will come out and there you just get rid of them.  But, it seems also when soldiers are following these fellows they take time to follow them.  

I think, we would have really known how Kony moves, if he is going to the direction of Sudan he should not actually go straight there, but he must have some other areas because I am told a man goes and then comes back.  Now, if that tactic has been discovered now why is it that this man is still harassing us, out of all the soldiers we have?  And I am made to believe this is a small unit of people, now all these soldiers they are always been sent to the North, why can they not put these soldiers at a strategic point that road going to Moyo, this road coming to Kona-Kilak?  I do not think really those areas are to bushy and Kony can hide, the Government has always taken this lightly thinking that, may be, it is ending today, but i think it is to much the Government must take steps to ensure the Kony activity should stop without wasting time.  

If we allow this thing to continue I do not know how the people of Northern region will settle, the elections are coming and I do not think they will be subject to voting really because you cannot vote when you are insecure and now here in our NRC the Defence Budget is always very high.  Now when you ask why is this Budget so high? They explain to you, this money goes for military hardware, but I am sure even the military hardware they have must be -(Interruption)- of Kony apart from the grenade or the mines Kony puts there.  I think, Mr Chairman, the Government is not very serious on this matter, if the Government was serious this matter will have been solved once and for all. Thank you very much.

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think at a time of sorrow such as this, for the people of Uganda and all men and women of goodwill are concerned at what is happening in Northern Uganda.  But, With my modest knowledge and experience of the security operations whereas it is easy for one to state as indeed the Minister of State for Defence and the Minister himself the President, that a small band such as that of Kony can be easily contained, small bands are necessary difficult to eliminate most especially when such bands are found in areas that may lend tentative support in the local area.  We have seen in the recent years how Maj. Itongwa set up camps not far from here, but because of limited support it was easy for that group to be contained and pushed out. (Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member, Mr Chairman, that in the area where LRA is operating at the moment they have no support from the public.  I would like to assure Members of this, if this was not so I do not see how the public can organise and offer their own children to be armed as home guards to contain the situation.  People have been mobilized and everywhere you go in this area you do not find any support what so ever, surely if there was such a support perhaps the situation would be worse than it is. I cannot in any case see how somebody can be supported and the same person his looted, his killed and he is abducted, it does not make sense so, I do not see how people can even have the courage to say that there is support in the area where Kony is operating.  How is it that Kony robs the people if they were his supporters, the minimum they would do is to make sure that the people who support them are saved, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the Acholi community has time and again denounced Kony’s activity the RDC of Kitgum did it, the RDC of Gulu did it, the Acholi Political Leaders in Acholi pacification Committee did it, I do not know how else Acholi should make it known to the public that they do not support Kony.  It is wrong, Mr Chairman, for this contention by everybody in the House and outside this House to believe this is an Acholi affair; this is a national issue and must be given a national treatment.  Thank you, Mr Chairman -(Applause)

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the information and we have all been working along the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I would you like to be informed.

CAPT. GASATURA:  I will take it later.  From the news we have received both on the electronic media and in printing and we are aware that a number of LDUs in some of those areas have been taken in who are alleged or said to have known about Kony coming to attend some funeral rites at some place. 

It is clear that this is a national issue not just an Acholi issue, but it is also clear that a great number of people in the North in Acholi in particular have renounced rebellion and they must be recommended for that, but it may be, possible that these people penetrate through friendly assistance, it may be, a few, but still to move all the way from the sudan border those many miles is suspect I am not accusing anyone in particular.

I would like, Mr Chairman, this House at a time of sorrow as this rather than be like, I am told of ‘Luyaa’ group in a neighbouring country where they say, “nobody dies people are simply bewitched “, so at the funerals they are always hunting for who should be hanged for the death of somebody else.  We must appreciate the effort put in by our gallant soldiers, we must appreciate the limited facilities given to them it is not for me to speak for Government of the seriousness I doubt that anybody in Government would want to see this continue.  If we were to have gunships, Mr Chairman, you are talking of several billion shillings; just one helicopter not to talk of weapons, but to burn down a bus an RPG weighs less that 25 kilograms and one can walk with it for tens of miles and just one person can disable a fleet of vehicles whereas it is easy to cause damage it is a lot more difficult to protect that individual vehicle or house.

Mr Chairman, it is a time when we should all again come together from all corners Movement, Multiparties, whatever, any inclination political thinking to condemn once more such atrocities committed to our brothers and sisters in any part of this country and to urge Government not to settle down for just military or to a war machine, but continue to seek political settlement diplomatic pressures as we now know that some of these rebels are helped by entities from without our borders.  I want to thank you, Mr Chairman, and to thank the hon. Member who brought up the Motion.

MR WANENDEYA: (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support the Motion whole-heartedly and extend my condolences to all those who lost their beloved ones and as a country we must condemn what happened last Friday and what has been happening. (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, I was frightened by my Brother Elly Karuhanga and this is why he is laughing so much.  

First of all when some of us really advise we sincerely do it in the best interest of our country, I must urge the Government and Ugandans to know this, that the French, the American big powers with big resources the great Kongo were not able to be uprooted by Americans.  In the North of this continent the French could not manage the Algerian Revolution, the British could not manage the ‘Mau Mau Rebellion’.   We live in this country we must, therefore, find a solution, the fact that NRM was supported by some of us to take over the Government it does not mean that this revolution in the north which is a guerrilla warfare and has been going on for some time -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, whether actually the activities in the North is a revolution or a rebellion, because if it is a revolution then it means it has got a different meaning and what we are discussing is different, but if it is a rebellion that is a different thing.  Can he clarify, Mr Chairman. 

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Manzi may have his own views as to whether it is a revolution or a guerrilla, but the fact it is going on something must be done to address it.  In 1989, when we had come to this House I had this proposal and I want to put it forward to you and the Government that we must find people to be elected from the four regions of Uganda and work for a solution go even to bush if need be to get Kony or meet in another country whereby we can sit at table with Kony to find out his demands.  

Mr Chairman, I say this in all seriousness because we seem to think that it is a very simple thing, I remember Obote used to say, we will flash out NRM from the bush, but it never managed to be flashed out.  This same thing I remember the Minister for Defence saying last month that the rebellion in the North is over, but what has happened just last week?  

Therefore, I urge the Government to look for people from all regions of Uganda it is not the Northern people’s problem it is for the whole Uganda because if a finger on the body is hurting the whole body has got a problem which must be addressed and, therefore, I urge the Government to look into that matter.  I remember, the Sudan’s Government I think said that, they had captured some UPDF those names should be given by the Government so that we can find out what is happening.  Indeed, Mr Chairman, we said that, we will flash Kony from the bush, but in Budadiri I was there yesterday we even sent local defence units to go at the war front and some of the ‘Badadiri’ have been killed and taken back for burial.  So this problem must be addressed by the Government and I would urge that the Government should get about three people from each region of Uganda to set up a committee and, therefore, look into the grievances because you find that we have a whole residence Minister in the North he would have solved this problem, but it has been going on for quite a long time, therefore, I again repeat that this problem must be addressed by setting up a committee.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MORO (Koboko County, Arua): Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for allowing Mark Tivu to move this Motion.  I had actually intended to move the Motion myself, I contacted our Clerk who advised me to see you unfortunately this morning when I came to your office you had not come, I had also to go and see the Minister for Labour because of what is happening in my constituency.  

We have a problem and it’s a big problem, the problem is not only for Acholi or for West Nile or for the North, but it is a problem for the whole of Uganda, I think it is proper let this Motion be accepted and be debated by this House.  I would like to appeal to the whole House through you, Mr Chairman, when debating this Motion we should not take sides and say, this is a problem of the North and it is believed that these people are supported by the local people.  

I want to assure you that, when you bring up puppies to become dogs you can claim them either to be good dogs or to become bad dogs and even if they take the milk that you give them one could bite you on top of the milk that you gave it.  So when a brother runs away from the home and decides to take opposite side, nobody should be deceived that the brother at home can support that enemy.  We have experienced this, some times we say, okay, he has been supported by the people and yet if you go to those disturbed areas, you will find that the so called rebels, well after going to rebel activity they come back home but, when they enter the home whether it is their brother’s home or their mother’s home or their father’s home they do not care of anything.  They come and demand whatever is there and if you do not give it they are prepared to punish you, either by death or temporary punishment that is tying you the so called ‘kandoya’.  Recently, secretary for defence in our area was tied, and others killed, some of us reported this issue to the local authorities particularly our armed forces, I am sorry to say, I am not accusing them, some of them seems to be taking the matters very, very, light which is very unfortunate.  

If you read in the papers if we hear from our Executive officers it appears Kony’s issue was already gone case, I think recently we heard that, that was a gone case and yet a few days back there were ambushes along the road from Gulu to Moyo where one of our doctor was killed and burnt I think his driver was also killed plus somebody else. Hardly, a week ago this incident happened in Gulu people were killed in Minakulu area, some soldiers not only from Acholi land, some were from the East, some from the South and some from even West Nile.  One of them was a brother of mine he was a captain he was one of the victims killed and I was wondering how it was possible if you take the distance between the Gulu/Karuma road and then the Karuma/Pakwach how these people could not be detected really I was wondering, I think something must have gone wrong and yet of late when we appealed with the covey this covey gave us a lot of problems some of us travel along that road, some times we travel very late and I do not know why some times you are kept on the road every now and then you stopped, you arrive very late, very dusty, we complained the President listened to our complains and then he instituted these detachments from Pakwach up to karuma every five miles we have got detachment of this army and there soldiers patrolling, some were even seated along the road, things went well, of late I do not know  what happened it appears there has been a bit of relaxation I do not see them as I used to see and some of detachments I think are not there.  

So, I think that case should be considered very, very seriously; we say Government is to protect the people and their property, but if we are going to protect, you know that a lion is roaring nearby your animal are in danger you go to sleep.  Within one week really to see a large number of rebels according to my information in Arua that the road was lined for about three kilometres by these rebels and the number of vehicles, the six buses, the lorries, the cars were all attacked, where were our soldiers by then?  I am still wondering, what really had happened and I do not know whether the authorities have gone to investigate really what happened, I think there was negligence somewhere, as a result many of our people, may be, from Arua, people from Moyo, not all that even people from here, even the drivers, there was a driver who was a Muganda who used to sleep even in my place, this Haji was driving a Fly way he has now changed to ‘Jagwa’ he was one of the victims and two drivers who were my neighbours they were brothers of the same mother we were told both of them died, but up to now we are not certain; has been confirmed that he was killed, these buses were set on fire and they were burnt beyond recognition, I heard some of the dead bodies were taken to Nebbi and dumped there, I do not know why they were not able to take some of them to Arua, the whole of Friday, Saturday, Sunday; people were  there by the time I left yesterday. It was so miserable you could not imagine really and people were asking themselves, have we really got a Government?  If we have a Government, how can Government really allow this to happen to our people?  

So, the situation is very bad and I think, Mr Chairman, something must be done very seriously, along the Pakwach/Karuma road we have not got a problem, Kitgum and Gulu I understand some roads leading to Kitgum were blocked there is a problem in Kitgum, problem in Gulu, in Koboko it is worse, about seven parishes now are in jungle, no houses the tents provided by the Red Cross are not enough people are sleeping the open air with the cold.  I am happy to say that, the Ministry of labour assisted by providing food, but it is not enough, the religious leaders have tried to assist, but this food is not enough, but I think Government must do something to protect her citizens and their property otherwise the home people will not understand that the Government is protecting them.  It is true that some people ran to join the rebel activities we do not know exactly their motive for us in the West Nile we have told all the Ugandans that we did not like to fight because we had enough of it, in fact, more than enough, now we are going to have another one after staying in exile for over ten years we came here because of this Government.  It was our President who said, you come back and we came back and we are happy, when we came back there were no houses people have now come back and they are settled, we in the West Nile we say we are not going to participate, Government should find why the rebels  - have gone to exile because some people were demobilized and put to now they demobilize soldiers I think they have not got their packages yet, the retrenches that were retrenched I think most of them got their packages, but what is this package one hundred thousand, two hundred, I some times get two millions here which people say that we have got money how long does the 2 millions take?  I think the money which was given got finished before they could settle and then there was another problem which was not immediately combated. 

So, I am appealing to Government that this issue of our road along Karuma/Pakwach, the road from Karuma/Gulu/Kitgum, from Gulu to Moyo Government should take it seriously I have seen a number of soldiers here, I am not saying that all here is well I know there some other problems, let the problems here be solved by the Police, we have got the Police, we have got even the Prisons, we have got the LDUs, let them take all this one let us move all these soldiers to the North if we can line our border from Nabi through Kaya to the border  -(Laughter)- yes, if we can do that I think it will assist us.

Mr Chairman, I know the others who are going to speak, but I want to tell you, Mr Chairman, the people at home, this ambush added something to the suffering of the people of West Nile as such not only in Koboko even I think along the Moyo then going up to Kitgum.  So, please, Government, I am sorry that the responsible Minister is not here, but other Ministers you are here we have been telling you, you do not want to listen you want to go to your homes and familiarize why do you not go to Koboko and familiarise were there is problem?  Why do you not go to Moyo and familiarize were there is problem there?  These are your areas now I want you to take it very, very seriously that the people there are suffering innocently and we want the money which they pay to be used to protect their lives and property.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUMU (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me opportunity to contribute on this Motion.  First of all I would like to send my condolences to the people who have lost their people since February, mainly because this is a new way of the rebel activities which started in February this year.  In 1989; Ambrose Okullu was then a Member of this House try to introduce a Motion to discuss the problem of the North at that time, but we never had opportunity to talk about this problem in this House.  I think today is a great day especially for those of us who remember what we have gone through since 1986.  

I am very happy that Members who have contributed so far has stressed the fact that this is not an Acholi affair it is a national affair. (Applause) Members of this House deserve to know what Government has put in place to stop this problem once and for all. (Applause) The people of the North who are now affected by this rebellion  -(Interruption) 

MR MATEKE: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the House to discuss such important matter affecting the lives of so many Ugandans when the Minister of State for Defence is not here and the leader of Business is not here?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members, the hon. Minister of State for Defence is right now in Arua assessing the situation and it is, therefore, in order for us to continue.

MR OLUM: Mr Chairman, I think the Members of this House deserve to know what Government has put in place to solve this problem once and for all.  We all remember during the Luwero problems many of the Members who came from Luwero were made the scapegoat of what was going on in Luwero, they were told they must end the rebellion in Luweero and Government continued to harp on the people who represented Luweero just because they happened to be on the opposition side.  

I was very sad when I read a statement attributed to the Minister of State for Pacification in the North alleging that it was hon. Tiberondwa who are supporting the rebellion in the North.  I think that is a statement which must be challenged, we have a problem, the problem is not Ssemogerere or Tiberondwa we must save the people of the North from suffering and protect their lives and properties, I think diverting the people’s minds and getting scapegoat will not solve our problem.  I heard one Member here contributing alleging that the people are supporting the rebels, I would like to assure this House that the Members of the Acholi Pacification Committee which consists of Members of NRC, former cadres and many leaders in the area have gone to great length to assist Government.  Government was fully aware that these rebels were coming the population in Kitgum gave due information to the Government, it is not true that these people came when they do not know, they came in, in fact, if you read some newspapers at that time they came right through fighting steering their way to Uganda.  So, let us not minimize this problem, it is a serious problem, which must be tackled, otherwise the people feel that they have been abandoned to their own devices.  

I heard a BBC broadcast, two, three days ago by Catherine Watson, she said the rebellion in the North is no threat to Kampala you know, when you get that kind of analysis, sure enough they may never take the Government, but what do you with the people of the area, are they not Ugandans?  These are Ugandans they pay taxes, they belong to this country, we deserve to be protected and saved from this rebellion. What is Government, therefore, if Government cannot protect it’s people -(Applause)- the people of Nwoya whom I represent are now living like wild animals, many of them have run to Gulu they are not getting sufficient assistance, their Houses have been burnt and they are wondering whether really Government is serious about protecting them.  

I think this is the only place where we can express these views publicly and I think Government should face the fact that they are to blame they have never sought the views of this House in solving this problem -(Applause)- and I think the views of this House is so important if we are going to solve that problem.  We must swallow our pride and get together and solve this problem. 

Mr Chairman, a lot has already been said, I just wanted to express those few views and support this Motion and I think the sooner Government comes to grip with this situation and the sooner the Minister of Defence comes to this House and make an authoritative statement giving us a programme of solving this problem the people of Acholi and the people of the North still abandon nobody is there for them.  Some times you hear people asking what are you people doing about your problem?  Even Members of this House do ask us, how do I feel as a representative of the people?  The question is not how Olum and his people are going to solve the problem, it is how Government will solve this problem and I think this is a good time for us Members here to speak out very strongly. We vote a lot of money to Defence, where does that money go, is it not for protecting the people?  We want to find out how Government is going to solve this problem and it must be given out very quickly because people have run out of patience they feel helpless.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members because of the importance of this Motion I will allow two more speakers, order please. 

MR MAYANJA ABU (Busujju County Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  As a person who has been here for a long time I would like to express our deep condolences, our sympathy and our solidarity with the people in the North.  The widows, the orphans, and all the victims of this rebellion, I think it quite clear that the matter has really gone beyond what can be tolerated in a civilised society.  There is really nothing more left to be said, there three ways of dealing with the rebellion of solving problems caused by a rebellion of this nature, either you defeat them militarily or you talk with them, the third way is magic, but as a Muslim I do not believe in magic. (Laughter)  

So, let us get serious with ourselves, we have tried for about eight years, we have tried for a long time, the way of the stick.  At one time some initiative was taken to try the method of the carrot and then for reasons which were never explained to us because we depend entirely on new papers for our information even Members of Parliament, the method of the carrot by that I mean discussion, dialogue, was abandoned and we went back for a gun obviously the gun has not worked in the sense that, we may have killed and do not forget that these people who are killed even if they are killed by UPDF some of them are innocent people because we are told they are abducted by Kony, they do not go and join Kony on their free will.  

Now what is the situation? What conclusion can we as decent, honest concerned leaders of this country, what conclusion can we draw from this situation?  Can we honestly say that the methods of defeating them militarily has worked.  We have dealt with similar situations through this government.  This government is not ashamed of discussing with people of dialogue, with Ugandans and other people, the former leaders and whatever, say to call them whatever they are.  

So, I appeal to them - now nobody will say that Kony is stronger than UPDF if we go and sit down anywhere and discuss with Kony and resolve this problem and stop the killings and the maiming and this terrible shame on our country. (Interruption)

MR OKURUT: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman we had that same problem in Teso and we decided as leaders of Teso to go and talk to them. (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, I stand here to tell you that I was hijacked, abducted and I stayed in the bush for nine months suffering.  But we said we shall talk to these people and we talked to them.  I think it is necessary for us to talk.  We better find out what Kony is after.  In any case, who is Kony?  Who is he?  For we were told in Teso that we had external force by the name of Otai.  We said Otai is in London eating bread and what have you and enjoying life.  So I am saying and I would like to inform my hon. Members that, I have been in Parliament since 1962; we should talk.  Let us open a dialogue and let us find out what these people are after.  Thank you, very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA: We the elders of this country and elders I think also in this House, are humbly telling you that we should use the method of dialogue.  There is nothing to be ashamed about using this method, if it will save our people.  This thing is now going to put even the projected elections into jeopardy.  Who cannot see that?  Do we want that to happen?  We get disturbed, because as I say, even we Members of Parliament are depending on newspapers and the news papers in Uganda are notoriously inaccurate. (Laughter)  Nevertheless, I get disturbed when I read a statement attributed to a Minister that - so, if we here are supporting this rebellion, why can we not be exposed?  

Mr Chairman, the Baganda say enungu enkalirize ekissa, tewonna.’  I do not know what ‘enungu’ is. (Laughter)  Enungu means a feeling on one’s foot, usually it is treated by exposing it on fire.  But if you do not do it constantly, it does not get cured.  So, let us resolve from this House.  I am sorry I came in later and I did not get the terms of the Motion we are debating.  So, I think this afternoon would have been usefully deplored if we came out from this House with one message to the Government.  Let us give one message to the government; we want the government to talk with rebels and resolve this problem once and for all. (Applause)

MR RWAKAKOKO (Ruhama County, Ntungamo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I like my Colleagues who have just spoken, would like to join the people in the North who have lost their dear ones, who have suffered as a result of this incidence and therefore, I would like to offer our very heartfelt condolences.  That this is a National issue is not a mood point.  Every part of Uganda that suffers any single day is the rest of Uganda suffering.  Last time, here in this House, we were about to discuss the issue of Karamoja and I do recall as if it was early this afternoon; the exchange that took place between the people from Karamoja themselves.  This afternoon, I have seen seemingly some blame being apportioned on different parties.  

I would like on my behalf to register and appeal as a nationality, and appeal as somebody who has been functionally associated with the North.  I traveled those routes for four years, a minimum of one month, one trip for four years.  And many times I traveled in the night arriving in Kampala in the morning.  Mr Chairman, there are Colleagues who have not been privileged to know Uganda, they represent just counties where they come from.  One of the things I said before in this House and I would like to repeat it for those who are coming in next round, I think there should be an effort for everybody more particularly in this House, to be a Ugandan.  

I would like an effort made for leaders to know Uganda geographically not in a technical sense.  I would like Ugandans to travel across Uganda; and talk to Ugandans.  The first time I went to West Nile, I went by map reading.  When I was posted there, we had a project and I had a number of 50 officers.  Some of them when they arrived there because of the foolish biases we were in this country, many of those officers asked for leave never to come back.  I have worked and many people who worked with me in the North know my position as a Ugandan -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to inform the hon. Member that this country of ours is one of the most beautiful in this world and some of us who have traveled and crossed the international date line, there is no country which is as beautiful as this one.  Mr Chairman, just across Kenya here, you find fortress on the side of Uganda, whereas just on the other side of River Malaba, there are no fortress there and yet Kenya would want them.

MR RWAKAKOKO:  I would like to thank hon. Wanendeya for saying the obvious -(Laughter)- but he bears what I bear.  I was saying what I said.  Because I do not like the expressions coming from some of us as if the problem is either local or as if the government after all does not care as much or as if some of the people are not affected and therefore, they do not care. No!  I think that we should all in uniform, wear the concerns of the areas which are affected.  We must in this Chamber show this concern.  We must be united beyond political consideration.  We must not make demand with elections in view.   What are elections for people who are loosing lives, that does not apply therefore.  Mr Chairman, I think this afternoon, as a Colleague has said, we have been worthy spent - if we discuss what is taking place in the North, bearing in mind the incidence that took place in Buganda recently, in the central areas, bearing in mind the fight that took place between Lakwena and the Basoga.  Kamuli where the Lakwenas were defeated near Magamaga Barracks.  

W should also bear in mind what the hon. Member from Soroti has said.  I think therefore, in my view we should have a combined effort and condemn it in the strongest terms anybody who uses innocent civilians to score against government. (Applause)  

I think it is not right morally, that kind of thing cannot be supported.  Because it lacks the cause.  If Kony has a score against government, he should face government soldiers and leave civilians intact.  I do not also support the idea of a military strategy being exclusive in the North.  Because I fear that the young and helpless there will again be inconvenienced.  Because if you are to set a zone for the battle, again people will have to be moved away from their homes and trouble will not have been solved.  So, what do I suggest Mr Chairman?  

Mr Chairman, I would like a multiple cost of actions to be adopted.  The government should come out again and set a position as it has done so before expressing willingness to hear the problem.  What is the cause from the fighters?  But on the other hand, that should not be used as a weakness on the army of a nation to be taken as hostage for people whose cause may not after all be national.  I think therefore, the sense of civilians should also take a proper place in its passages -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, in light of the fact that, the issues being raised are of such great importance in this House and in the country, and in light of the fact that, the Motion has actually not been formally drafted and presented and in light of the fact that, issues important as they are, are coming up. I would like to appeal to you, Mr Chairman, to allow more discussion than you had allowed hon. Rwakakoko being the last Member to speak.  I would appeal to you to allow this House to express itself and feel satisfied, because this matter has been going on for a long time.  And so far, I think only one school of thought has kind of presented its ideas, and there are others who feel differently.  And I think it is very important, Mr Chairman, that you allow a full discussion on this issue today, so that we can come up with a resolution which is worthy the standards of our House. (Applause)  I appeal to you Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well, hon. Members, this is exactly what we are observing here in the Chair; as the point has been raised, the presenter of the Motion is already ready with the written text; and I am in a short while going to call upon him to present a written text on the Motion and also there will be subsequent discussion.  I think you are reading my mind.

MR RWAKAKOKO:  When Mr Chairman, you travel from Karuma to Pakwach and you particularly have reached a place called Anaka and Oryemu up to Pakwach.  The Northern part of that area is so wide that, somebody can travel un noticed.  In fact, there is one time when I was traveling in that area and I really had a problem.  This problem this time was between me and the lion.  Now, when I crossed I went through Paidha.  Paidha across that is in Nebbi; is very high up.  I tried to look back whether it is not possible to see the lion in the park there.  I failed!  So, the area is very wide, people can travel unnoticed.  So there are some technical problems and so on and I do not think that I am qualified militarily to go into the detail.  But I know that, the inquiry that I made confirms that problem.  

So, I would like to leave the military part to those who are qualified.  But I would like from our point of view politically for the government to continue extending yet and yet the open discussion method so that we have no roadblock, or at least those who want to be just stubborn have no any further experience to use.  I thank you very much indeed for having allowed me and I would like to appeal to the Members to be united in this matter.  I thank you. (Applause)

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the mover of this Motion and I do hope that at the end of it all, some resolutions be passed to guide the government on our views here, this afternoon.  Mr Chairman, I do not know how much we Members of this House, feel accountable to explain to the people and to be able to defend a common strategy on what is happening in Northern Uganda.  As Members of Parliament collectively, tomorrow somebody will say No, No!  You see I was not really involved in it, it is a government position.  We owe it to ourselves Mr Chairman, to stand up for purposes of accountability and transparency and good governance to solve this problem in the North.  And I have noticed, we have set up several Committees of this House to look into matters which to me are not as important to the people of Uganda as the many deaths that are occurring in Northern Uganda, out of this problem of insurgency.  And I would, therefore, be happy that you will find it possible to set up a Parliamentary Committee to complement other effort being done in trying to find a solution.  Because I do understand what contacts are available in Northern Uganda with the rebels, and they had been established before.  And these contacts must be exploited.  

Mr Chairman, to me so much has been destroyed in Northern Uganda, through cause of life, through property and so on.  But I do not know whether there can be any punishment you can inflict on these rebels to repay the damage they have caused to the people and to the society.  Economic light, we have heard of Koboko; we have now known apparently that rebels are moving unto Kitgum.  If every Ugandan is only happy during the day but is worried of what is going to happen to him at night; rebels will come and abduct you, your wife, your children.  This matter is a very serious matter.  Those of us who have never tasted insurgency, can only relate this to what happened when there is a change of government and there are people who are moving at night, some are robbers, some are murderers.  

So, I think we should not try to apportion blame.  But we must call on government to keep this House fully informed of what is happening on the ground.  I think the Minister responsible should come and make a ministerial statement of affair to this House.  So that, we can then interpret it and take that quickly as the official government position, rather than relying on what Monitor says.  

For instance, I do not know how many people actually have so far died out of this ambush.  I think  The Monitor was talking of 130, another one was talking of 15, you know!  We must really try to get some spokesman to tell this House, not the press conference. The House takes precedence so that we know.  Because we are all leaders in our capacity and we have people who are residents in various parts, who come from the areas which are affected, so that we can reassure them of what is happening, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while I support what the Member is talking about, I would like to inform him that government notoriously un reliable in the way they inform populations about wars which are going on.  And the best example I can give him is what happened when the Vruguayan war was going on.  The Americans put in strong forces fighting against people they used to call the Guatekung.  And I remember in 1952, when they said, Guatekung number about 10,000 and then they proceeded to narrate the proceedings of the war, how it went on.  In the evening they would say, today our troops killed 1,000 and not 20; the following day they say our troops killed 500 Gautekung and lost 10; and went on for almost a year killing 1,000 a day nearly and Gautekungs were never finished. (Laughter)

DR MAGEZI: Mr Chairman, notwithstanding; I would like to be able to have at least a reliable and authoritative source of information when matters of this nature do erupt in our country.  Mr Chairman, we have heard that some leaders from some parts of Northern Uganda hope to call on government and claim compensation for the dear ones who have died or who have been inquired in respect of exchange.  This matter indeed deserves some attention.  But I would suggest that the modusoperandi really for Uganda now is to use every means available to stop the escalation or this rebellion or insurgency which is taking place.  So that we can look meaningfully and access the damage which has been done by a non committed forum.  Because once it is done at this particular minute in time, there will be a lot of other over tonnes which will cloud the affair, they will be the political, they will be the non political and so on and so forth.  

I would like to conclude, Mr Chairman, by calling upon the leaders of Northern Uganda, to realise that you are not alone; we are with you.  But because you know the common ground better than most of us, I have just heard that, Kamuli is apparently near Magamaga; it is far from the truth.  But because you are on the common ground, we expect you to play a more involved role, only in so far as trying to defuse this crisis in the Northern Uganda.  And this calls on you if you have had support for this rebellion, we shall disown you.  We must work together to find a solution.  But you are the people who must lead us.  Probably people may not want to listen to you.  But when they realise that, somebody else is talking to them, there can be peace brought about.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR ETIANG (Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Chairman, thank you.  I am standing not as Minister of Defence obviously, but I would like to make a contribution, Mr Chairman, on this issue.  First of all, I thought it will be confined to within about a half an hour being as it was tabled a matter of national agency.  But I do recognise the fact that, as hon. Elly Karuhanga said, it is so important that, it needs to be treated more than so far Members have attempted.  

Mr Chairman, may I first of all join those who have expressed their condolence not so much the debate, but those who are bereaved.  Again here, I fully concur with those who have said so, since the matter is national; to that extent Mr Chairman, we are all grieved.  

Personally, I have a historical and personal attachment to the area which is affected. It happens to be my second home, that is where I first earned my salary - Kilak County, was one of the counties which I charged administratively as a junior officer based in Gulu, in the early 60s.  It is a county populated by extremely warm-hearted people, it is a county with which I recall my administrative experience; because I found nothing but actual friendship from the people of that county, reflecting as they did the general feeling among the Acholi people.  When I stand, therefore, to speak, it is not so much as a Minister in this particular context, but as somebody who shares deeply in the so much suffering that the people of that area have experienced.  It is therefore, unfortunate for some Members to be delusive on the matter either blaming leaders from the North or Northerners blaming themselves as to who should have started what action or those who do not come from the area, in any way insinuating blame on those who come from the area.  Or for that matter, Parliament being a part of Government to be generally acrimonious towards the executive.  We all share this responsibility as leaders whether we are in the Executive Arm of the Government or on the Legislative side.  

It is true, that the matter must now be recognised as being much more than so far all of us in government or outside have seen to be.  Government position on this matter has time and again been expressed by the authorities that are competent on it, not the list of which the President himself, who has spent months of working days in Gulu and in the neighbourhood of the area affected.  Some where in between sharing blame and apportioning blame into two.  We all share in the shortcoming or in the truth of this matter.  

On that basis, if this House has got some of the message at this point in time, it should not be a message which is lopsided, it is not a message to one party which is supposed to be involved in this matter, but it should be a message of national character.  First of all, before we all condemn as we here would have done, if we condemn this act as being seen uncivilised and what have you, we should first of all be unanimous as a House in condemning this act.  We should be (Applause!) If we are going to call government to talk, I would like to remind my Colleagues that, it is not the first time that government has talked; even on the Kony issue.  

But I would like to say, no government worthy its thought, can talk when the situation is not yet contained.  In other words, this evil act must be challenged with atrocities committed.  I do not think any government can sit here talking to Kony when buses are being blown on the road.  I think we should first of all see and appeal to everybody first of all to stop these bad acts.  I have seen this in respect of the British and ARA that they are not going to talk unless those who are using force must resist from using force.  I have seen this in the Middle East coming up now as thus, that no talking is going to be entertained unless those who are using force must actually give up the use of force.  Now, if my hon. Colleagues have got to come with a message of national character attaining to all sides concerned, that message initially at this point in time must be impartial.  

Mr Chairman, you have rightly informed the House that my Colleague the Minister of State for Defence is in the area obviously collecting the latest situation on the spot.  So that the House can be given a better situation and perspective on the basis of which it would have an informed debate on the subject.  I would like to plead therefore, with the House that we do not hurry to adopt any Motion  now which maybe either half baked into the information, or it may prejudice the situation to the document that we are all trying to avoid.  

With regard to the newspapers and I say this for the obvious reason of my attachment to them.  Elsewhere, I have said that, the newspapers have got an encumbrance in the country; they do not have logistics of all types from the humblest to the higher.  As it is happening right now, I am not aware of any Ugandan military reporter who is at the battlefront.  The nearest reporter I am aware of who is somewhere in Gulu probably taking photographs of the arms that have been captured and reporting from the comforts of Gulu, from a desk or to the inefficiency of such a story which because of a first changing situation may be erroneous.  Mr Chairman, I am not, therefore, going to subscribe that the newspapers are mysterious in their reporting; but I should like to appeal to my Colleagues on their behalf and mitigation that definitely they have played a role even on this matter.

Lastly, one point that so far has not been made is the eye international aspect to this matter.  I agree with those who say that the matter is more than just Mr Kony and his Lord’s Resistance Army; that it is not as small as it appears to be.  But if one scares even to look at the photographs of the arms that have been captured and that it has taken up all this long and that time, that these people were across the border in a numbering country.  It is about time that we also in our submission make a message to those who are concerned.  Because whether we like it or not, the matter has an international aspect.  Now, it is to the extent of that aspect that perhaps the government to date has not been able to come into full swing to hold the situation.  And I would like to emphasize the point, Mr Chairman, that my Colleagues do not rush into a resolution which may mislead them and the country, but rather to state the decision on such a resolution, to allow my Colleague the Minister of State for Defence on his return as it has been requested to come and inform the House on the basis of which he will take a suitable and a sensible decision to the national interest.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, kindly take your seats.  The matter which you have been discussing is very important and I think it would be better if we suspend discussion which we should open tomorrow in the afternoon, so that some of you can go and sit down and may contribute towards the resolution, which we will not like to be hurriedly presented.  Because what is happening now is that, I was going to call upon hon. Mark Tivu, to come with the written resolution upon which further discuss would be continued.  But in the absence of the Minister of State for Defence who is very crucial, I think we would not be doing justice to either of the party and at this juncture, I would argue you to support the proposal made by the hon. Minister of Information.  And with this, I would like to suspend discussion and we proceed.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, this is the gravity of this discussion and if we are to switch business to the temple which has already been built to a formal debate in the remaining hour or so, I think you will find it very counter productive.  I was going to seek your guidance and indulgence to allow Members even if we do not come to a formal resolution, at least come to a resolution which would direct the Minister of State for Defence to make a formal statement at the earliest convenient time.  

Secondly, rather than us going into the form of business of discussing the Bill, because the temperature now I think is a bit uneasy.  I would request you Sir, to allow Members to express their feelings so as to reduce the anxiety and the tension.  By the time the Minister comes, we will formally receive his statement and move on to a resolution in a calm manner than we could other wise do.  If you accept that, Mr Chairman, then some of us would proceed to contribute to this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order!  Take your seat.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, just on a point of procedure.  I think what hon. Kanyomozi and I believe most of the hon. Members here were begging you to do is while a bit more of this team is being let off, hon. Mark Tivu with a few others around him are formulating an idea into a resolution and already we understand from different speakers, it is mainly one as hon. Kanyomozi said; to ask Government to come up with a statement and of course Members have expressed their sorrow at the death of so many of our brothers and sisters, we condemn the act and we are asking government to say, how do they want us to back them up.  And I think what hon. Members were asking is, if you would modify the procedure, to allow a few more people to let off the discussion.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I am in total agreement with all your proposals.  Right now hon. Mark Tivu has already prepared a written text in form of a resolution which he is to present here upon which further discussion will follow.

MR TIVU (Youth Representative, Northern Region):  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much and Members for first of all in supporting me and extending their various views.  The NRC duly convinced constituted and sitting in Kampala on the 1st day of March, 1996; and having exhaustively discussed the question of persistence and increasing insecurity in Northern Uganda and killing of innocent civilians, burning of vehicles and abduction of people, have noted with concern and asks the government for the following:  

First of all, the NRC condemns in the strongest terms the act of killing innocent civilians, burning vehicles and the destruction of property.  That government does everything possible to end the insecurity in the affected areas of the country, by talking to the rebels.  

That government does everything possible to rescue those abducted, assist the families to recover the bodies of those killed for decent burial.  The government assists transporters whose buses are burnt, since insurance companies cannot indemnify war accidents.  

That government provides all kinds relief to the displaced people.  

That call upon government to approach the NRC and the country at large on the security situation in the country.  That the political leaders of the North could meet periodical to analyze the situation on the ground and seek advice of the government on what to do.  

That the NRC condemns anybody who uses civilians to secure against the government.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Peace and security, is the real foundation stone for the development and democracy of any government and any country and the stability of that country and progress and the enjoyment of democracy all depend on peace.  For anybody who wants to stop development of a country or who wants to stop the democratic development and enjoyment of democracy, the best route  that person should take is to disturb the peace of that country.  And the people who are disturbing the peace which has been brought in and ushered in by the National Resistance Movement government are in various categories.  There are those obviously when the National Movement Government threw out militarily, there are those who have got foreign interests and use foreign influence as hon. Kiyonga said, who would like to destabilise the peace in Uganda, like a neighbouring country in the North.  

There are some locals who like to eat in Kavuyo and probably enjoy the stability of a stable government would bring them in power if elections are near the corner.  Some of these collaborate with the foreigners, collaborate with those who were thrown out and they formed bands of gorilla group, namely: the West Nile Bank Front and the Lord Resistance Army.  My very good Friend in the CA, whom I used to share a cup of tea with and discuss national issues and discuss the efficient Constitutional Development of Uganda; my Friend Atamvaku, abandoned this exercise of creating a Constitution for Uganda.  Because he wants to see the Constitutional Developments of Uganda fail, so he went and took up arms and he is with the West Nile Bank Front.  It is a pity that we still have politicians in our amidst who are taking this road to destabilise our country.

MR OKURUT: Point of procedure.   There is no question to substantiate in this issue.  Let us not talk as if we are politicking.  Our interest is Uganda; and I suggest that we organise one, two, three people to go and draft a resolution, which would be brought back to this House and which has nothing to do with partisanship.  Because we are only interested in peace into the country.  Once you have any part of your politics bleeding, you cannot say you are alright.  So, please can we ask these people to organise one, two, three people to go and draft a resolution and we pass it.  Because we are all interested in this business about peace in our country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, you are interested in it and equally hon. Karuhanga and other people are interested in it.  We shall come to that hon. Okurut.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, even if that Committee was to be involved, the truth if you had left this resolution on the Floor of this House, let the truth be said.  I wish to analyze this situation and everybody knows what it is.  This is my position.  It is also true and that, this story, I heard it with my own ears, that the last attack at Atiak where massacres took place, carried out by the Lord Resistance Army, a section of our politicians blamed the NRA at that time, trying to turn this into UPDF as having been responsible for that massacre and I was present in Mbarara in the Uganda Think Tank Foundation meeting, which was addressed by -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of procedure.  Hon. Tivu moved a draft resolution and that was he presents what he should in summary of what has been talked in the resolution and we talk about.  I would have thought that we should first of all, look at what he has moved and see whether it is necessary to pass that resolution now in its form or if it needs polishing, we set up a Committee to polish that resolution and probably also at the same time, wait for the Minister of State for Defence to come in and put in government position and all his findings in West Nile.  So that the resolution incorporates both our feeling, our aspiration and what government so far has done.  Because if we do not do that, then we are loosing sight of what hon. Tivu has moved and we are again in general discussion, just to air our views.  Mr Chairman that is what I thought we are supposed to do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order.  This is exactly what I told you hon. Members, as to what I am expecting from you.  I allowed a written text of the resolution to be read to you upon which your contribution would be dwelling as to contribute.  You are either supporting and improve or make proposals, so that at the end of the day, we have something to carry home.

MR KARUHANGA:  And I would like this resolution to be discussed in the context of our security situation in the country.  And as we talking now, this morning there was a funeral service of an American doctor in Mulago whom thugs followed and shot him in front of his office.  And I can see that, that if we do not take into the situation, the earlier rebel activities by Itongwa and others and just operate because this one came today, as if nothing has been going on, when we are approaching a very high chargeable political season.  In India during elections, they bury more than 1,000 people, because of politics.  Yes!  In other countries they just pass by like rain came and it went.  What I would like us to discuss and for me my views on this talk; what do you talk with Lord’s Resistance Army?  They are agents of a foreign country - what would you talk with Lakwena?  Her idea was to bring white lamps here and some witchcraft in State House and be in charge of our country.  And now if the Kuwait’s people had talked the better, inside of fighting them -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of Clarification.  Mr Chairman, I appreciate what hon. Elly Karuhanga is advancing in supporting the Motion.  Some how from his contribution and discussion to the debate, I get perhaps a false impression I hope I am wrong, that he does not even have the full text of the Motion.  I would wish him to guide us as to whether he accepts the resolution as it is where he as a good lawyer would like to help us modify it so that he guides us, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Let me just put the minds of the Members at ease.  There are certain things in the resolution which I would like to differ with.  For example that government does everything possible by talking with the rebels.  I would have another opinion, and I am giving the background to why I would raise an amendment to that resolution.  Be patient with me please.  The thing is that, in my view this type of -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to point out that the Minister of Information gave us guidelines which we have to follow.  In my opinion in this juncture, the intention of this debate is, it would be premature to formulate a resolution.  We need the explanation of government, the government must put in an input before this House can formulate.  And I had thought that the suggestion made by hon. Kanyomozi; circulated I think by hon. Gasatura was, let us continue with the debate which hon. Karuhanga is doing, until such time as the Minister responsible will put in an input.  And basing on what he has said, then we can formulate a resolution which can be adopted by this House.  I think really that is what we are doing Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members let us do orderly.  You see hon. Members, for the matter is important, I was urged to continue and I am continuing.  But hon. Members should either advise that the resolution read by hon. Mark Tivu; should hold on.  This is upon you, it is not a Chair to direct.  I have allowed you to continue debating, but based on the point raised on the resolution.  If in your wisdom you feel that it should be suspended, you just continue to say so as the hon. Prof. George Kanyeihamba have been saying.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that we are debating a Motion with a highly charged situation in the North, or something that has happened in this country of so many losses of lives and property and yet Mr Chairman, I see so many interruptions and points of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for any form of interruptions to come to the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members as you continue contributing, please try to either improve on the resolution read before the House with a view of improving it and making amendment as part of your contribution, as it has been recommended.  So, please I allow debate to continue.

MR KARUHANGA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I was saying that it would be wonderful for there to be peace talks when the two groups of people do not agree.  But I realise the Lord’s Resistance Army and so far to me it sounds as if it is different from for example the West Nile Bank.  It seems those people have not been - I do not know yet, I have not read in the papers; they seem to be engaged in the army not the civilian.  Now, in light of what is going on, I read that one of the Presidential hopeful has said that, he wants an international inquiry.  Now, I think to me, this is a bit funny.  This resolution to make a meaning impact in our society we need to see at both sides of the coin.  We need to know the government’s position and in the resolution what we need is to demand that the government makes a statement in the House, about the specific situation in the North.  And that, having said that, we ourselves discussing what we will, come up and make a resolution now directing maybe a Committee of the House and we do have a Committee on Defence and Security, to work together with the government, to find out if the government has enough equipment to meet the new situation.  These arms are coming, the photographs are being seen, they are in Arabic, they are from Sudan.  We would like to know, when we are passing this Budget, this Committee came up with a Budget on Defence, it had not foreseen this situation.  Now, there is a new situation.  Maybe the Committee on Defence should sit with the government officials to find out if the equipment that is available in the army can contain the situation of the new invasion.  But to sit here and say that we are talking as elders, that we have peace talks!  Peace talks were held in Nairobi, which we called them.  We saw them.  When we came here, nothing changed. So, the NRA helped to clean the place and the peace talks now can take place.  We can now talk peace.  But with the Lord’s Resistance Army, it is not even the same as the Lutwa Army.  This is a different situation.  

So, in my view, our resolution should be examined until we ask the Ministry of Defence to come up with a statement.  And, I hope in that statement they will say whether they have sufficient capacity and equipment or whether they need new and modern equipment to contain the new situation; because short of declaring war with a neighbouring country where it is so obvious that this is where these people are coming from –(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I feel very much disturbed Mr Chairman, to hear that peace talks is a waste of time.  Mr Chairman, I want to be clarified by hon. Elly Karuhanga whether the government did not at one time try to discuss with Kony.  If they did, what went wrong?  Because the questions came from hon. Abu Mayanja that what should we do?  We have been asked to give a better idea to bring solution.  So, if you say that peace talk does not give any effect, I am surprised because I remember in Teso, it is peace talks which brought rebellion down.  So, I think Mr Chairman, this is a serious matter.  We should not joke as if people are not dying.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this very august House heard our President commission General Tinyefuza in 1989 to come up with a report of the rebellion in the north.  That report has never come forward for discussion.  In addition Mr Chairman, if we are to do a good job as hon. Karuhanga is saying, we have Sudan involved, Zaire is a neighbour, we have Kenya also hosting some of the Sudanese.  Mr Chairman, in any motion, we have got take is to have the Minister of Defence to tell us what is going on before we can completely get our motion forward.  I thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am not saying and I must not be misunderstood to say that I do not accept peace talks.  I am only saying that this type of peace talks which are rushing in our resolution should come after we have listened to the Minister of Defence.  It is possible that the Minister of Defence will say that even if you give us so much equipment, these people are so strong we better succumb and make Kony the Vice-President -(Interruptions)- because it is exactly what you are talking about.  So for me, I am not saying that we should say that the peace talks have been ruled out.  All I am saying is that the Minister of Defence should be allowed to come and give a statement and having given a statement, then we will know whether the capacity of government to handle this situation -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the point of information I want to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor is that we would be better off reducing the resolution to one point which the mover of the motion gave and that was to request government to make a formal statement on the situation in the north.  Let us not wander out for a long time and stop other hon. Members from contributing to this noble debate.  

I think I am sorry Mr Chairman; the information I am giving but the hon. Member is dragging us into unnecessary things instead of coming to the point.  I am saying this thing should be limited to one of the proposal in the resolution which says we request the Minister of Defence or we request government to give us a formal statement on the situation in the north and how it can be contained.  Finish; instead of going in circles and circles.  When he continues going in circles and circles, none of us is going to contribute Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I have sat down and listened.  At one time Members said we make a resolution and you said, no, no, you are hurrying us Mr Chairman, let us talk at large.  The Chairman said that is correct.  Now Members are discussing and giving their views.  Some Members are not on the Floor yet.  They want to come and discuss but they do not want other Members to discuss their views.  Now what do we want?  We stop the resolution or the Members discuss?  If the Members must discuss, then Members must be patient and discussion continues and the resolution will, therefore, come ready and I would like to add by saying if you are anxious, you are going to be selfish.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  I want to conclude my remarks by just saying that in this time of national calamity, when the citizens of Uganda stretching from all corners of the country are being killed, civilians being killed by Kony’s Lord’s Resistance Army throughout the country because we do receive in our constituencies unfortunate victims of that war; while this time the country is going through this, I appeal to my political Friends to come and unite together against this terrible scourge that has come in our country.  Instead of saying Museveni lied, instead of saying let us have an international commission of inquiry, instead of talking different languages, I appeal to our political Friends to come and rally behind us together in this NRC and maintain the peace and security that the majority of the country is enjoying.  This is my appeal and it is my humble request.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, as you continue to debate, you should take note that the resolution is the work of the council telling government what to do and you should not expect government to be party to drafting your resolution.  So I think as you proceed, you should either support that resolution or try to make amendment or make such recommendations that may be or some kind of committee be set to come up with a resolution later. This is what I am expecting from you; not to say you are waiting for government.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Allow me Mr Chairman, to add my voice to those who have already expressed shock and anger at what has happened or what is happening in the north of our country.  This so called rebellion in the north is not a new problem.  It is quite an old problem, a problem which started in 1986.  Mr Chairman, I had the fortune or the misfortune of working for two years in Gulu as a DA when this rebellion was at its highest.  I observed at that time that what most people were thinking was a small matter was actually a big matter, it was actually an insurrection at that time.  The people of those areas had rebelled against government.  As political leaders at the time, we devised certain approaches to handle the situation.  The approach we decided upon was to win the people away from the rebels.  That was the political approach that we took plus handling the rebels militarily.  Those two approaches really broke the back of the rebellion.  However, that rebellion changed coats.  It became some form of banditry; banditry led by people who were disgruntled with both the government and the people of the area because the people had refused to support them.  This is why you see this civilian carnage in the north because the people have refused to support Kony.  

So now, when you have a problem of this nature, what should be done is the following:  One, militarily the easiest way to solve such a problem is to kill the leadership of the rebellion; that is the easiest and quickest way of solving this problem, kill by all means.  (Laughter)  

Secondly, another approach that can be taken is to circulate the area with troops virtually to make it impossible for these bandits to operate so that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that actually what we are seeing is a second stage of unarmed insurgency to a certain stage.  Now, what stage is it?  It is a stage where the armed rebellion in their own way, in their own perspective as they would call an armed struggle, for them, it is an armed struggle against NRM.  For us, it is an insurgency.  It depends how you interpret the two conflicts.  Now in their own way, it is at a stage almost of conventional war.  So, it is not possible, you cannot simply say at that stage that actually you can kill Kony, that actually you can kill anybody.  You must also look at the forces.  The forces are balancing.  That is what it means.  So, it is not enough to say that you go and kill Kony at A mobile or conventional stage Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I do not quite agree with this military expert but I leave the debate to another occasion when we can challenge one another over that issue.  But what I know is that it is possible to make life impossible for Kony.  If you had enough troops in the area so that - because he is always running away from troops.  Whenever troops make contact, he runs away but supposing they were virtually in every corner, he runs away from this unit following a certain direction, then a message is sent to a unit in the neighbourhood of the area or in the direction he is trying to go.  This Kony can be defeated and actually this was done in 1990 and in 1991 and Kony had virtually got defeated.  But then unfortunately, he again changed his scheme.  We got more internationalisation of the problem.  The man got a rear which is outside the borders of our country.  The man got access to supplies from a sovereign power which has got as much resources at its disposal as ourselves or even more.  So here we are in 1996 still battling with this thug who is a friend of nobody.  He is not a friend of the government and he is not a friend of the people in the areas he is operating.  So, now what can we do in 1996?  

I would wish Mr Chairman, to suggest the following to the government.  I would also wish to suggest the following to the House so that probably they can be considered for adoption in our resolution that we shall finally make.  One, we must deploy more troops in that area because I believe our army has been weakened by the so called demobilisation when we were not ready for it because this country was not at peace.  How do you demobilise when you are at war?  

Secondly, we must put more resources at our army’s disposal.  Our army must become mobile.  They must not walk at the same speed as Kony; and in fact when I was in Gulu only one week ago, a friend of mine who is in the army actually confessed to me that Kony is lighter than our forces because Kony has captives.  So, it is the captives who carry the ammunition and the food but our own soldiers have got to carry their own ammunition and their food.  So the Kony soldiers are faster than our own forces.  We must become mobile, be able to deploy as quickly as possible.  

For example, the problem that has triggered report.  I was reading in the papers that a helicopter gunship arrived at the scene three hours later. When the problem occurred, probably on 30 miles from the army base in Gulu.  Thirdly, we could attempt talks but we must talk from a position agreed.  First make life very hard for Kony and then you can talk to him.  After all, he is a Ugandan and some of the people with him are actually with him against their own will.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman Sir, before I can start preparing for talks, we must first of all look at political objectives of either side.  We must not look at the political objectives of the Kony rebels; because before you go to the table, you must disagree on politics.  If one group is a thug, how do you go to table?  If one just wants to destabilise, what do you discuss on table?  

Mr Chairman, what I would want to tell the Member on the Floor is that before you can prepare to meet any fighting force against NRM, we must be clear on the objectives, on the philosophy, on the underlying causes of the rebellion.  That is my information Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, in 1989, we talked with UPDA and managed to cause about 3,000 rebels to come out.  Many of those gentlemen are serving in the present government and its army.  So, I think it could be possible to talk to Kony but we must talk from position of stress.  Therefore my earlier suggestions must be the first approach.  When the first suggestions have been implemented, then the talks can come into place.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, you are aware that there is a resolution on the Floor with some input from hon. Kanyomozi and hon. George Kanyeihamba.  I wish to propose further that it would be useful for this House if had a very brief resolution at this stage of a nature which is requesting government and this motion could simply request government to come up with an authoritative statement on the situation in the north and after that statement, more debate will ensue which will result in a resolution of a direct nature.  

Now what we have done at this stage Mr Chairman, is really to debate the first motion of hon. Tivu which I welcome that we suspend the rules and debate a motion of national importance; and within that motion of national importance, we are now going to request government and we hope that within a day or two, we can even give the day that the government should come with a statement within two days because as we are told, the Minister of State who is responsible this may not be in Kampala but we request that on Thursday, the government should come here and give us this motion.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In that respect, could you move it formally?

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, the NRC sitting on this day 12th March, 1996, having suspended the rules under the relevant rules to debate a motion of national importance, hereby request government to debate a motion of national importance regarding the insecurity - because we are suspending the rules of national importance to debate the security situation in the north.  The NRC hereby resolves that government should come with an authoritative statement on this matter not later than Thursday, 14th March, 1996 to enable the NRC to debate the matter further. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is that supported?

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Motion as drafted by hon. Omara Atubo has been supported and with that, we come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn the council until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 March 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)






