Tuesday, 19 March1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILL
FIRST READING
 
THE CONSTITUTION (CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 1996

MR EKEMU: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the constitution consequential provisions Bill, 1996 be read the first time.  I beg to move.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS BILL, 1996

MR SIBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand here before you, Mr Chairman, without being sure whether I should or should not support the Bill; and I also quite frankly do not understand the urgency of this Bill.  I believe that there are more important and more urgent Bills and waiting to be debated. Such Bills like the water Bill, Uganda Wild Life Bill. I believe these Bills are more important and urgent than this one.  Mr Chairman, we will soon realize when I go into it, why I believe that there is no urgency for this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, order.  Could the hon. Member stick to the Bill. Either you support it or do not tell us what to do.  The Bill is here for discussion. (Laughter)

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I am under no obligation to support or not support the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then say so.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I will want to be convinced by the Minister before I support the Bill. I think the Minister should have for instance introduced the Uganda Medical and Dental practitioners Bill. This Bill lumps together all the professions of the Medical profession together, all technicians and all the professions together.  In a normal balance in employment we have always differentiated between professionals and technicians. There is a difference between a Radiologist and a Radiographer. There is a difference between a dentist and dental assistant. There is a difference between a Doctor and Medical Assistant or a Mid-wife or nurse or nursing sister. It is the difference between these categories that I am addressing myself. To lump them together is to fail to appreciate values of attainments in professionalism.  Indeed the disciplinary committee that is being set up under the Bill, will find it difficult in applying the values and standards.  

I also want to call your attention to the fact that the Bill is also top heavy in a control and regulation of professions. It sets up top councils.  One big top council under which you have some other councils.  Set up under different laws.  Mr Chairman, we have as we speak today, the Medical practitioners and Dental surgeon’s Act, under that Act there is a council.  That council is now being subjected to the council under this allied Medical practitioners professionals Bill.  There is also now I think a Bill waiting to be debated, the nurses and mid-wives Bill, under that Bill there is also a council, and we are now subjecting that council to this. There is also another council under the current pharmacist Act; and that council is also being subjected to this one.  

Now, these councils are also enjoying to regulate and control these professions under them.  The same council under this Bill is also enjoying to regulate the same professionals under different councils. In a third place this Bill sets up also boards in the different professions.  Now, these boards are also supposed to be regulating the same professionals.  Now, if this is not top heavy, what is top heavy, Mr Chairman?  That is exactly what is worrying me that there is too much treading on another’s toes. So when I said that I am not quite sure whether I want to support this, that is the kind of expression I am putting forward; and I would like the Minister to convince me that these three-the main council and these other councils on top of different professions and the boards all regulating the same individuals are necessary. That is exactly what I am trying to find out.  

Mr Chairman, I also note that this Bill is trying to set up practice to allow the different technicians and different professions ability -to allow them ability to set up their own private practices.  I am aware that we need the services of these technicians.  But I am worried that without supervision, these technicians like -with the deepest respect to my sisters here the nurse and mid-wives, without proper supervision their practice could do more harm than good. They are at the moment. -(Interruption)

MRS OKER: Point of order Mr Chairman. Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to indicate that without practice, the nurses and the Mid-wives could be a danger to the community.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman, to indicate that this category of cadres of professionals have not been competently trained to execute their professionary, and qualified and given certificates. Is therefore in order? Is he therefore, in order to indicate that we are professionary a danger to the society?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see hon. Mary Oker, since you appear to be an authority in that sector, it would have been better for you to inform the hon. Member so that you put him to order yourself. On your information since you appear to be an authority. He was only expressing-so do not mind.

MRS OKER: Point of information. I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that the nurses and Midwives are highly qualified and are able to execute their professional ethics and duty without any supervision completely. Only in cases –(Interruption)- or to ask for supervision that is to refer a case where they are unable to conduct. Therefore, I am saying, is the hon. Member in order to indicate that these professionals have been a danger to the society without supervision?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Mrs Mary Oker, you have substantially informed the hon. Member,and let him proceed.

MR SIBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I really did not doubt the high qualification of my sisters, the nurses and midwives.  I am fully conscious of their big -highest qualification.  But I am only giving a kind of -it is not really warning but a caution that, in some cases they may need a more qualified person like a doctor to assist them.  For instance, in delivering a child in case of a woman who has failed to deliver normally, and needs a caesarean operation.  I am not quite sure whether my sister here would be able to help a woman deliver a child in a caesarean case.  That is the case I am trying to put across.  That at the moment, the Medical assistants, the midwives and nurses who have got private practice have to have somebody like a doctor, a doctor responsible for their practicing unit.  There must be somebody responsible for that practicing unit. Now in this case, in the present Bill, there is a removal of that responsibility, and that the practitioner-the nursing practitioner will refer the case as he thinks fit to the doctor.  Otherwise she may be able to treat the case independent without reference to the doctor.  That is the level of ability that I am trying pronounce a caution on.  

MR OKURUT: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the attitude which is being promulgated by my hon. Member on the Floor is that, when I was under graduate, they would not allow any Medical assistant to sit for mature entrance simply because, doctors think that, anybody else should not come into their realm. It is wrong to say that these people do not really produce a lot of professional contribution.  We have a lot of medical assistants who as good as Doctors.  In fact, they even practice better.  A lot of these Doctors inspite of their training, are not -are really lousy. (Laughter) May I say - and I would like to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, do not turn your good information into a debate.

MR OKURUT: Mr Chairman, allow me to finish.  May I say that I beg your indulgence to be able to talk on this issue. Because the backbone of the Minister for Health is actually the Medical assistants, it is the nurses and midwives.  The Doctors only prescribe and most of the work is done by these people; and this, we should take note of, and it is wrong that we surgeons -this nonsense about- that they not be in the council.

MR SIBO: Thank you very, Mr Chairman.  I will soon wind up in accordance with your ruling.  Mr Chairman, I am not suggesting that the midwives and nurses and Medical assistants are not important at all.  They are important, indeed without them the Doctor cannot do much let us accept that.  But I am trying to stress emphasis where it should be.  There is the question of recognition of qualifications.  In these actually I have referred to which are in these four previous enactments of Parliament, the recognition lies with the professions involved. Now we are setting another council to recognise professions and to be responsible for training and for regulating standards and so on.  But I think we have to make up our own mind which of the two bodies we want to bring the control of standards under.  I would like to call your attention to the fact also that, the registration of the different professions again lies with the different councils that are existing today.  So, now we are saying this council can register.  

Now, I would like to request the Minister to perhaps repeal the previous legislation so that we can have the same functions being referred to, to one single body. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to suggest that, if the Minister convinces on these issues, I am prepared to support him.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you are expected to spend not more than 10 minutes when you contribute here so that other hon. Members have time also to participate.  Because once you are given time, and you decide to take 30 minutes, you are actually robbing two hon. Members from participating. When I give you time and you take 40 minutes, you are taking away time for three hon. Members and so on.  I have always been advising you, and if you want to speak for more than that, then make special request before.  Otherwise you are entitled to 10 minutes.

DR NYEKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this important Bill. I do support the Bill, Mr Chairman. But I before I go into the details of the Bill, let me make some observations. Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, as you can see from the report of the sectoral committee, and also from the Bill, the allied health workers are actually a very big proportion and very essential in the running of the health services.  In fact they truly form the backbone of the health service team, and take an example of an upcountry district-I mean a remote district where you may find one Doctor running a hospital plus or minus a District Medical Officer.  They may be 50 or other health workers. So other than the trained doctor all the other trained health workers are actually the allied workers; and some of these health workers even work in very remote and isolated places which are even very difficult for them to communicate with their district headquarters.  

Well, for my experience as a Medical Superintendent and as a Distirct Medical Officer, and also even having come to this House, I have worked very closely with the health workers, and some things I find which are still happening in the health units, especially concerning their welfare.  One of them is the salary.  The salaries of the newly qualified health workers can even delay for so long which becomes very demoralising and can lead to indiscipline from the part of those workers.  I, for example, have some nurses in Kapchorwa Hospital who qualified in 1992/93,and were not paid for up two years, and when they eventually started paying them, they have not been paid arrears.  So they have two years’ salaries in arrears, and these officers have actually given up almost, and yet the salary is a must. This has even led to some of them to do some immoral activities like selling drugs and so on. Well, the problem here is that, until your name appears in the computer list, you will not get salary. So this is a problem which involves Minister for Health, Minister for Public Service and Minister for Finance.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman, and for my Brother to have allowed me to take on the Floor.  Mr Chairman, this is a very serious matter,and it seems as it is purposely planned by those people paying out money to suppliers to salary earners and as a result, it is what contributes to inefficiency, and with the professions which deal with life. something must be done by the Ministry and the sooner it is done, the better.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR NYEKO: Thank you very much for that information. Another issue again which affects the welfare of these health workers is the confirmation in the service.  There is also a delay in having officers confirmed in the service.  Officers can work up to about 10 years without being confirmed, and the  people who are affected are those working in upcountry stations. Well confidential forms are filled timely and regularly, but when these officers come to the headquarters they find their files empty.  

So, I think the registry department in the ministries should improve on this.  Well I am not an allied worker, but I have a personal experience.  In that as a Medical Officer, it took me also over 10 years to be confirmed in the service.  Despite the factor that I was filling the confidential forms regularly and timely.

 The other issue is opportunities for training. This is training for those who want to go for further training, is that the conditions really given are that you must have worked for at least two to three years or more; and then you must be confirmed in the service; and yet if you are working as I have just said in upcountry station, you find that you have not been confirmed, despite the fact that you have been in service for over 10 years; and if you compare it with another officer, take for example two nurses qualified in Mulago. One is posted to Mulago or within the District Medical Officer’s office in Kampala district, and another one is posted to Moroto.  The one who is posted to Mulago, within two to three years she has already been accepted to go for further training. While the one who is upcountry is rejected on the reason that you are not confirmed, you have not worked for more than three years. While the other one who stayed here has already got access to further training within less than -before finishing even three years.  So I think there is malice on the part of the people who sacrifice to go out and work in upcountry places. Well, the issue here is that, the person who stays near the headquarters has the time to go and lobby to be admitted to go for further training for example.  While the one who is upcountry it is expensive both in time and money to come here every month and so on trying to lobby.

So I propose some special consideration to be given to upcountry officers. Then also on the beginners, people who want to join training institutions. Is that applicants from upcountry say a district like Kapchorwa or Kotido or where.  They find it difficult to join those training institutions. To join Mulago or Lira or where.  First of all because of the level of education, the standards of the school where they are trained. They eventually do worse than those ones from urban schools, and yet, we cannot get a number of bureau. Being posts-one who was born in Kampala here, trained in Kampala, she cannot accept to go and work in Abinu. Because it is a remote place. So it will be better for the Ministry to give a special consideration to candidates whose place of origin is from those remote places. Because eventually when they finish, they can accept to go and work in those remote areas where they come from. 

The other observation is about private practice of these health workers. Well, I welcome the idea or the proposal for the health workers to engage in private practice.  If it is properly done, that is these health workers not using the official time they are supposed to be in their health units, if do use that time to go and do private practice; and then if they do not abuse or practice beyond what the licence says, definitely this one would improve the social economic welfare of the health worker, they would have therefore fought poverty, and then would also provide better competitive services to the patients. But the problem I see here is that, there is a lot of difficulty in the implementation of this private practice to licence these people to practice; and because of the low level of education of our society, because of their poor economic status and because of their mainly rural society, it is not possible to open a private health unit dealing  only with for example, consultation or providing only laboratory services or nursing services without giving those patients drugs or injections.  

No patient, Mr Chairman, can accept to go to a private clinic upcountry and pay a fee for consultation only. He will ask you, how can you pay for paper only? They will want to come out of the private unit with drugs not with a chit of paper. For example, if a medical assistant has opened up a clinic an upcountry station, by law is only required to examine and give chits.  Then that patient will go with a chit to pharmacist or a drug seller and get drugs from there. To charge him a fee say 500 shillings because  he has come to you, with that patient, you will be sure that is the last patient you will see.  He will never come back again because he will say, you have sold him paper. This issue of charging people consultation fees can only work in a place like Kampala or big towns.  Hence people who have opened those private clinics are attempted or forced to do everything and they pretend actually they know every thing.  

So, you find even midwives will at the same time deal with psychiatric cases, deal with retaining drugs, she will do everything, and as I said they are attempted or forced to; and another reason is that, that may be the only health unit available in that place. The next person may be about 20 or 30 miles. So when a person falls sick, they only think of the nearest health unit, and if it is a private clinic they expect to come out from that place with all these services given. No saying me I do not know this one; and then it is even compounded by the fact that liberalisation on sell of drugs.  Many drug shops you see in town here are owned by businessmen not by pharmacists. So, with the available drugs which are sold to anyone and everywhere, anybody wants to open up a private business dealing with treatment can obtain drugs from that businessman who does not care whom he sells to.

Well, the Bill as I notice also seems to be silent whether one can open more than one private unit. It seems it is silent, in other words I can have even 10 private units run by one individual.

 Then on the Bill, Mr Chairman, is that in Clause 6 it says the chairperson of that council shall be senior allied worker.  I see problems in that provision. Because a senior allied worked could be a senior medical assistant, and in clause 6 (b), one of the members of the council shall be the director of health services.  The Director of health services is a chief technical person in the Ministry of Health, and is a Doctor.  So, I see that there will be a problem of the senior health worker chairing a meeting where one of his members is the Director of Health Services. This Director of Health Services is bound to under look this chairperson, and here he is attending, he may not attend with all the seriousness.  

So I propose that the Director of Health Services be deleted and instead be replaced by a representative of the Director of Health Services not the Director of health Services to be member of the committee.  Then in Clause 14 (2), it says sub-section 3 of Clause 12. That sub-section 3 of Clause 12 does not exist. May be section 2 was a mistake that it should be on the things referring to the Deputy Registrar. It says sub-section 3 of Clause 12. That section does not exist, or may be they meant sub-section 2 of Clause 12;and Clause 16 (2), it says the council may open a bank as determined by the council.  I am proposing to add there that, “determined by the council and approved by the Minister”.  The bank which will be opened; and then Clause 52, Mr Chairman, I see a problem in that there is a problem in implementing on the charges which a private practitioner has put.  

A section dealing with peasants, if I have opened up a clinic in a remote place, and I am only charging consultation fee, people are saying they are paying for paper, because after consultation a patient is given a paper only. How will the council come and implement that thing that you must pay this person consultation fee. While patients are saying, they have only paid for air. With those remarks, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Members.  I would like to start by asking for your permission to throw light in this business before us to that of the liberalisation of the Foreign Exchange.  Mr Chairman, that exercise really led to a better management of the Foreign exchange and to the availability of foreign exchange by allowing them only means that before this was done, the government or people knew there were the Kibanda boys who were dealing with foreign exchange illegally, and they were and they were doing a good job in some sense. They knew them, but the government did not recognise them until this was liberalised. 

Mr Chairman, this is what I say of the health allied workers or professionals as such.  Who are doing some service to the public as such, but up to now they have not been recognised.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the bulk of the health problems in this country are first handled by what we call allied workers.  That is hitherto they have been handled by them.  If ideally - if for instance, a chroloquine tablet has been prescribed , the blood slight** has got to be done.  It has got to be examined. This is done a technician.  Mr Chairman, before for instance, cetrax this is a treatment for worms Before that is administered or prescribed by a physician the stool has got to be examined by technicians.  That is how important these people are.  

For instance, Mr Chairman, if a big short gets choked on a piece of meat, it is a radiographer to take the X-rays first to locate where this piece of meat is before a surgeon takes over control to get this thing out.  For instance again, if a play boy runs around and picks dose of S.T.D,** it is going to be a technician to do a culture or to examine the urine before treatment is done. Mr Chairman, for instance, these days TB is very rampant indeed. But before anybody comes in, it has got to be a technician to examine the striatum** for instance to really diagnose, to identify the organism responsible before treatment has been embarked on. This is what I say that these people do not come in to the direct picture of the health services but they are very very important indeed. 

Mr Chairman, all these exercises I have mentioned examination of slides and so on, and many more are being done by these technicians, and they are very very rarely indeed mentioned in the health picture.  The hospitals when you are talking about these important people, the hospitals are congested with the patients who have got all sorts of diseases which have got to be handled by this health professions. But then on the other hand, these hospitals cannot afford to take on or accommodate more than 3 to 4 technicians. 

In other words, there is so much work to be done and very few people to do this piece of work; and secondly these hospitals are of course, far apart and then there is that much work to be done; and of course we have got to look at the conditions, terms of service and conditions which very very often make the problem or the work for these few people in the hospitals terrible. If we can think of one hospital, the 3 technicians in a hospital to have to look at over 100 specimens a day, that is a lot. That is where we run the risks of some of these samples being mixed up.  But if some of these people were allowed to register and do some private practice, I think this conjection would be really taken care of in the big hospitals. 

On the other hand, the hours again at the hospitals these few who are more or less over worked, they have tended to work government hours, 5.00 O’Clock they knock off and go home because of the conditions and terms they work under. When for instance these are allowed, the technicians of allied workers who are in private practice, I think they can afford to work longer hours through lunchtime and late in the evening.  But if they are going to be so few, then there is a problem there.

Mr Chairman, if for instance we look at the pharmaceutical profession - hon. Members, Makerere can only produce a limited number of pharmacists as such right now; and yet there are quite number of places or institutions which really need some kind of dispensing. Now few if any, of these noble ladies and gentlemen who come from the school of Pharmacy at Makerere, are willing to work upcountry, few of them who are really willing. Later on opening up businesses there. They can afford-or they want to stay in big towns.  But who is going to do the dispensing in the upcountry centres and so on. That is when, Mr Chairman our less sophisticated brethren, the dispensers coming to the picture to help out.  Because the pharmacist cannot go up country or they do not want to open up pharmacies in the rural areas, the dispensers can come in fill in that gap. But then they cannot do it without being registered, without being allowed to do so. 

So, Mr Chairman, my suggestion is that, or my support is that, these people should be allowed -the dispensers should be allowed to run some limited practice. But of course under supervision. That we have to emphasize, they have to be supervised. 

Similar views and comments as I have mentioned about the dispensers and medical assistants, the technicians. These also apply to for instance dental assistants.  How many dentists are really willing to go upcountry or to open up dental surgeries.  But then of course, we can have our less sophisticated brethren the dental assistants to work in these areas. Radiographers for instance, they can work there. So, in conclusion, while supporting the registration of allied health professionals as indicated in part 5 of the Bill, and to allow them to engage in some limited practice as indicated in part 6.  

I equally support the spirit and measures that are thought in the Bill to govern these private practices, so the establishment of the council as indicated in part 2 of the Bill. The establishment of the councils to maintain and control the standards of these allied professions.  This has got to be done, and I support the measures that are being indicated in the Bill. At the same time, I support the measures suggested in the Bill again to protect the public as indicated in part 8 of the Clause that is Clause 49.  

So, in conclusion, I support the Bill, and I thank you very much indeed.  
           
MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  In this Bill, has got certain very important flaws which need to be pointed out and which may be of great importance if not danger to the population of this country.  Is it, therefore, in order Mr Chairman for you to wind up debate when there are still Members who want to contribute, and when the views of the people of Busujju have not been put?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you will recall last week when the hon. Abu Mayanja was absent from this House, the chairman of the committee came with all the possible amendments which have been incorporated in the Bill; and I was even convinced last week almost to take the Bill to committee stage.  Because there was really nothing controversial to discuss about.  But since he was absent, I am reminding him that, this Bill has been thoroughly considered by all the Members of this House including the committee chairman and his committee, and please, we are just in order.

MR ABU MAYANJA: May I ask for your indulgence Mr Chairman, to allow me to make a contribution in 5 minutes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Once the Chair has made a ruling I think we proceed.

MR KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to thank the hon. Members who have spoken and given support to this Bill; and in passing I want to answer some of the points and I certainly hope that I will convince hon. Sibo who appears to have completely been off the mark in his remarks. I will start with the point that was raised by hon. Ogwang, and which was repeated by hon. Sibo that we should probably have started with the Medical and Dental practitioners Bill which in their view, is more important.  

Mr Chairman, I did say when I was introducing the Bill that, us in the Ministry of Health these are our health workers playing important complimentary roles.  It is not a question of who is more important than another. As far as we are concerned, this is a body of medical workers who currently do not have legislation that protects them, that determines their status; that recognises their qualifications.  So, it is not a question of doctors being more important than nurses.  As far as we are concerned, these all important medical workers doing complimentary roles; and that brings me, Mr Chairman, to the second point which is, that these people are not professionals. Which has been raised by hon. Sibo. I did say that previously these were paramedicals; and I explained that with advances in medicine, with advances in International thinking, this nomenclature on the recommendation of World Health Ogranisation has been changed to allied health professionals.  Because these people now are recognised that there have advances in their training.  You get people now with degrees and Masters degrees in laboratory technology.  It would be wrong to continue to call those people as mere technicians, and not professionals in their own right; and indeed, Mr Chairman, right now Makerere University is offering a Bachelor of Science degree in nursing. So there is nothing wrong in a nurse being referred to as a professional.  I think hon. Sibo did not get this quite correct.  

I appreciate the concerns of hon. Ogwang and other Members that there is need for strict supervision.  When people are being licenced for private practice.  This is quite correct, and that is why you have provisions here as I pointed out first which say, you must first register, having registered before you go for private practice, you must obtain a licence which will contain the conditions for which this licence has been granted.  If you breach the conditions of your licence, that will be ground for disciplinary action against you.  In these professionals there are things that you do not legislate for. Doctors, nurses, other medical workers in their training, there is something they know as reference of patients.  It is not something you prescribe in legislation.  It is a matter of conduct, professional etiquette for someone to know that a case beyond his ability, must be referred to a specialist.  Even medical practitioner, he may be a registered general doctor or a registered gynaecologist. If he gets a psychiatric case obviously he has to refer it to a psychiatrist.  These are not the sort of matters that you legislate for in this type of legislation.

DR LUYOMYBA: Point of clarification.  I would like the Minister to clarify one category of medical workers whether they are recognised by this Bill or not. These are the anesthetic assistants.  Mr Chairman, this country lacks doctor inequities, and in may hospitals, and many instances there is a group of people who have been trained to give anesthesia; and loss of deaths can occur during anesthesia. Looking through this Bill, this category seems not to be recognised anywhere in the Bill.  I would like the Minister to clarify where this category will fall, and even in private practice these people can be engaged or as private practitioners.  I would like him to clarify.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, when I was making the introduction of this Bill, anesthetic officers were one of the categories that I did cover as one of the people this Bill seeks to cover.  If there is some lacuna, this we can put right.  But I did mention anesthetic officers as one of those people that are supposed to be covered by this Bill.

As for whether they can engage in private practice, there is a whole section 30 which I hope the hon. Members looked at. Which initially brings out those categories that can be granted private practice; and it also says that you can act to that category after the council and the Director of Medical Services have so determined. So, this is not exhausting initially all the categories.  This will continue to be seen in advances in medicine and so forth. 

There was a point which was raised by hon. Ogwang about the supervision of these allied health professionals clinic.  I share that concern.  But the point is that, the overall supervising authority is the council.  It is the council that has the overall responsibility for supervision.  Section 49 only says, the council may delegate that power to an authority in a given district or a given area. But it is the council that retains the overall supervision, and anybody appointed under section 49 can only report back to council.

Now I get true the points of hon. Sibo because he said he did not understand first of all, the importance of this Bill.  Why debate it, because he did not think it was important.  

Mr Chairman, we are dealing with a body of category of people that deal with our lives.  Hon. Sibo did not seem quite to appreciate this, because he kept confusing this with the Medical and Dental Practitioners Law, and the Nurses and Midwives Law, and he ended by saying why not first repeal the existing law?  You cannot repeal a law that does not exist.  

Mr Chairman, I started off by saying that currently the doctors, the dental practitioners have a law that regulates and protects them.  The Bill that will presented here seeks to repeal that; the nurses and midwives to have a Nurses and Midwives Law, it is there on our statute books today.  The Bill that will be presented here will seek to modernise that and repeal the existing one.  But these categories of workers have nothing!  So, there is nothing to repeal hon. Sibo, through the Chairman.  There is no law right now that regulates these people.  The laboratory technologists, *he medical assistants who run our health centres dispensaries, there is now no law that regulates their training, their practice and recognises their qualifications.  That is the whole purpose of this Bill.  Now, if one does not think that this Bill is probably more important than the Water Bill, that is a matter of opinion, but I would think that the law that caters for a whole body of workers, that deal with our everyday lives is probably more important than any other, especially, where there is an existing vacuum in the law; that is why this Bill is before this house.  

Also, I want to make it clear and to explain to hon. Sibo, that it is not a question of subjecting the medical and dental workers practitioners Council to this council; once you recognise that this is a body of professionals in their own right, you set up a council that regulates that particular body of workers; and that is true of all professions, and there is some contradiction when one says, as hon. Sibo did say, that qualifications and training are regulated by the professions but not the councils, but of course it is the councils, indeed!  As I am sure Senior Counsel, hon. Abu Mayanja will bear me out, even for lawyers it is the Law Council that recognises the qualification of lawyers; and under the Medical and Dental Practitioners Statute, it is also the Medical Council which recognises those qualifications.  

So, it is being proposed here that the allied professionals Council does recognise the qualifications of these people.  I see nothing contradictory about this, and as for the boards, it is not a question of making this Bill top heavy.  The boards have a function in relation to the council.  We have set up a big council where all these various professions are represented plus other categories of workers that are represented for reasons that were given.  But now you set up a board in respect of each category which will then act in advisory capacity to advise the larger council when it comes to matters affecting a particular category, let us say of medical assistants or laboratory technologists.  So, the two are complimentary, they are not in contradiction to each other.  The medical boards, the boards are advising larger council, it is otherwise the Council that is responsible for overall policy and supervision.  

I hope, Mr Chairman, that with these remarks, hon. Sibo now agrees with me that this Bill is very, very important.

MR RWABIITA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am been following the contribution of the Council and I have realised that we only deal with medical European disciplines; what about our traditional drugs?  Mr Chairman, this sector of traditional drugs is very important to our society, and I do not see how we just neglect it because it is African.  These people have got also a profession, the cure so many people, for example, take Bro. Annatoli of Kiteredde; that man has got more than a hundred drugs; if a professional of that type will be put to the Council, I think, that will help our African doctors or traditional healers not to be taken for granted, or people should not suffer under quack but a research could be done about African drugs and in the end get our own African drug rather than depending on European drugs. 

MR MAYENGO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, while I support hon. Rwabiita on this question of what is happening to our African doctors, I would like to mention to him that it is well known that when the Europeans descended upon the Africans, they made them sort of despise themselves.  The best thing that could illustrate this to hon. Members, is reading of the book entitled ‘Negritude’;  it is exactly for that reason the Africans have taken so much of the Western customs and neglected theirs and even called them inferior, and this stretches all the way from a mere name to the actual administration of our country, it is probably the reason why people prefer RCs now than the things which they were used to.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I believe hon. Rwabiita is only making a suggestion that in time we should consider to have a Bill about traditional healers.  This is a Bill about allied health professions, it has nothing to do with one being contemptuous of our African healers.  As a matter of fact, Mr Chairman, only recently hon. Members must have seen me on television visiting Katwe traditional healers, and only yesterday I was visiting traditional healers at a place called Rukararwe in Bushenyi District; so, it is not that the ministry looks with disdain upon these traditional healers.  If the suggestion is that in time this Parliament should have a law regulating traditional healers we shall do so, but for the time being let us concentrate on the Bill before the House -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister, through you that during the discussion on the sectoral committee on Social Services handling these, the medical and dental practitioners, allied professional workers and nurse and midwives Bill, we did suggest that at a later date the Ministry should come out with a Bill governing the traditional healers.  So, the sectoral committee has not forgotten and I think the ministry has also not forgotten; we did make that suggestion.  Thank you very much.

MR KATUREEBE:  Yes, Mr Chairman, the suggestion was made, and as I said, for us we do work with these people hand in hand -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in the medical practitioner and dental practitioners statute which is operating at the moment, recognises those traditional healers; but since their methods are not following the scientific way as we know it, they are only allowed to operate amongst societies who believe in their method of treatment.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I will proceed with the valuable contribution made by hon. Dr Yeko, he did touch on matters of salaries, confirmations and other administrative concerns and opportunities for training for these allied health professionals.  Mr Chairman, it is true that for a long time, through no fault of the Ministry of Health really, but more of public service, there were many public officers, not only in the Ministry of Health, but other places as well, who remained in employment for long periods without confirmation, let alone promotions.  I am happy to report to this House that over the last two three years, the entire backlog in the Ministry of Health has been handled, and if there are any cases today of people who have not been confirmed or been recommended for promotion accordingly, those cases will be very few indeed.  This has been handled, especially, with the re-organisation of the Public Service generally and the Ministry of Health in particular.  With regard to the question of salaries, hon. Members are aware that no long ago the allied medical workers, through the Uganda Medical Workers Union had a strike, there were negotiations with government and they have continued with the Ministry of Labour and they have been promised that in the next Budget there will be an overall increase in the wage bill and this will take care of, not only medical workers but other workers as well.  Hon. Yeko raised concerns about private practice; as I have said, yes, we are concerned that there should be strict, stringent measures to make sure that it is not a question of someone waking up one morning and setting up a clinic; those measures are within the Bill as we come to consider them; and as for drugs, that is why we are saying dispensers; people who have been trained in pharmacy to some degree should be allowed to run drug shops instead of having drug shops being run businessmen and none qualified staff.  This is part of an effort to protect society.  

There are some few Amendments that hon. Yeko brought out, which will be necessary in section 12 and section 14 of this Bill;  these we shall bring and point out to the House when we come to the Committee Stage. I wish to thank hon. Members, Mr Chairman for their  support to this Bill. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled The Allied Health Professions Bill, 1996 be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILL
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS BILL, 1996

Clause 1

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Can I make it my obligation at this stage?  I want to talk about the definition of professional; it be the person registered under section 26, and there it just says that on the registration of allied health professional - I mean, it is using the same word to define the other word.  We are defining professional by professional.  Anyway, I supposed it just legally means somebody who has been registered -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon, Member do you not think you are taking us too much ahead;  why do you not wait until we come to clause 26?

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the fact that the Minister is proposing the establishing of one Council to be responsible for something like ten professions, and in my view - Mr Chairman, I will have to take you a little bit on page 8, you will find that the professions to be represented on the Council are: dentistry, pharmacy, clinical medicine, medical laboratory technology, authopidic technology, pediothrapy, public health, radiography, and then later on you will find that in clinical medicine on page 10, the medical clinical board shall cater for medical clinical officers, anethitic clinical officers, celomic clinical officers, pycatric clinical officers.  Mr Chairman, we are establishing one body to deal with a whole group of professions; you call them allied but there is nothing really common dentistry and orthopedic or something like that.  

So, Mr Chairman, I am worried that this body which is being set up will not be in a position to do the things specified in - just to regulate the conduct of all these people, to approve their training, to do all sorts of things.  I would like to propose that there should be some categorisation so that things are given to different classes, probably within the board.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to inform you and the House, particularly hon. Abu Mayanja, that for the different fields of medicine to be allied, you need not have so much in common, as we know many alliances do not have much in common.  But, although hon. Abu Mayanja predicts that such alliances are down to brake up, in this case, the allied health works have ethics in common; two, they also have in common there power to struggle for workers welfare; there are many areas in which they have common interest, Mr Chairman, and in any case this very law would bring them into such an alliance although we know other alliances without any written documents.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, as I explained earlier, the difficulty raised by hon. Abu Mayanja has been taken care of by section 10;  because we do recognise that there are different categories, that is why we are now setting up a Board in respect of each category whose function will be to advise the Council on policy and other matters relating to the functions of the Council with respect to that profession.  So, we have already considered the problem raise.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

DR YEKO:  Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 6.1(b) we delete the words “Director General of health services” and replace them with “The representative of the Director General of health services” for the reasons I had given that a Director General of health services may feel he is too big to fit in this committee, and if he attends the meetings he may not attend with ready seriousness.  I beg to move.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to strongly support Dr Yeko; you see, if I may use the analogy of my profession, to make the person who is really the professional head of the medical profession in this country, to sit on a body chaired by somebody who is much below him in status, would be like, for instance, if you have established a Magistrates Association and a Board of Magistrates and so on, and you said that the Chairman shall be a Senior Magistrate, and then you said that the Chief Justice shall be a member and sit under the chairmanship of the Magistrate.  These things do really - okay, democracy is democracy, but these things do not work very well in practice, and this is going to cause a lot of problems in practice.  I think the Minister will be well advised to accept the Amendment of Dr Yeko.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I do accept the Amendment.

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 6 of the Bill and on page 7, you will find that the Council has been formed and there are people qualified in dentistry, pharmacy and the rest of it; when you get to clause 10(a) there is again dentistry, medical clinic - so, would it not complicate things, because those who are on that Board they must as well give their advise and, therefore, could the Minister not consider clause 10(a) sub clause 1, and 10(b) to be counselled so that the whole thing is anonymous and any advice that should be given should be given under the Council as opposed to the advisory Board.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I have already explained this. Clause 6 is talking about the composition of the Council, where you have representatives of the various professions.  Clause 10 is talking about professional boards set up in respect of each profession, not representatives; with a function that is given in clause 10.1.  So, I do not understand the concern of the hon. Member. 

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I feel these advisory boards are mere internal societies of the various categories of health workers.  If we legislate for them and put them in law; are they going to be remunerated?  Because looking at the total of these people it comes to about 72 persons who will be involved in that.  Once we legislate for them, are they going to be remunerated?  Or else I would feel that we would regard them just as internal societies of the various categories and leave it at that.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, we should not confuse remuneration with anybody being given statutory functions; that is really confusing two issues.  Whoever will be paid, when we come to the financial provisions, whoever it is says in the law that he will be remunerated, that is the person to be remunerated.  But now our concern here is setting up someone that will do a statutory function which is to advise the council.  It is not a matter of internal private associations.  These are going to be boards as set up by law, and we should not confuse as to whether they should be paid or not, because we have not even reached a point whether members of the council will be paid or not!

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, on clause 14 there is a typing error, because as you will notice, there is no subsection 3 in clause 12; so the reference in 14.2 to the provisions of subsection 3 should read to the provisions of subsection 2, because 3 is not there; this is a typing error, Mr Chairman.

Clause 14 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16

DR YEKO:  Mr Chairman, in clause 16.2 I propose that the following be added:  After a second word ‘council’ I propose to add the words ‘and approved by the Minister’.  It is because some of the monies it will be getting shall even be appropriated by the legislature, and the Minister is the only who can report to the legislature.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I am sure the hon. Member concerned, actually, -(Interruption)- to the council is not misused, and there are provisions which say state accounts and estimates will be presented to the Minister.  I think that is the appropriate level of control.  But as to which bank branch should be opened, I think, really that is an internal matter that could appropriately be left to the Council.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, clause 16(a) this has appeared to be permanent features of many Bills we have passed in this House; if they do not talk about money appropriated by the legislature, they talk of subvention.  In this House sometimes back, I think, we have agreed that a number of areas where government was involved in business were going to be privatised; and the way I look at it, with mushrooming of all these authorities and boards, we are smuggling back government into business.  

So, I was of the opinion that if this body being generated or these bodies appearing were for serious purposes and with intent to generate their own income, then they should not drain on the government Budget.  Otherwise, the same mischief we had before will continue.  Of course, this one is only one area of opening up avenues for employment.  How do we control on the appointment of these employments?  The same nepotism will continue and, therefore, these bodies which are being built up are likely to fail, the same way the parastatal bodies are failing.  

Mr Chairman, I was of the opinion that this clause could either be deleted or we could allow it to stay but in form of Entandikwa of the fund for those organisations.  

Two, we have not indicated how the funds being generated by these organisations, the one self generated by them are going to be used; are they going to be treated as appropriation in aid, or will they put on government consolidated account?  If they are not going to be put on these government consolidated fund, what are they going to be used for?  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I am of the opinion that this clause be deleted.  Let these organisations that come in form their own money, generate it and use it.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Dr Yeko has just moved a minor Amendment to clause 17, but had he waited up to clause 19 he would find that this that he is removing is, actually, accommodated and there is no way where the Council can operate without the Minister’s guidance or approval;  because that is a small thing that he wants out there, as I am saying, if you read through 19 you will find that it is covered.  I would not support it, therefore, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, mine was on 16.2 that the Minister had spoken to, I do not know whether we can first finish off with hon. Lak’s Amendment and then I come back to 16.2.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, I wish to respond to the Amendment being moved by the hon. Member on the other side.  I think first of all this is a case of taking this privatisation too far; because here we are dealing with a professional body, but also it is a complete misleading of the provision, because this provision is not saying that government shall appropriate money to this Council; that is not what it is saying.  All it is saying is that the funds of this Council shall consist of the following; should government make any appropriation to this Council, if you did not have this type of provision you would have know law under which it could be done.  So, this is a mere enabling provision should government so chose to make that appropriation.  But it is not mandating government to make that appropriation.  If this is understood, then the hon. Member has no problem.  

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance on procedure;  you were about to put a question whether 16 be amended as propose by hon. Lak, then I come on to 16.2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 16.1 be amended as proposed by hon. Dr Yeko.

(Question put and negatived.)
   
CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, 16.2, now we know that this Council is not going to be a corporation, it is part of the -(Interjections.)- I withdraw my Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 16.2 be amended as proposed by hon. Dr Yeko.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I wanted to enquire from the Minister on clause 28.1(c) “The Council may after enquire cause to be removed from the register the name of any person who is suspended from practice...” is this to mean on the basis of suspension or as a result of misconduct, because misconduct is already given in 1(b) found guilty of professional misconduct by the Council, and in (a) obviously convicted by court of law.  But in 1(c) I would like to learn from the hon. Minister whether it is on the basis of suspension itself or some other misconduct.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, this is another case where after due inquiry, because the catch word is in 28.1 where it says the council may after inquiry.  Now, there may be a case where out right someone is ordered to be removed from the register, there may be a case where he may be suspended pending further inquiries as a lesser degree of punishment.  So, that is why this (c) is there in addition to (b).

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I was concerned and I am still concerned that the Council is nog given guidance as for the cause for which they may remove a person’s name from the professional register.  I would with the hon. Minister to state clearly for what reasons he may be removed; whether it is general all the council members do not like this fellow or has he committed an offence either to the public or an offence against a profession!  

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, there are matters of professional conduct, there are matters of offenses being created under this Statute as we will come to it; it could be any one of those.  The important thing is that there will have to be due inquiry first.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, under 28.1(b) the council may after inquiry cause to be removed from the register the name of any person (b) who is found of professional misconduct by the council.  Professional misconduct has not been defined anywhere in this statute, and as I said we are creating a monster of many professions or quasi professions without one known professional standard.  Now, I may be - of course, I am not trained in the medical field, but as a professional man myself, it does not seem to me that the kind of ethics applicable to a dental technician would apply to a dispenser, would apply to a medical assistant and so on and so forth.  Therefore, it is necessary, not only for purposes or removing, but also for positive purposes of knowing when I go to be treated by this man. What is he bound by.  

Mr Chairman, in my profession our ethics are spelt out in the advocates Act; in any event if you are a Barrister there are very well known, they are spelt out and you will soon be - they accuse me to Lincolns inn, and my name will be removed from the list of Barristers.  For doctors, for engineers and so on.  Now, we are today we are not recognising, we are really creating professions without a traditions, without any known code of ethics; and we are talking about people observing professional conduct or being guilty of professional misconduct, and we have not defined what constitutes professional misconduct in this Statute.  

Mr Chairman, I move that professional misconduct should be spelt out, that conduct a,b,c,d, would amount to professional misconduct.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I also like to support hon. Abu Mayanja that in this Bill we are talking of professional misconduct in 12(c) and then in resurfaces in 28(b); for doctors this is guided by the Hippocratic oath, but for these allied professionals it is not clearly stated, whether they are going to fall under that Hippocratic oath or there is going to be another set of misconduct.  I would like to support hon. Mayanja that this be clarified.

DR MATOVU:  Mr Chairman, as the Minister pointed out, this Bill is to sort of govern and control these bodies coming for the first time; and the kind of misconduct that we are looking for is going to be determined by the various boards which are being created, and these boards are the ones which are going to advise the Council as to what misconduct has been done by any professional.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I tend to go along with hon. Abu Mayanja, because I remember very well when we had the journalists Bill, when we decided to turn them into professionals we provided a code of conduct which came in a form of a schedule. So, I would really recommend that we have a schedule where we define a code of conduct say for the dental surgeons, the code of conduct for all these other categories; otherwise, how will you tell the misconduct?  In fact, if a man misbehaves there will be no way you can, actually, pin him down because he will say, where is the code of conduct which I have broken.  So, it looks a bit of a big task, but I am afraid the hon. Minister will have no alternative but to provide the code of conduct for all these different categories in the form of schedules, Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  In fact, I have been worried about the whole Bill myself, but since I do not practice medicine I thought those who do would take care of controversial issues.  However, I do not know whether there is any profession where there are two councils dealing with the same profession.  This is my first time to meet it, perhaps, I am young in the things.  But I find it strange that this allied health professionals Council deals with various people and leaves out doctors!  Are doctors not allied to them professionally?  I thought, as hon. Mayanja has pointed out, if psychiatrists are related to nurses, I would think also the doctors are; why are they not affected by this Bill?  I understand they have another Bill.  So, in other words, for the same profession which we commonly know as medicine there are now two councils dealing with professionals, is it not?  This is really what we are creating and I think it has serious implications to other professions as well.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, all said, I think, what is being read as allied health professionals now seems to be allied health workers.  Professional will, as the Minister has attempted to do, set minimum standards, which he has attempted; but further to that a professional is not just a minimum standards worker, but has ethics, the code of conduct need to be established for any profession, and all of us who belong to professions know that very well, and I am sure the hon. Minister is keenly aware of that.  So, to set up a professional body without a common code of ethics is very slippery a ground, Mr Chairman.  I move, therefore, that we change this to allied health workers to save the Minister embarrassment or go back and put up a code of ethics so that when we come to, as I had raised the question of how do you determine when a member is to be removed; professional misconduct we know how he or she is supposed to conduct herself.  Now, we leave it the institutions to determine; an institution in America, Australia, wherever and they are not necessarily of the same ethical standards.  Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But, I think, hon. Gasatura that is in order except that you would have raised that during the time we are considering the Title, since it almost bear the whole Title.

MR KATUREEBE:  Mr Chairman, the very reason that hon. Abu Mayanja used to advance his argument are the very reasons that, actually, answer him.  The difficulties of spelling out what constitutes professional conduct in respect of each of the various categories.  Secondly, I did say that as of today this body of professionals has no law that regulates them.  So, the first thing that we did, if hon. Members will look back at clause 5, the functions of the Council; the very first one is to regulate the standards of these allied health professionals;  (b) to regulate the conduct of these professionals.  So, we have recognised that these people do need a code of conduct, but of course, hitherto no one even recognised their qualifications.  So, having set up the council we are now saying this council, the first job they have to do is to set up the standards and what constitutes conduct for each category of these people.  You have to read this together with section 10 and then you will say that the whole thing is in proper perspective.  

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, clause 30(b) says that the four categories of allied health professions may establish, engage in and manage private common health conditions units, that is to say; (b) medical clinical officers to manage some common health conditions approved between the Council and the medical and dental practitioners council.  Mr Chairman, again - okay, I recognise the difficulty of the Minister, but nevertheless this is really the crux of the matter.  Are we laying the people of Uganda open to quack doctors, or are we sufficiently protecting them.  Mr Chairman, in my submission we are not, because we have not defined the boundaries of what they can do and what the fully qualified doctors or people in those professions can do.  So, we do not know; and our people will find somebody suffering from a very complicated condition being managed by a medical assistant; or the way it is written, it is going to be a matter or burdening between the Council we are creating and the medical and dental practitioners council.  

Mr Chairman, I hope I am understood, I am not happy.  I really think that it is for the interests of the health of the people of Uganda; this Bill should have attempted to say in a schedule that these medical assistants, people who are going to prescribe medicine for patients, we should say that they can do this, in other words this home work should have been done between - yes, it should have been done, after all it is the people in that profession who know and who can advise us; I do not know the competence, I do not know how far I can entrust my life to a medical assistant.  So, all these people are under the ministry of hon. gentleman there, and it was his responsibility to - in fact, before this Bill came I know they talked and talked and they have agreed to come and even call them professionals, without the doctors jumping up in arms to say that they are diluting our profession.  

So, they should agree and spell out, and we should put here in law so that when a medical assistant over steps what he has been told to do, we know that he is clearly committing an offence, and they also know, and those patients who are bright enough or who care enough about their health would know before going to a medical assistant they know that this is what they do.  Mr Chairman, without labouring the point too much, I think, it is obvious;  I am pleading that this law should spell out the boundary.  It should say that these medical assistants can only go that far but no further.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, while I do appreciate the points raised by hon. Abu Mayanja, I would like to point out that in certain areas, especially, in the area of dentistry there are so few dentists that you may find in a district, for example, like Bushenyi I do not know of any dentist in many of the counties so that you have a dental surgeon at Ishaka and probably that may be all; and all that is happening is that so many people are suffering with dental problems and they have to go to these substandard dental assistants;  they cannot come, for example, to Kampala, many of them do not have the means and with one dental surgeon in the whole district, if you follow hon. Mayanja’s argument -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, we have managed the health of our people from the time of the British up to today; when the people, dentists and whatever have been fewer; if they are few today they were even fewer ten years ago, and much fewer 50 years ago; but we have never licensed these paramedicals to practice on their own.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I thank the hon. Member for that information, but what he calls managing - okay, I do not want to call it mismanaging but it is these people who have been doing this job without licenses; they have been doing it and they continue to do it because the number of dental doctors that we have is so small, that if you restrict these people, definitely almost every person who has got a dental problem will be treated by another person, - that person who treats him will have committed a crime according to Abu Mayanja’s argument.  So, instead of allowing people to commit professional crimes we would rather find out those who are reasonable and license them.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Chairman, the words as written in (b); do not mean what they say.  If we take them to mean what they say, Medical Clinical Officers to manage some common health conditions are provided between the council and Medical and then to practitioner’ council.  If those words mean what they say, surely unless we are doubting the council and we are doubting the integrity of the Medical and then to the practitioner’s council.  Now, we do know the common conditions, wounds, malaria, they do all these things and even if hon. Mayanja is right that in the past we have not licensed them, but they have been doing these jobs.  

Now, let us not really come from the blue or imagine that the world has changed so automatically in Uganda.  In fact, we may have lost more doctors, we may be poorer in doctor numbers now than before because some of the doctors have been going away.  So, in my opinion let us take what these words mean and let us hope that the professionals that will man these councils will be of such a quality that will apportion the task to these people that seeks their qualifications. 

Lastly, I believe these people also with their own practice and knowledge will reach problems which they find they cannot manage and they will refer them to other authorities that is what is expected of them and I think that is what they normally do.  This should not only refer to (b) it should also refer to (c); if hon. Mayanja was right, because laboratory technicians these are the fellows who organise the experiments and other sort of things if it is an orthopaedic laboratory technologist he is the one who prepares the patient before the surgeon comes in and the role of these people is so much that you cannot just dismiss them as if they have not been playing a big role.  I think the law is trying to cover a lacuna. (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I for one would support hon. Abu Mayanja because of one technical word which has been spotted out by hon. Professor on the other side, the name is to long I cannot pronounce so you will excuse me.  The use of the word ‘some’ here brings many doubts, what is the limitation of that some?  And, therefore, as far as I am concern I will say, we remove that word ‘some’ and bring in a schedule and then we mention the limitation as specified in the schedule and that in itself would help to reduce the argument we are having in the House, I am not trying to say, I doubt the capability of Medical Assistants.  For instance Kitgum District where I come from we have about two doctors in Kitgum hospital, the rest are being manned by Medical Assistant and then even further today they are being manned by nursing aids we can still go to them and get treatment and we are alive.  

So, I would think now that they are going professional and when they are going to practice on their own let us specify and put in the schedule so that we limit the area upon which these people can work.  I would support hon. Abu Mayanja.

MR BAKASABA RUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr chairman, i wish the Minister to clarify whether the following categories of allied health professionals may establish, engage in and manage private common health condition units when they are working under the Ministry of Health or they must leave the Civil Service to do this.

MRS M. OKER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to give information on hon. Abu Mayanja’s reaction.  I would wish to say that, Mr Chairman, through you that the Medical professional workers or the allied professional workers knows exactly professionally their limitation where they are supposed to stop and how they can refer the patient to the doctor or to the nearest medical unit without really going into how, which one, medically every trained professional person knows exactly that in this particular case I am not supposed to handle I should refer the patient to the hospital.  Likewise a doctor also knows that now this patient is beyond my control I should refer the patient to the consultant and so on and so forth, and I think it is just like in law, I think in law we also have now even local council 1 handling cases, they know also their limitation.  We also know Magistrate grade 1, Magistrate grade 11, and then the Chief Magistrate and so on and so forth. (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, I think this argument Medical people knows very well where their limitation is and how they should handle the case.  Thank you.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman. hon. Abu Mayanja knows that I always defer to him as a senior counsel in the profession to which I also belong.  But I think this is one instance where I must completely disagree because I think he has read too much into a simple clear provision.  Hon. Abu Mayanja says, he is concerned that we should not just unleash these people on the public and that is exactly what this provision says, because you start by saying they will only manage some.  The word ‘some’ is a limitation in itself, because clearly it says, then they will not manage all, so even to release that then is actually to open the flood gates that is one.

Two, even what is left to them must first of all be approved by the professional councils including the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council -(Applause).  So, where is it in this, that now these people will just go and open any place in Busujju there is a limitation here, first the word ‘some’, secondly, that these are still to be worked out.

Thirdly, Mr Chairman, I am not even aware that -(Interruption)


MR MAYANJA ABU: I imagine when we have passed the law the two councils will meet and then agree and then something will be written down.  But, it would have been preferable for what is written down to be really appended to this law, because it may not even be gazetted and people will not be able to relate it to this and so on.  This is in other words, I know practically as a law that it can be lost somewhere, we might agree, but it would be better if it was appended to the Act so that when you go into the man’s shop you know and you find that it is doing something different -

MR KATUREEBE: Thirdly, look at the situation from where we are starting, we are starting from a situation where you have Medical Assistants doing medicine without a law that regulates them, we are now trying to put in place first of all even the council which would prepare that schedule is not yet even in place we are actually starting from zero.  

So, we are saying before anyone gets a practicing certificate as a Medical Assistant this must first be worked out and his certificate will clearly delimit him in what he can do and cannot do.  If he goes beyond what his certificate promises that is what will constitute professional misconduct because we have already set up a council one of the functions of which is to set the standards and regulate the conduct. So, at this stage to demand that Members of parliament be the ones to constitute themselves into passing what a doctor may do or may not do, I think that is asking too much. (Applause) 

Indeed even in the Legal professional hon. Minister knows there is nothing which says, this is a schedule which says what a criminal lawyer will do, what an International lawyer will do, what a low class will do, no you do not have this type of thing. There in professions are regulated by their conduct by their professional bodies and this is a very, very, clear protection against society that these people will not just go out and practice they can only manage some conditions and even those will have to be spelt out between professional bodies I cannot see any further signatory.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members whenever the Minister winds up I think he should allow us to proceed I will take only the last clarification.

MR ONGOM: Mr Chairman, in view of what the Minister has just told us and what actually is in the Bill that the council does not yet exist and whatever they are going to decide on the limit will be done later.  Would the Minister assure us or will the Minister mind if he included somewhere that whatever the various councils will decide will be gazetted so that the public knows exactly where the limits are, so that it becomes also legal, Mr Chairman.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, my own view and on professional advise it is not necessary and it is not done and indeed even under the existing legislation if the hon. Senior Counsellor would advise me even the existing legislation the Medical and dental Practitioners know all the nurses and Midwives, is there a schedule that says, this is what a Midwife may do or my not do?
   
MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  I think that, with due respect to my learned Friend who is a very good lawyer, I think if they make something under this 30(b); it will have to be in the form I imagine of a statutory instrument and a statutory instrument would normally be gazetted.  It would be very preferable that it should be done in the form of a statutory instrument spelling out what they can do and what they cannot do and that would be gazetted, but if he does not want to do it that way he is really losing my sympathy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members.  The hon. Minister has already summarised on these things you are drawing us back to the debate, there is no amendment formerly after all.  Order please, let us proceed we have a lot of things to do.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 put and agreed to.

Clause 32 put and agreed to.

Clause 33 put and agreed to.

Clause 34 put and agreed to.

Clause 35 put and agreed to.

Clause 36

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, clause 36; Mr Chairman, I feel where inspection of health units is concerned there two words at the end of sub-section 1; if necessary should be deleted.  In other words what I want to suggest is that, inspection of health units  should be a must and, therefore, conditions of saying if necessary should be deleted. 

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. (Interruption)- with law enforcement officer, we do not need always to go with a law enforcement officer.

MR KATUREEBE: As hon. Mayanja has said, Mr Chairman, this is actually qualifying not the inspection itself, but the going in if it becomes necessary.  In other words if the inspector comes and the people operating open for him  then there is no need for a law enforcement officer, but if they refuse then this section would allow him to come with a law enforcement officer that is why the word ‘ if necessary’ is necessary.

AN HON. MEMBER: Sub-section 2, Mr Chairman, the last two words which says at the earliest opportunity.  I wish to introduce an amendment specifying a period not just to leave it open.  We introduce the words within 30 days.  So, we delete at the ‘earliest opportunity’ substitute ‘within 30 days’

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended agreed to.

Clause 37

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I now come on the side of these newly created professionals, I am worried that to demand by law that they are to submit each year a report of the transaction stating all the cases he or she attended in the previous year and records made by that and so on and that this is a condition on which the licence may be, renewed and I think putting two honours a duty on these people and  this is the kind of thing which any professional would entrust to his clerk, book keeper,  as necessary.  Now, if we are going to refuse to register him because there some mistakes in it I do not know, I am not putting a proposal, if the Minister can really give me some information what purpose should be served by this, because it seems to be too onerous a duty put on these people.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, in the present practice even before registration and licensing all these records are mandatory even today, when you went to the clinic or anything run by a Medical Assistant even a nursing aid they put down all these record, so it is not a new thing it is just a matter of putting it down.

MR KATUREEBE: I have been explaining, Mr Chairman, this is nothing new, but the overall rational for it is, it is a further check on possible abuses in these private clinics that we should be able to look at the cases these kind of persons handles and if he handled cases that went beyond what he is licensed to do then the inspectors can take the necessary measures it is a further protection against society.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I hope I will be support on this. Mr Chairman, I want to introduce an amendment, so that as there are boards in clause 10; catering for different disciplines and advising the council in those disciplines for instance a board for Dentists, people practicing allied dentist, a board for allied Medical Assistants, and so on, there should be a number of disciplinary committees each one dealing with discipline of people of that particular branch of the profession.  

Mr Chairman, I see that under paragraph c; on top of page 23; they have provided for one person appointed by - who shall be a person registered - in other words an adhoc I imagine that if they are dealing with dentist case today they will appoint a Dentist, it a Medical Assistant tomorrow they will appoint a Medical Assistant, but never-the-less when you look at the composition of the permanent board of nine people it is unsatisfactory that there should be one  disciplinary committee dealing with all these people. The Minister himself has seen it fit to say that he has created an advisory board of 10 to advise the council in the various disciplines. So, he should also constitute different disciplinary committees to deal more effectively and with greater knowledge and professional competence with the disciplining of people in those particular professions.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, the committee really looked at this section in the way hon. Abu Mayanja is putting it and we agreed that let this one, be one committee, but should time come when this committee is disciplining a Medical Assistant on that particular committee a person from that field of the Medical Assistant should come, when they are looking at a laboratory technician then that committee should incorporate this person on the committee.  So, it will depend upon the discipline these people are looking at and in section 2; in sub-clause 2; of 38, at the meeting of the disciplinary committee five members including the Chairman and a person registered in the same discipline as a person whose conduct is a subject of inquiry shall form a quorum.  So, this particular discipline is catered for at each of the disciplinary committee.  Thank you very, much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Mayanja Abu, are you satisfied?

MR MAYANJA ABU: Mr chairman, the explanation is not satisfying, I have considered it, I have mentioned it in my original remarks.  Here we have got a committee of some nine Members and we are providing that for only one or if you take a quorum of five it is one against four.  So, it is really important, I would really hate if I was being disciplined as a lawyer for this matter to be handled by butchers, carpenters and –(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The boards which hon. Mayanja is talking about are merely advisory and it is the function of the council to inculcate discipline in these professionals and, therefore, it is the role of the Council to discipline and if necessary punish the professionals and sub-clause (c); adequately caters for the interest of the particular person who may fall subject of the disciplinary inquiry, because the purpose of that (c) I think is for the council to have adequate advise as far as disciplining the particular individual in that particular discipline.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would request the hon. Mayanja to submit and we accept this laws as it is.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, Dr Luyombya has not understood me, I am not saying that the Advisory Committees should be doing the disciplining, I stated quite clearly that there should be many disciplinary committees according to the professions that are there, there should be a Disciplinary Committee for Medical Assistants, a Disciplinary Committee for -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Point of order.  I rise on a point of order, Mr Chairman.  Is the hon. Member in order to mis-lead this House by implying that all these branches we have talked about are so different that they have nothing in common, when in fact, they all have basic education, which makes them allied health professions.  Because these people do study some basic course if he is  a Medical Assistant and so forth they do study courses in common which make them allied.  But, he is talking as if they are so different that is why he would mention butchers.  Is he in order to confuse this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Excuse me, hon. Members you remembered earlier hon. Mayanja expressed this fear of what this different professionals have in common, and there is one time if you could recall one of his Colleagues in the name of hon. Capt. Gasatura pointed out that they definitely have certain issues in common, one of them being ethics then the other one being the power, you know, whenever they go into problem if you could remember the debate and it appears that, this common issues which professionals have still continues to haunt him, but now that  he is advised I think he was just expressing his concern. Let him proceed to participate.

MR KATUREEBE:  For reasons that have been ably given by other Members I believe hon. Mayanja has reconsidered his position, so there is no amendment to this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39 put and agreed to.

Clause 40 put and agreed to.

Clause 41 put and agreed to.

Clause 42 put and agreed to.

Clause 43 put and agreed to.

Clause 44 put and agreed to.

Clause 45 put and agreed to.

Clause 46 put and agreed to.

Clause 47 put and agreed to.

Clause 48 put and agreed to.

Clause 49 put and agreed to.

Clause 50 put and agreed to.

Clause 51 put and agreed to.

Clause 52 put and agreed to.


Clause 53 put and agreed to.

Clause 54 put and agreed to.


Clause 55

CAPT. GASATURA: I just wanted to seek some clarification from the hon. Minister as to whether these courses, continuing education given by the Council at a fee because - while these professionals work in the field indeed they need continuing with education to catch up with mobile technology, but I do not know whether he wants to leave that to administrative nature that such people may be, required to pay reasonable fee for the training.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, as the hon. Member quite pointed out we regarded this as purely administrative matter the important thing is that, that person has undertaken a course of some duration as prescribed whether he pays for it or it is given to him that really is an administrative matter.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56 put and agreed to.

Clause 57 put and agreed to.

Clause 58 put and agreed to.


The Schedule

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was hoping that the clarification that Dr Luyombya asked earlier on would be followed up later, but he did not and I would like before we go further, to get clarification on this financial provisions.  I know that we have passed this already and clause 16, but all that we have done is to provide the funds where the Council will get these funds from.  But, we have not indicated and at least I have not seen anywhere in the Bill how these funds will be applied and I do not know whether that is what is meant to be or is it just left to the council to apply the funds as they like on anything whether connected or not.  Because I was hoping that Dr Luyombya will follow up his clarification, Mr Chairman, but I find no where, in case I have just missed, may be, I could be advised the applications of the funds that the council will be collected how are they going to be applied, on what? 

DR YEKO: Mr Chairman, I was just directing the hon. Abednego Ongom to clause 18; and I think when people do estimates they are already making sure that they are directing us to where these finance be operated.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, this law does set up a body, it gives the body statutory functions which has to discharge under the law it provides for funds and the reasonable assumption is that this body will apply it’s funds for it’s functions.  What you can do and what we have done is to provide in section 18; for control measures, they have to prepare the estimates, they have to work out the budget, they have to present it to the Minister for approval, we have provided for the inspection by the Auditor General to make sure that the funds are used for the purposes for which this council was set up, I cannot think of any other provision that would adequately cover for that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, as the hon. Minister had indicated earlier, I also wish to move with your permission that the Title read, “The Allied Health Professionals Bill 19966” for obvious reasons.

MR KATUREEBE:  Accepted, Mr Chairman.

The Title as amended agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Mr Katureebe):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Mr Katureebe):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled ‘The Allied Health Professionals Bill, 1996’, and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Mr Katureebe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Mr Katureebe):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitle The Allied Health Professionals Bill 1996 be Read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The Title of the Bill resettled and the Bill, therefore, passes. (Applause) With this we come to end of today’s Session and we shall adjourn until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 March1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

 



