
Wednesday, 17th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

 PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair). 

(The Council was called to order).


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued from Tuesday 16th March, 1993).

DR. HIGIRO SEMAJEGE (Lwemiyaga County, Masaka):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me this chance to make my comments on this very important Bill.  I think this is the time when we should begin to consider principles not mere details.  We should ask ourselves what principles are we following?  And that question having been answered, then we can go to details.  If you want governance, it will lead to prosperity, which will lead to stability, then we must have institutions.  As you remember, when we started, when we were extending this House, we said that we were going to improve the institutions and that was very important.  These institutions include the army, Judiciary, the Legislature, the Executive and police and others.  These institutions are in existence and a lot of developments and improvements have taken place since the time we were here.  But what matters is that there must be mutual respect between the institutions.  Once there is mutual respect, then there will be checks and balances.  Where there is checks and balances, these institutions will ensure democracy and where the mutual respect between the institutions lacks, and where there is no checks and balances, even if we write a wonderful Constitution, that Constitution will be thrown in dustbin.  So, the principle is mutual respect and checks and balances.  

Now, what has been happening?  This House has done very well, not that I am in it but really we have performed very, very well and I wish to give the credit to you, as a person because when we started here especially, those who were elected to add to the original 38, we did not know one another.  Some of us thought that is DP; some of them said that is UPC staunch and so on.  But you have moulded us into a group of nationalists, into a group of people who believe in one another, people who once we meet here, we are meeting for a national interest not for the party, not for a tribe, not for who and we go ahead.  That credit, you have, Mr. Chairman.  

Now, while I still talk about institutions and mutual respect, can we ask ourselves, have we had that mutual respect between this House and the Government?  I say, yes, but there have been some cases, which brings in some kind of doubt.  This House has prepared papers including PAC reports.  These reports are here and they never come for discussion.  We sat here for two days.  We made a resolution that there should be a committee to study this Custodian Board Business.  It was done.  The report was given to us but it has never been discussed. The committee on economy often has tabled papers here and nothing happens.  That kind of behaviour does not help us.  It makes the Parliament seem to be not doing what it should do.  So, now that we are seeing any future, we must consider that point that the Parliament must have its respect just as much as the Executive must have its respect.  Now, in the past few months, we have heard some statements, which downgraded this House.  Some of these statements were not really called for especially when it was discussing about this Constituent Assembly.  The total results of these statements were incompetence.  But this House is very competent.  When talking about the historicals, these people had confidence of the people otherwise never would have come to Kampala here.  Those who were nominated, we have had very brilliant brains here and they were nominated by authority which has got the backing of the people.  Then we who were elected, we still have that popularity but the statements like that this House was not directly elected, this House has many Museveni men, this House is not authentic, those statements were not called for. But now that this happened, now that everybody says that this Constituent Assembly must consist of directly elected representatives, that is a principle.  Then, let us take that principle wholly and let there be no back door entrants. (Applause)  Some Members here spent three quarters of their contributions proving that because this House was not directly elected, therefore we must have a new House but when you turn around, they come to Clause 4 of this Bill.  They begin now to prove again that there should be some people who should come in from another door.  Let us not accept that.  Let us have one principle that if you want to have direct election, let it be for everybody, let him come here when he has been elected.  I am proposing that rather than have 180 representatives which is a small number, it means one man is representing one million Ugandans -(Interjection)- No, we are almost 18 million and they are giving us 180 -(Interjection)- 100,000 okay.  Thank you very much.  Good correction.  It is alright, Mr. Chairman.  

Now, I am suggesting that we increase the number to 300, then there should be no room therefore for anybody, special interests should not be there.  Take for instance, the political parties.  We have told them not to meet, we have told them not to convene the delegates’ conference.  How will they elect those who will come to this conference?  How will they draw up their positions?  How will it happen?

MR. KASAJJA:  Point of information.  On Clause 4 sub-Section 1 part A says, such number of directly elected delegates, so he is reinforcing the point to this House.  I am just saying that it is possible for the political parties to convene a meeting and therefore they cannot elect anybody to represent them here and also they cannot sit to draw up a memorandum because they cannot make it.  We are now calling them to come in but who will come?  Then people, like the religious authorities, there are countries that are being led by Bishops.  They can be elected.  Trade Unions, normally we have got one country, which is led by a trade union leader.  These people should go in and be elected.  

So, the special people need not be there except two.  Our ladies –(Laughter)- they should also be elected in some way but we have all accepted because we want them in but we also know that by culture, our cultural behaviour makes them a bit humble, which is very nice.  Women must stabilise the homes.  I do not say we keep them behind, but I say keep them in the rear, we are stabilised.  So, now we want you to come in, we must give you a hand.  

Secondly, the army, on this point of the army, I would like to propose that we have 15 delegates and these delegates should actually be allocated to the Ministry of Defence and it is from these 15 delegates that say 12 might be elected by the armed forces and His Excellency being the Commander-in-Chief, being the Minister for Defence and being also a top soldier, Lt. General, then he can have at least three who will be nominated on that score.  But in that case, we shall have nearly 99.9 per cent of directly elected representatives and this question of being accused of back door, of being accused of influences, will not be there.  Mr. Chairman, let me come to the point of -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

DR. HIGIRO SEMAJEGE:  I am winding up, I have two points only.  The point of electing procedure.  This Bill is proposing to use secret ballot.  In order for secret ballot to work, we must at least have more than 75 per cent of the population who can read and write.  In our case, we have 99 per cent of the population who cannot read and write -(Interjection)- I can see somebody saying no, but I am saying the largest majority of Ugandans cannot read and write and therefore, it is not going to be effective.  

Secondly, I would like to request the Minister for Constitutional Affairs to tell us how much this exercise will cost.  He should give us some estimates.  We would like to approve it, we would like to see that he is accountable but is there so much money, when the government has failed to pay National Housing Corporation?  It has failed to Posts and Telecommunications.  Even Ambassadors abroad find it hard.  So, I am proposing that we have a simple open election and I want to make it more modern.  This will be in that each person who wants to be elected must have a big poster, a large size picture which looks like him. (Laughter)  The cost of these pictures will be born by the candidate and when it is time for election, these big posters should be posted four yards from one another facing the electorate.  Considering our terrain, considering our roads that are not there, considering that it might be next morning, where shall we keep these boxes?  I can imagine a box which is in Bulongo in my county to be taken to Sembabule at 5.00 p.m.  It simply will not work, and it will not go there.  So, for us to be more realistic, let us use a system which is more direct and which is possibly cheap.  

For the Chairman of the Assembly, I am proposing that rather than have a person being nominated by the President, let the President nominate three and out of those three eminent Ugandans, the Members of the Assembly will elect two of them, the one who will be the Chairman and the one who will be his Deputy.  There is no reason why the two people the Chairman and Deputy should come through different doors.  They are going to do exactly the same job, they are going to be identical and if it is for nomination, let both be nominated.  If it is for election, let both be elected and I am suggesting that President is in position to know such people of rare quality whom he can present to the Assembly and the Assembly will do their job by actually doing election and elect two of them.  I thank you very much.  

MR. OMUTTE (Kumi County):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the people of Kumi for electing me and also, allow me to than the Minister of Local Government for organising the bye-elections that enabled Kumi to be represented in this House.  The elections were carried in a cal, atmosphere and freely and fairly done and that is why I am talking here.  The people of Kumi would like to thank the Government for its efforts in bringing peace to this part of the country.  This is demonstrated by among other things, the Presidential pardon for the rebels who surrender.  This has enabled many of these boys to come out of the bush.  The appointment of the Presidential Commission which has done enormous work in bringing peace in this part of the region and it also enables the region to borrow directly from the foreign bodies.  However, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that we are still faced with a number of problems.  One, the roads, our roads have never been graded since the insurgency ended especially the feeder roads.  They are closed.  The Ministry of Local government sent half of the equipments without other major components like the loader, the grader and so on, work has been done despite receiving the money.  The problem of the Karimojong raiders, a bit of protection here.  There has been recent execution of these raiders to Kumi District especially near Omino where we keep our cattle for restocking.  They are really threatened.

AN HON. MEMBER:  By?

MR. OMUTTE:  By the raiders.  There is yet another serious problem of lack of water in Kumi town since these pumps broke down in the early 1980s, they have never been repaired and no attention has been taken and yet Kumi town is developing faster with the population increasing.  We still have few thugs led by self styled commander called major Young Ogwang staying in the bush, killing people and stealing their chickens. (Laughter)  This is very serious.  

Turning to the Bill, I stand to support the Bill.  Upon careful discussion with my people, it was recommended that it was necessary to have a directly elected body or Constituent Assembly which is non-partisan, independent, has no influence of the executive arm of the Government.  On the Chairman, the President should be allowed to elect the Chairman.  This is one thing.  I have one observation here.  We do not know what kind of people will go to this Constituent Assembly.  After they have been fully backed or mandated by the people, they will have terms or reference.  They will do their work and finish it. There may be very stubborn fellows in the Assembly.  They can easily turn themselves to be provisional Parliament and eventually say they are forming a Government that will prepare the country for elections.  The Parliament on the other hand will say that we are mandated, we have the voice of the people.  So, we have the right to form the government because we are using the voice of the people.  When the President moves this way with his arms there will be violence so we need such people should this Assembly to protect from such things to happen.

I am not opposed to the army being represented but the issue is, other security organs like the Police, Prisons, should be equally represented.  This is so because the Constituent Assembly is likely to discuss the organisation role very possibly and it may not be a surprise to see a complete new order of security personnel in place.

On the issue of other interest groups, I think they will be represented while these people are elected.  May be the Church organisations and human rights but I believe they will also be represented.  So, I think they can always be left out through, we talk of compromise but not everyone will compromise and you cannot compromise throughout.

On the issue of voters an the delegates, on the age of 18 it is assumed that one will have qualified to register as a voter in the Constituent Assembly elections.  The Bill says that anyone to stand as a delegate in any constituency he or she will have attained the age of 21.  I think this to me is meaningless.  I propose that the age limit should be uniform and I see no reason for including the youth as a special interest group in the Constituent Assembly.  By the way, it will not be necessary for the youth to have a special representation as many of them are bound to be elected through a normal channel.  I have in this regard proposed that the youth group be represented through the student group as a special interest group.  While it is necessary for some nomination fee to be paid by every intending delegate, I feel the proposed fee of 100,000/= is perhaps too high and it will only favour urban people rather than the rural people. I propose that 50,000/= be the fee.

On the campaigns, why should one be guided?  Why should they be guided?  I think they should be open, and everyone could go wherever he wants without being followed up.  We do not need guided campaigns.

Lastly, it is hoped that arrangements are being made for the draft to be translated into several local languages.  The Constitution belongs to the people, they must be able to read and understand.  I understand only a few copies were printed out but we hear that DANIDA has sponsored the drafting of the constitution.  Didn’t the Commission make any allowance for such supply to be catered for?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAGIMBI (Bugabula County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The people of Bugabula County have requested me to make an appeal through you to this august House.  The appeal is this, as agents of the people we should be transparent.  We should be honest, we should be sincere and we should be committed to the will of the people -(Applause)- especially at this time when we are finalising the Constitutional writing.  The second appeal, from the people of Bugabula is that we should be original.  What we mean is this, the Bagabula people say that copying systems simply because those systems are working somewhere else is unfortunate.  We must be original, we must know who we are in Uganda.  The third appeal is that we should be independent.  It is indeed unfair and very painful for somebody to say that you are independent but at the same time keep a rope around your neck throughout.  The people of Bugabula have appealed to this House that as leaders we must remind those people that we are supposed to be independent.  The NRM Government has a historical role of writing a peoples Constitution for Uganda.  

Allow me at this time to commend the Government for the commitment to this important and difficult task.  At this juncture, allow me also to congratulate the Minister of Constitutional Affairs and the Constitutional Commission for having successfully gone through what I would call phase one.  This is an intensive process of consultation which was adequately done and they views of the people are now in form of a draft.  In my opinion, that one is phase one.  We expected in Bugabula phase two to come and phase two, according to the people of my county should include the availing of the draft to this House.  This has been done and I must thank the Minister and the Office of the Prime Minister for having done that.  Phase two should include a formal reading through of the draft by this House and then three, and this is part of phase two, Government and this House should ensure that the draft is circulated to the people for these reasons.  This is a people’s Constitution.  Reason number two, if the laws here are to be respected by the people, they must be known to the majority of the people.  Three, in Uganda, we must recognise that we have two groups of people and the historical members know this very well.  We have those people in the villages who cannot read newspapers or who do not listen to the radio, those are there and then we have those people who are able to do that.  Now, these must be kept together.  Reason number four; there will, therefore, be a possibility of further consultation by the people.  Number five; the delegates to be elected will have a chance to know what their people really want them to do when they come.  Reason number six, we reduce room for any manipulations because the people at home will know exactly who are going to represent them and will know exactly what their representatives are going to do.

Mr. Chairman, allow me to propose a method.  The people of Bugabula propose that as we go about circulating the draft to the people, we could have four booklets, two in English and two in vernacular of the area and then using our parish counsels, using institutions, colleges, schools, we ensure that the draft is circulated to the people so that the people know that this is their Constitution.  This phase two should not be marginalised; it is a very important stage.  The time for this could be about two months only, we ensure that the people know the draft, the people are able to review their view and are able together with those who want to represent them in the Assembly, and they are able to know the work they are going to do for them.  Then phase three would be the one of the Constituent Assembly.  In my opinion the ideal case would be that we the NRC, supreme body, should give an assignment to a specific body that is the Constituent Assembly and they do the work for us.  That would be the ideal case, but because of what is happening we could do this.  The Constituent Assembly should, first of all, include the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman and those are to be appointed by His Excellency the President because of the historical role that was given us yesterday by one of the hon. Members.  That one is a historical role, the NRM Government has got a historical role of writing a Constitution.  The NRC can be represented by the ten people as suggested and that one is also historical as far as I take the whole thing, say from historical right from 1980.  Then the NRA should also be represented because of the same reasons.  The special groups as a matter of principle, I am not a party to a principle which excludes some people especially when we are doing something so important for the nation, I have no quarrel with the special people, the special groups, they can be included.  The delegates can be elected by the people and using universal suffrages.  Each electoral area should have about 50,000, the maximum 60,000 people.  The lining up method is the one that is required by the people.  The people should like this method to continue because it is fit, direct, there is no confusion.  So we can use photographs and people line up behind.  So, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to speak.

MR. JOHN OBWANGAMOYI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me this opportunity to make my contribution.  I would first like to add my voice to the concern that was mentioned, I think by the hon. Lady from Luwero about the welfare of Members of this House.  Some of us went to burry the late Alip and we were told by Reverend Ongora Atwai that apparently we did not have provision for when a Member dies even for buying a coffin.  This is a very sad situation because some time one might die when none of the Members have any money or even when the House is not in Session, then we can have a very embarrassing situation where we will have to wrap our Colleague in a wreath and perhaps putting him in a bag.  So, I would suggest, through you, Mr. Chairman, that the Privilege Committee should look into this and may be come out with some kind of suggestion for even informal discussion so that we may together collectively put something in place for such inevitable but sad occasions.

Having said this, I think in my opinion we are debating a very critical Bill that we should, in case of that, avoid rushing to conclusions if we disagree with the opinions f some of the hon. Members.  We should give ourselves the opportunity and the benefit to critically examine very contribution here and some comments outside the House where some of the hon. Members who went with reservations about this particular Bill have been labelled as those who fear to face the electorate or as those who do not want to leave this House.  I think these are not correct; they are erroneous conclusions.  First, because this Bill does not anywhere say that a Member will lose his membership of this House, if anything, the Member will enjoy and continue to enjoy full benefits that he has been enjoying since he was first brought here and, therefore, I cannot suspect that a Member would be contributing with reservations because he fears to leave this House.  Secondly, there has been mention that some of those reservations are because some people fear to face the electorate.  I also would like to disagree with this, because some of the Members I know have held seminars in their Constituencies and they have been given that specific information that they should come and have these reservations.  Therefore, these are the same people who will be electing them and I do not see how you can say such Members fear to face elections.  

Secondly, it does not make sense for one to fear elections this year when he knows very well that inevitably next year whether under the Movement system of Government or under the multi-party or whatever form of government, there will be elections.  So, it does not make sense for us to rush or any of us rush and make conclusions that those who have reservations are because of those two reasons.  I would rather we give ourselves time to think and analyse why do they have those reservations and I do have some reservations myself.

I would like to ask one question and I would like to share with members my reasons for answering the way I do.  Are the NRC and the people different?  This is a very crucial question.  The contributions in this House and elsewhere have been that those two are different and that the NRC apparently is a monster somewhere trying to usurp the powers of the people and that it has no legitimacy what so ever.  I beg to disagree.  I want to say this, that the kind of perfect democracy that was practised by the Greeks City State is no longer practicable.  In those days all the citizens of a State would assemble and everyone would make a direct contribution and every citizen would make decision.  Now these are still found impracticable throughout the world.  In other words, people must now speak through elected representation and in my view, subject to any correction, is that the NRC is at the moment the elected spokesmen of the people of Uganda. (Applause)  Admittedly though, one would argue that first of all the election was not a universal suffrage.  Let us admit that.  Two, it could also be argued that this particular House extended its life without specific mandate.  Let us also admit that having admitted those two, those two must be seen in the context of the NRA/NRM evolutionary methods of perfecting democracy. (Applause)  Twenty-seven people of thirty soldiers, be it by no standard is any democratic figure but they had to evolve over a period of time and now involve tens of thousands of Ugandan soldiers but in the process of evolutionary democracy.  Others know better details but there were two historicals who started but over the years some of the steps we do not know - some of us who joined at a later stage but from the few historicals it has evolved about three hundred people now sitting here in this House.  So, you can see we should be able to appreciate that at certain stages there may not have been perfect democracy but then the society evolved to perfect democracy, some of those steps could not have been done.  

We have been practising electoral kind of collar system but now we are able to talk about universal suffrage, it is not a too far distance system.  So, I would like to say that because of first not elected by a universal suffrage and extending its period should not let this House illegitimate.  We should see that those who were forced to make this one, it was necessary in the search for absolute democracy.  Of course, it is not going to be as absolute as the Greek State democracy.

Now, if the NRC is legitimate or let us say if it is not legitimate as people want to say, then I am sorry this illegitimacy will be abnitial, which means since the time they extended all what we have been doing is null and void. (Applause)  In other words, all the laws you have passed, all the resolutions you have resolved are null and void and you are admitting so.  I would like to disagree with that.  Secondly, if this House is not legitimate then, we do not even have the right to stand here and discuss this very Bill. (Laughter)  Because we are discussing this Bill on what strength, and on whose behalf?  If the people of Uganda are saying NRC is not legitimate, we do not like them and so on, then we should not have the basis on which to discuss this very Bill.  It will not be any different from Makerere University discussing this Bill as a matter of academic exercise or even the Kampala Club discussing differently.  But we are discussing this Bill because there is a realisation that we are the legitimate representatives of this country.  I think, I would like to correct the erroneous reasoning some people have been putting forward for saying we must elect another body.

I would want to say that this House has all the legitimacy and it is the right spokesmen.  I have been hearing people say ‘the people have said this’, I do not know where they get that one from because every time I know Members go back to their Constituencies and they live in their Constituencies and they debate, but why I have not seen the contrary we have no opinion poll to say that the people of Uganda disagree with the NRC which is their representative.  Recently, when this House took a bold decision to suspend the divestiture everybody on the street said, if they have been that kind of thing, we would not have complained which to me, this tends to be that there are people who are only interested in this House being in confrontation with the government, while it is doing a good job.  In my opinion, that is not the correct decision but you can see that at times they say that this House is competent, at times they say, it is completely useless.  I do not want to trial that.

If we accept that this House is legitimate, then the question of whether it is the people who are supreme or the NRC which is supreme is of little importance, if not of academic exercise because what we would be saying is the people through their representatives unlike the Greek States are the ones who are speaking and we make decisions for everything including the Constitution.  It follows without taxing your mind too much.  The people are supreme but they speak through the NRC, through their representatives that at the moment has no alternative.  This is simply what you are saying.  Those who want to say the people on this side are supreme, the NRC on this side is not supreme, apparently X do not seem to see the logic, the reason how this thing works.  

So, Mr. Chairman, the people through their representation discuss and decide over all issues included.  Now, I would want to be very brief on this now, the legal status quo.  Presently, the law is very clear that the hon. Gentlemen and Ladies who are here are supposed to discuss critically and resolve and promulgate.  I think this is the present legal status quo.  I am not saying anything more than what is here.  This was arrived at 1989 when we were extending this period.  When an august House like this indulges in contradictions, it must be very good reason otherwise, we cease to be taken very seriously on national issues.  The House cannot predict today we will decide this, tomorrow we will completely unwind, it is a very dangerous situation to be in especially when you know that Parliament makes and unmakes.  Now, if in 1989 were able to arrive at this and one of the reasons was that this House would wind up after giving Uganda a Constitution, something to go by and that is the next step to democracy and then here today we are saying no, no, that was a big mistake. I do not like contradicting myself.  I would like to be convinced that now we have very good reason that since then a lot of water has flown under the bridge that has made a difference.  If not, we are not being honest and history will judge us very severely. (Applause) 


 Part of my last contribution is that it is my biggest fear why I have reservations about this exercise - is creating a foul political climate before the debate on the Constitution.  As a House, and as a nation, we have gone a long way to create a comfortable acceptable, firm, calm, sincere and sanity in this nation.  Those are pre-requisites for sober discussions on Constitution, because this Constitution is a very critical one.  Some are very contentious and we therefore need this calm atmosphere in order to be able to discuss meaningfully, soberly, critically before we promulgate the Constitution for the country.  But my fear since this debate started is that this calmness has been subjected to a lot of stress.  A lot of stones are being thrown into this calm water and this is disturbing the calmness of water and continues to be so.  It has been mentioned that we are going nearly for General elections, Universal suffrage.  You are not going to stop individuals traversing their Constituencies in search of votes.  Definitely, there is no police force that can enforce this.  So, we are going to have people meeting at night, talking all sorts of things and this is before the Constitution.  It is going to foul the climate.  Two, it has been mentioned here in the House many times - you have given seats to political parties.  Now, they will say, having given us that, we want to be transparent, we want to be democratic about our representation, limited at it is.  So, they will now demand agitations to go and traverse the county search of getting the best two to represent the entire party.  They may not like the President of the party to choose.  They may think that is undemocratic.  In case of some parties they may say their President is not in the country.  So, they may want to try to replace and the kind of disturbance that happened in West Nile, in Arua, in Nebbi, and it should be a pointer that calm water is being disturbed and I do not see how we are going to contain this situation, prior even to debating the constitution.  This is my genuine fear and I am speaking as a nationalist.  

Secondly, we are going to have all these interest groups.  We have the Women Councils; we are supposed to elect eight people.  I do not know whether they will not have any fear or any concern that it is rigged of the membership is not fairly made up.  The youth will also have their won elections.  The Trade Unions will have theirs.  Various groups will have theirs.  In the process we are not likely to have this calm atmosphere as we should have at the moment and enjoy because everybody will have a reason to say this has been rigged and so on.  

I would like briefly to refer the Members to the contribution made by the second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere.  He said in his contribution that the elections that we are talking about must be seen to be free and fair.  That demarcation should not be used to rig elections, that the competition ground should be levelled.  I do not know who has the bulldozer to level this ground before the Constitution.  These are issues that should have been raised during the constitutional debate but we are bringing them and they are likely to foul the atmosphere.  Supposing when after elections of the Constituent Assembly we have this kind of allegations that the ground was not levelled, that the Constituencies were demarcated such that the elections were rigged or that elections were not free and fair, then we are pre-emptying issues that should have been resolved during the Constitutional debate.

Finally, there is another fear I feel for the people of Uganda who have enjoyed relative unity - is the possibility of having two bulls in Kraal.  Although you specifically say these are yours, these are yours, if you have cattle but there is a temptation to traverse - to go over to the other side.  I would like to use an example of my friends whom I think will not misunderstand my using them as an illustration because they are so close to me.  They are my Learned Friends, one is here, one is outside the House and they come from my favourite constituency and I would like to use an example of Nyabushozi.  Let us put it this way.  I know they are very distinguished people.  We have hon. Elly Karuhanga who was my classmate and a learned brother, who is now in the House here, he is a CM of Nyabushozi.  Let us say he will want not to really contest this CA and therefore my other learned brother Sam Kuteesa will want to contest.  Now, for some time Nyabushozi will have two bulls.  Although you see one is a CM, one is purely a delegate; the fact that he has been universally elected and the latest might claim to be more of a spokesman than him - Karuhanga.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to inform my learned brother hon. Obwangamoyi through you that, the situation in Nyabushozi is a little more complicated than just Elly Karuhanga and Sam Kuteesa. (Laughter) From the UPC side, we have Dr. Rwanyarare who comes from there also.  Butagira can stand there also.  Kamuntu can stand there also.  From the DP side, we have even the Chairman of the party Byanyima - he also comes from there, the legal advisor of DP Mulenga comes from there, hon. Sibo -(Interruption)- then from NRM, if I start from down there of course, I am here, hon. Rwabiita has a right to stand there, hon. Ntimba has a position there, then of course, I am there but of course, -(Laughter)- there are others! (Laughter)  

MR. OBWANGAMOYI:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for that information.  I did not want to use the example of the bull of all the bulls as part of that contest, so I kept to where I think I would be comfortably covered but my point was that you now have these two and Nyabushozi may not have a peaceful night until 1994, more so if these two gentlemen as it has been amply explained subscribe to different political aspirations. They will now be all gearing for 1994 and therefore that remaining period that the NRM is supposed to wind up the interim might be completely disrupted.  I know situations in some constituencies where this can be very nasty and we are all creating this just before the Constitution is debated.  I feel extremely scared and frightened of this possibility.  

Finally, economically I am one of those who do not subscribe for the availability of free money anywhere in this world.  People may say we have got free money, we are God gifted with money but I do not think that it is free because the entire world is asking for money.  So, when someone is going to give you money, there must be some quiet maybe gentlemen understanding.  What I am saying is, we must ask ourselves, can we sustain two elections, general elections in a period of 12 months or less?  Finally, my concern if it can be addressed in that, we do not create unnecessary foul climate, then let us go and have elections.  If we are going to disturb the bees, let us discuss the Constitution, give the people the Constitution, they start from there and continue.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MISS LOCHORO. E. (Women Representative, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. chairman and hon. Members.  Before I contribute on the Bill, I would want to elaborate on something little which has always on many occasions caused tension, excitement and what have you in this House.  Now, for example, if hon. Members can guess, if I mentioned a word in Karimojong, what comes in one’s mind immediately? 

HON. MEMBERS:  Cattle rustling in chorus (Laughter).  

MISS LACHORO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, that is what I am going to say and when you mention the vice-versa, it is the same.  On cattle rustling, now you find that when a Member from Karamoja stands up for a point of information, you find Members shouting ‘a rustler, a rustler’. So -(Interjection)- yes it has always happened in this House.  I am appealing to all the neighbouring districts to Karamoja that instead of pointing figures at each other or at us, why do we not all the neighbouring districts of Lango, Acholi, Teso, Kapchorwa etc. Why do we not all sit down and call a conference, then we iron out our differences to discuss our issues from there and we will solve it there and then. (Applause)  Because there is no need of me for example, fighting somebody outside and being victorious, when I come in public I say how I fought, boxed, I kicked so and so, I did this.  It is very bad.  So, it is better to go back with that person and see what was really the cause and we iron these things correctly.  That is one alternative.  

So, when we are in NRC, you find that this august House unites all of us here.  So there is no need of showing out that we are enemies to so and so because this is the House that unites all of us here.  Second alternative, if it is unbecoming, we either table a Motion in this House on cattle rustling purely.  We discuss it and exhaust it here -(Applause)- because this is a national issue.  Thirdly, now if we could ask a question, is the Government really not bothered about the Karimojong at all?  The answer is no because many people are now saying the public says the Government favours the Karimojong.  How does it favour the Karimojong at the expense of our dying - the very guns the Karimojong are handling are also killing them.  At the same time they use those guns wrongly for raiding the neighbours.  So, we find that His Excellency the President came to Karamoja in 1990.  He set-up a Committee on this issue ready to disarm the Karimojong and the Chairman of the Committee was David Tinyefuza but at the same time, that was the time when there was much insurgency in the North, at the same time comparing the two they found out that these rebel activities was the first priority than cattle rustling.  So, they found that the team was switched to the North and it handled that case.  So, we found that, since now that problem of the rebel activity has calmed down in the North.  So, there is no need of our neighbours now rejoicing and saying we have peace and that now the Karimojong are bad.  So, the Government is very aware of this issue of Karamoja.  You find that as I had already told you last week, that some rebels came to Dodoth County in Kotido District, whereby they abducted some people in the Health Centre, they took them to Acholi, cut off some of the women’s breasts.  Then you find that if rebels saw you start shouting like people who are making noise, they get the padlock.  Not only that three months later, the very rebels came to Labwor County in Kotido District.  You find that these rebels came and abducted school children from Abim Secondary School and left many houses ablaze.  I do not need information, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then turn to the Bill, please.

MRS. OKER. M:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I do not subscribe to rebel activities but the order I am trying to give -(Interruption)- is it in order for the hon. Member to continue deliberating on the Karimojong issue or rather she should go to the Bill?  Is it in order for her to continue?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I have already ruled on that please.  Proceed please.

MRS. LOCHORO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, earlier on before, I started, if she was attentive I had asked permission to explain on the same.  Now, Mr. Chairman you find that the issue of cattle rustling -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Turn to the Bill now please.

MRS. LOCHORO:  Mr. Chairman, I am remaining with one point and before I switch to the Bill.  So, you find that even the press there was in The New Vision of 27th whereby there was a very big heading written ‘cattle rustlers kill three’ but as you read the title and the story, you find that it is a contradiction. You cannot find where the rebels came and raided somewhere.  So, you find that the whole issue was that somebody set fire and the little boys were grazing their cattle in the bush.  So, you find that as the fire was set, it burnt the three boys.  As a meeting was called, the county chief was called from Kiru in Labwor County.  You find that people talked from morning, from eight up to five in the evening and there was no solution made.  There was nothing that came out of the meeting.  So you find that what somebody did was to apply Samurai’s law, ‘ an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth’.  So, you find that the very person, the owner of the children just got hold of his gun and shot the three people to compensate for the three, otherwise it was not rustling, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take information from her.

MRS. LOCHORO:  Mr. Chairman, my time is going on interruption.  I turn on the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  

MRS. OKER:  I would like to inform the House through you, Mr. Chairman, that the abducted girls who were abducted from Gulu Sacred Heart, did inform us that when they crossed over Abim in dodoth, the place she is trying to - is the place where they were received, the Karimojong handed over guns to the rebels and they stayed there for three weeks being fed by the Karimojong and they got a lot of arms from there.  These were the girls’ statements that we took and submitted to the President.  Thank you 

MRS. LOCHORO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To reply to her point of information, Mr. Chairman, you find that she now implicates that it is the Karimojong who supplied Acholis with guns but you find that on many occasions we do trading with neighbouring districts, so you find that they put guns in sim-sim bags and sell to us in exchange of cows. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Turn to the Bill now.

MRS. LOCHORO:  I think I am on the Bill now, Mr. Chairman.  We give credit to the NRM Government, which has thought of the women.  We find that NRM really has considered women compared to the past regimes.  So, since it has already started, the idea of promoting women so we better continue with it.  So we find that the issue of the eight women, does not work. Even if we say we choose those women regionally, we have five regions, they should be five ladies.  what criteria shall we use?  So you find that we must choose five ladies.  Otherwise, where will the three drop from?  So, each woman should come from each district, so they should be all together 39 women.  Now, you find that - plus others who will be interested in contesting with men in their constituencies if you add on the number of women, and then on the special nominees, it is not specified anywhere that it is only men and so as for these special nominees, I feel some women should come out of this also. (Laughter)  Yes, it will be sectarian because we should all share this thing equally.  

On the part of army representative, ten army representatives.  Also here I feel ten is a good number but out of the ten, there is no law which outlines that all will be men.  So there are some army ladies also should come out of the ten.  On the issue of fees, we feel the fees should remain as it is as 100,000/= but we feel that since this is given to everybody above 18 years, you find that they will be very many people who will be wanting to contest.  So you find that 100,000/- will be okay but after the exercise, we feel we should be refunded a half way, at least, to console somebody because somebody might have borrowed this money hoping to refund when things become okay.  Now, I am going to the issue of running two Houses concurrently.  Now, first of all, as you look at our country, our economy is already limping and we do not really have any money.  I really wonder how the two Houses will go on.  I am happy that the Leader of Government Business is here.  Now, suppose three quarters of the House here is elected and it remains a quarter that will not form the quorum, what will happen next?  Either I am forwarding this question to the Prime Minister?  Now, maybe things shall be on paper that time.  Should we say the debates should exceed eight months or more than seven months?  So at least the question of funds should be specified in advance.  

Now, on the issue of saying that we are not directly elected, you find that it is not our mistake not to be directly elected.  It is not our own will, but otherwise, I would accept to go by the consensus by saying we do not accept to go for a fresh mandate and all of us must go plus the Front Benchers, all of us must go. (Laughter)  So, to clear what the papers express that these NRC Members fear to go for fresh mandate, we do not fear.  So, we accept that all of us must go for a fresh mandate.  

On the issue of parties, you find that all parties which participated in 1980 and if there are new ones also formed, they should all be represented in the Constituent Assembly.  Why?  So that next time we should avoid the confusion of saying that the NRC and NRM were the ones who formed these things, so that there will be no party, which will complain to avoid being biased next time.  You find that in Karamoja, this business of parties is not much there.  So, the two well-known parties are DP and UPC but others are not very well known. (Laughter) So, you find that the Karimojong, since they were left, since those Colonial days, when the Baganda were with the Kabakas, the Mugabes in the South and so forth, the Karimojong were just like that.  So you find that a Karimojong is very interested and observant with his cows.  Whichever government comes, give the Karimojong water.  

Now, the next question is, if it is a point of information, I accept it.  Somebody might say that what is KDA doing on the issue of water for the animals?  KDA has tried to dig some valley dams but you find that the machines that were brought were reconditioned from Yugoslavia, which by now has already broken down.  So, the spare parts are to be brought from abroad, Mr. Chairman.

MR. C. ADYEBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, sometime in April of 1991, I led a delegation of High Commissioners and Heads of International Organisations based in Uganda here to Karamoja for an official visit.  When I toured that district of Moroto and Kotido at that time, I did promise on behalf of Government, that Government will do everything possible to make sure that there is water enough for humans and animals as well as crops in Karamoja.  I am glad to inform the hon. Member that towards the end of this month, there is a team of six engineers from Korea who are coming and going to stay for six months in Karamoja and carry out the task of irrigation so that there is water, enough for animals as well as the Karimojong and the grass. (Laughter)

MRS. LOCHORO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank the Prime Minister for that information.  Well the Karimojong are not interested in parties as I have said.  Give them water and that is the Government; they want. (Laughter)  Give them food, that is the Government; they want, give them a farming implements; that is the Government, they want.  But you find that for long, people have created a wrong concept in their minds that the Karimojong are lazy.  They are not lazy.  You find that the weather conditions in Karamoja are not the same as weather conditions here.  Karimojong are hard working people but you find that the weather does not favour them.  So, that is why you find that relief has to be taken there.  

On the issue of water, I know that you will also solve the issue of insecurity of disturbing our neighbours.  I do not want to touch more on that because they always take their cows to neighbouring districts to graze.  On reaching there, they are attracted to the neighbours’ cows and rustle them.  So if water problem is solved, that problem will be out.  

Now, on the method of voting, since the Karimojong are people of cows, I think the best method for those would be lining up since they are used to counting their cows. (Laughter)  So, the best method I would opt for lining up, count there and then in broad daylight, and we finish and everybody goes away.  If I could comment on one point one hon. Member said on signals whereby he said at least, if they could use signals on ballot boxes maybe a hand or hoe or etc, so you find that these symbols will confuse people again because they might think this is general election, this is not our party, at least it will be better to use symbols in 1994, but not now because we are going to confuse people the more.  On the language, I think it should be English that should be the only language to be used.  Now, when we say interpreting, I think then, even warriors there are some warriors who are very clever with high IQs.  So they can really give you good knowledge.  So, I think the warriors can come and give good ideas that will be interpreted to the Assembly.  So we feel it should be English only.  So, if you say interpretation, I think even a warrior can qualify for that. 

On the population, you see to it that since Karamoja is a scantly populated area, and since counties will be there represented all Municipalities should also be represented.  Whether a Municipality has 100,000 people or 5,000 people, it should qualify to have a representative from a Municipality.  So, if a Municipality has two people, it should not be combined with a county.  It should stand alone.  Now on the point of Chairmanship -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.  

MRS. LOCHORO:  This is the last point, Mr. Chairman.  I am winding up.  On the point of Chairmanship, I feel that it should not be the President to nominate the Chairman because if the Chairman is nominated by the President, you will find that the person will be too proud, he will grow horns and say after all, I am a Presidential Nominee. (Laughter)  So, I feel it should be the Assembly to elect their own Chairman and the Vice-Chairman and continue with business.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support. 

MR. KAYONDE (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, constitutionalism has been absent for a very long time and there has been a cost.  The cost of constitutionalism has been blood.  As a result of overthrow of constitutionalism in 1967 that introduced Amin, we lost half a million people.  As a result of again reverting to unconstitutional method, we lost between 1980 and 1986 about 300,000 or 400,000 people, I do not know the number - as a result of the insurgency.  Therefore when we are discussing about constitutional making, the cost has been heavy and really we should be careful of what we have gone through.  Some people have been saying legitimacy, whether this House has got legitimacy or not, in my view, all previous Governments ruled and they have run Governments and even their Decrees are still in the books.  So really NRM came through an armed struggle and we set up an interim period.  We know that we had means and we could legislate.  

So, we were legal but the legitimacy we need this NRM or this arrangement to be endorsed by the people.  Me, as somebody said, I am Historical but definitely I cannot claim that the people of Uganda either want me here until I have gone to the election.  So, I have the right to be here as per proclamation but how long can I be here?  So, as far as the legitimacy or the supremacy of this House - this House is only legitimate as far as the interim period is concerned and we must accept that this House, we are all Members of the interim administration of NRM that set up itself.  So, really short of that interim period, we should not mix old wine into new wine.  Let us have a cut off point and a cut off point has been spelt out in the proclamation up to 1994.  Now, this Constitution making exercise is to prepare the country to resort to constitutionalism that is absent and which we need so that a repeat of what we have gone through does not come again.  Now, I also want to correct the impression that this House has suddenly shifted the blame and put all the labels this House received to Government.  I do not think really we are being fair to be criticizing Government that it has said this House is illegitimate.  This thing originated outside this House.  Yes, let us go and look at what citizens has been writing about this House.  Let us go and read the People paper and the Shariat has been writing about this House.  In fact, it is in response because NRM is very sensitive to comments of the people -(Interruption)

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to give us his views about what he feels about this House himself?  He spotted the Newspapers, the facts are here.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, if I may respond briefly on this, NRM we were 38 initially as a political organ.  We expanded ourselves to include all other members from all parts of Uganda so that we form an interim administration which will superintend the interim period to make sure that the people of Uganda will ultimately fuse through a democratic process, a Government which is elected by all the people and therefore, this interim period definitely there is no question that this House is supreme, it is legitimate as far as the interim period is concerned.  And that is why I do not even buy the idea of saying let us dissolve.  To dissolve and do what?  Because we have a task all of us.  The task we have is that the people of Uganda must make their Constitution through which Constitution after which they will go to election and make Government and which Constitution will be defended by all of us.  I do not think you can defend a thing that you have not participated in.  So, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, if other Governments didn’t think that this House was the forum for the people of Uganda to discuss their affairs, even the people who have assisted like I can recognise the Danish Ambassador strangers gallery, I therefore would say that it was legitimate being recognised as a forum for the people of Uganda to discuss their problems.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, I beg your indulgence but I think it is very important.  Now, the question we have here, should we give credence to Shariat, to all these people who have labelled this House wrongly?  Should we give them ammunition that is in the constitutional process?  If we do not go to the people and we just add on, the same people will turn round and say, the Constituent Assembly was heavily in favour of the NRM Government and really this is a fundamental issue.  We should not give opportunity to anyone who will challenge this Constitution making exercise.  In fact, if you allow me, if I can buy a leaf from the interim report by the Constitutional Commission page 10, Section 23.  The people’s hope for a new Constitution than can last, one which is believed in by all Ugandans of good will, which will solve the nation’s conflicts, establish lasting peace, establish a solid foundation for flourishing democracy and to be conducive to development.  Such a Constitution should not be labelled an NRM document rather it should be seen as a people’s Constitution, one that can be fully respected by future Governments and generations.  

So, really, here the principle is - there are people who are interested in this Constitution making exercise.  The people, the opposition groups and even the International Community.  We should know we live as part of the International Community.  So, really whatever we do, must be seen by all these interested groups that we have been fair in this exercise.  The Clerk to National Assembly - which you may also know, that this NRC attempted to be Members of Inter-Parliamentary council and our application was turned down on the grounds that this House was not properly elected because it was indirectly elected.  So, Mr. Chairman, it is on those grounds that we should not give -(Interruption)

MR. D. LUBEGA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, I think you might have heard it wrong, but to the best of my knowledge, it is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association which rejected this House to be a Member rather than Inter-Parliamentary Association.

MR. M. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would also like to inform the Member on the Floor that, we were accepted as members of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.  It is the Inter-Parliamentary Union not Council except the main bottleneck is that we are unable to pay for our membership. (Laughter)  Thank you very much.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, I think the terminology as to which body but the fact is, that we could not be admitted because we were not directly elected -(Interjection)- that was the reason, but Mr. Chairman, if I may leave that point -(Interruption)

MR. NDEGE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that even the President of the United States is not directly elected.

MR. E. KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Israel Kayonde to continue on a line, when he knows very well that the Members who represent us in those Unions have informed us that are admitted but we have not yet paid our subscriptions - for him to continue saying that we are not admitted?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, he has already changed the statement.  Proceed please.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. chairman, for the speaker to continue when he has not checked his facts and I represented this Parliament in Sweden between 7th and 16th September last year in the Inter-Parliamentary Union where we are fully accepted and I delivered a statement?

THE CHAIRMAN: Not in order.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, earlier on, I said and the information we received - it was the Commonwealth.  The Commonwealth and this one I have facts and it can be substantiated that we could not be admitted but anyhow I have made my point.  Another point, I think it is also important that the thing which is looming about Uganda on the method of governance should be settled, really people who are brushing this point aside have not analyzed the gravity of this issue.  I normally go to political seminars in the countryside and right now, the population is paralysed on that one single thing as the method of governance that we are going to have and this should be multi-party or the movement.  I think it is important that before we go for any other exercise, this matter should be settled so that people are at peace -(Applause)- and this is where I am recommending that really before the Constituent Assembly elections, we should have a national referendum to settle this matter so that before people go to the Constituent Assembly, there is sanity and the people know that there other issues in the Constitutional making other than that one particular issue.  I think we shall have done a lot of good to this country if that matter is settled.  

I have heard people say, why should you pull out that only area which is subject to debate by the Constituent Assembly?  The fact is that it has been established.  This is the most contentious matter and therefore a contentious matter really should be settled through a national referendum and as an issue, so that - because I feel 300 people really in the Constituent Assembly, this is such a big issue to be decided by 300 people.  

Lastly, there are certain provisions in the Constituent Assembly Bill.  One is a local matter.  I think this also is something that should not go in passing because it is weighty.  Earlier on somebody asked, what do you consider a local matter?  I think the Minister has not given either information as to what is meant by a local matter but in my view, for instance, I would consider a cultural issue as a local matter because we have different cultures and we have - so if we consider that as local matter -(Interruption)- a culture.  I am just giving an example, is a cultural issue a local matter or not?  

So, I wanted to suggest that rather than Government negotiating, once that matter has become contentious, the people of that area must be consulted so that it is seen as a Constitutional process rather than a negotiation because today you can negotiate with this Government and if you get another Government, it sits and enters into fresh negotiations.  So, I think things that are Constitutional must be settled through a Constitutional process, and the Constitutional process would either be a local referendum to settle that matter of the people that matter concerns.  This would be my proposal, can I finish?  I think also the principle, of the cost of fees, really people are electing their representatives to come and talk about their matter.  As a principle, what is this man paying for?  The representative, what is he paying for?  I wish the Minister had put this to the population to pay this fee because it is the people who are interested in their Constitution.  But what is more fundamental here, this has always been a way of stopping people who have got material, who can be useful to be eliminated and you remember our earlier elections.  This was never there because it was deliberating in that resignation and fees for an election were deterrent to some people.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. J. EKEMU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Before I make contribution to this, I would like to make references to a State of Affairs of some seasonal diseases and out breaks of diseases which are very rampant and are causing a lot of havoc and I do not know really what method the Government has in place, particularly, we have a problem with meningitis now which has killed a lot of people in Teso, I think parts of Lango, Arua and even in Banda and these are seasonal diseases.  They tend to come during the dry season.  I would have liked the Minister for Health to say something about this but now that he is not here. However, I feel very much concerned to sound this because it is a matter of great concern to us.  It is very difficult for me to say anything new about this Bill, except one thing, urge Members to support it then I will add on a few things.  Before I do so, I would like to say that - I would like to try by answering a query which was asked by some Members, I think in the press somewhere, where one Member even asked whether there is need for us to think of making a new Constitution for Uganda at this moment.  This question was asked, many people have expressed their views about it.  I feel this question is quite important because we must justify what we are talking about.  I think, the position of a new Constitution with regard to Uganda now is quite necessary and very timely and I would like to answer that question in the affirmative saying, this is the time for Ugandans to make a new Constitution. (Applause)  Why I say so, one thing since Independence, we as a country have gone through a lot of times of different set-ups and different circumstances, different political systems, different economic organisations and manipulations.  Sometimes we have been ruled by whims of individuals and we have gone through certain processes that may in the long run, somehow became counter productive and we have gone through all these.  Ugandans have run overseas in exile for a long time.  Some have been lucky to come back, others have not, and others died there.  We have struggled with internal matters and in various ways we have contributed to the best of our abilities.  

So, all in all, we have gone through a lot of processes.  Now, these processes, although they may be good in one way or the other, finally they tend to weaken the fabric of the State machineries.  They also tend to weaken us individuals.  They tend to erode the mandates of various organs of Government and the only way therefore we can revive these mandates - the only way we can reinvigorate these machineries is through this process of Constitutionalism through making and re-examining and making a new Constitution.  It is, therefore, a time for us, a really time for soul searching.  A time for contemplation and re-examination of our past and taking stock of what has happened so that we can chat the course for the future for ourselves and for those who will live after us.  So, I am definitely positive and I would like to invite hon. Members to agree that this is the time for this country really to sit down and use whatever resources at its disposal to come out with a Constitution which we hope for the first will be appreciated and will be taken to be rational by ourselves and by the members of the world community.  To do this is not an easy task.  I have painfully listened to debates here from the beginning up to now.  

On this note, I must point out that I am usually perturbed by hon. Members who contribute effectively to this House then after contributing they go away.  Sometimes after making very devastating points and then they walk away on us and we are supposed to sit and screen what they have said and possibly answer them in their absence.  This is a very unfortunate thing and very painful.  I wish those Members could sit around and listen to other people too, because ultimately if we have to come out without a Constitution which is going to be accepted, this is going to be the approach that we must listen and everybody must listen to everybody, then finally we should come out with what will be everybody’s (Applause).  So, that is one of my concerns but what are we here for?  What are we debating?  We are not debating the Constitution for the Republic of Uganda, we are not!  Therefore, summarily and immediately, I would like to say, it is not relevant for me or indeed for any hon. Member to make reference to what is contained in what is now the Constitutional draft, because this is not the time.  What we are here for, if I understood this Bill correctly and I hope I did, if I did not, please any one hon. Member can correct me.  I think what we are here for is to debate this Bill and this Bill seeks stop set the machinery to handle the Constitutional debate.  

So, our work here is simply to debate this Bill and try to re-set up machinery, a viable machinery which is going to handle Constitutional debate effectively.  Therefore, if we look at this Bill critically and carefully and subscribe to it very well, we shall come out with a strong viable body that will handle the Constitution.  If we handle this Bill in our own way carelessly and probably emotionally and we get carried away by other things, then we are going to set up an organ which is a cripple, which is not going to handle the immense task ahead of it and posterity will live to blame us.  So, in this case, for me I have not had a chance to read the interim report, the Minister’s Constitutional proposals.  I have not read and I have no regret, I have not because I feel it is not the time.  Now, there are only two organs that the Bill tries to set.  One of them is a Constituent Assembly, the main one.  The other organ is the Arm organ that is the Commission for the Assembly.  

Now, the Constituent Assembly - there are three components parts of it.  First the directly elected Members, then the representatives of interest groups and then thirdly the Presidential nominees and I would like to say a few words about those.  Now, directly elected Members, this is I suppose what comes to affect Members of NRC and everybody else.  The Bill is clear.  It says that Members should be elected by Universal suffrage and I do not see anything wrong with that.  The Bill gives latitude to the incumbent NRC Members to stand and go to the Constituent Assembly if they wish.  If they wish, same applies to me.  Now, by hon. Members saying that they should dissolve this House and go.  They are forcing me too to go but may be I am not interested in going to the Constituent Assembly and I would like to render my services here and possibly stop here.  Why do you have to force me by dissolving this House.  I think I respectfully agree with the submissions of hon. Elly Tumwine yesterday that we have been a long way together, we should continue together because after all our operation is regulated by the laws of this country.  Whether it is the Shariat writing that we should dissolve or the citizen writing, or a few Ugandans who must be disgruntled saying so, that does not have to force us into submission of dissolving ourselves.  That would be a defeatist attitude anyway which I would like not to subscribe to, but that is not to say, I do not like to listen to Ugandans.  That is why I support, the idea of electing a fresh body that Members can go in for elections of a fresh body, but let the Members go and stand at their option.  Let it not be a compulsory thing.  I would not like that.  

So, as far as the elected Members are concerned, I have personally no quarrel.  There have been issues raised about population and about counties.  I think the Minister should take stock of these issues, because why some Members raised those issues, sometime when Governments are involved in making Constitutions, there is an atmosphere on suspicion.  So, maybe somebody somewhere may think that by appointing the population this way or that or apportioning the counties this way or that there is some element of manipulation.  But let the Minister take note of all the comments that are brought by the various groups from various counties about population and about the land area.  I think these are all very important.  But as far as electing the Members is concerned, I think, let the Members go for election.  The best I would do, I would advise all my Colleagues, if possible to go and stand for elections.  God willing, they will all come back. (Laughter)  But if they do not, at least, let us allow Ugandans to express themselves.  This is the most important thing. As far as the representatives of interests groups are concerned, there are women, there are NRC Members, then the political parties.  But, I would like to say this.  On women, with the greatest respect to our women folk I am one supporter of the women’s cause.  But I would like to caution that we Ugandans should not over drum the issue of women.  Let us support the women, but let us not push the horse too hard, otherwise the situation becomes absolutely artificial and the women will not understand what we mean.  Liberty and emancipation must be intrinsic.  The women themselves must be imbued with a spirit of dependence, not that women should always be drumming it on them.  I think, we should do so with reservations.  As far as the NRC is concerned, we are a special group and since I advocate that this body should not dissolve itself and since it will want to remain here, I now agree and I would like to invite my hon. Colleagues to agree that this body also be represented in the Constituent Assembly by a couple of people elected.  

But, I would like to emphasise over the issue of parties.  In this House hon. Members have all spoken about parties with such fire and have gone along way to condemn parties in a very hard way.  But we must recognise the role of Ministers sand NRC Members and everybody else.  I would like to make special reference to the hon. Minister of Education whom I respect very much.  But he made such a diatribe about the parties and more or less discouraged many of us.  But what I would say is, it will not be proper for Ugandans or the calibre of this House to run away from the fact of the existence of parties.  I think what we should do is, we must give parties adequate provision for representation of their views and in this respect, my view is that to give the parties representation of two Members is in any case ridiculous.  I think parties have had a lot of opportunities to act with many Ugandans.  They have a lot of influence I hope.  I think they should be given a higher representation than merely two members.  In this case, I suggest each party should be given an opportunity of being represented by at least not less than ten Members, in the case of the interest group, I also suggest that in order to give wider opportunities, we should increase the number of interest groups, like the religious denominations and other bodies.  Like elders, nobody has said much about elders.  But, who are the wisdom in this country to formulate a country’s constitution without any reference to elders?  In districts there are elders who are so well organised and we must make special reference to them.  

With the Presidential nominees, nominations by their nature are not very popular in political circles neither are they very prudent.  But I listened painfully about the wisdom of allowing the President to nominate some members and I would like to agree, because I think the reasons was very good that the President should know his country and maybe he knows better than some of us.  So, we should benefit, we should enrich our effort by allowing him to nominate.  But, despite the Minister’s recent Amendment reducing it from 15 to 13, I still think it is a bit too high. I would not mind if the President is allowed to nominate say five Members and he must confine himself to elders. I think to me that will be a little reasonable.  Finally, I have a lot of fears about the Commission.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I would like the hon. Member holding the Floor to clarify what he exactly means by elders.

MR. EKEMU:  Mr. Chairman, recently in this House hon. Obwangor was rather desperate one day and he made utterances that earned him an order out of this House.  But I have my observations that may help to explain.  The elders must be put in a certain place and they must be given some respect and they must be consulted.  I say so from experience. In my own part of the Constituency in Kaberamaido, I have a very well organised group of elders and they are extremely helpful to me.  All I am saying is that I would like my hon. Colleagues to benefit from that kind of set-up.

MR. MORO:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I believe I am an elder.  I agree with the profit made by the hon. Member holding the Floor.  The elder group is a very important group.  In West Nile it was the elders who sat with the fighting forces to convince them to lay down their arms and this is how West Nile was saved.  So, I think I agree with that Member that elders should also be represented on the constituent Assembly.  Thank you.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague holding the Floor of the House that, since the NRM came in 1986, we in Teso, in fact, the whole of Northern and North East, our only approach to the Government of NRM and His Excellency the President was through the organisation of the elders.  Elders are mature people above the age of 18 accepted by law. (Laughter) Therefore, anyone above the age of 18 is considered an elder who has richness and vast experience about the national affairs.

MR. EKEMU:  So, Mr. Chairman, you can see for yourself that the issue of elders in the Constitution making is a very vital issue and I hope the Minister will take serious note of the matter.  Because as we talk here, elders are also talking.  But, over the matter of referendum, I just want to put one thing.  I think there is a misconception that we must be very careful about.  In the Constitutional proposals, there is a proposal about - I read from the Newspaper of keeping NRM in a Government for five years or something like that. That particular proposal provokes other forces like the parties and other people.  So, that is the proposal that has made Members talk very conspicuously about the referendum. I would like to be clearly understood that with a referendum, it is a question of time and if we misunderstand time, we shall miss the point.  I have heard the hon. Members make proposals here that a referendum should be held now to determine.  I do not want to be misunderstood but I want to be understood.  A referendum should not be held now, but a referendum will have to be held in view of the proposal that I have mentioned.  But it does not have to be held now because we are setting up a machinery and we should first concern ourselves with the setting of the machinery. Then when the machinery is set, I agree a referendum may have to be held.  So, I would like Members to understand me on that.  But more importantly, over that issue, there is this question of issues of local character that people have talked about.  In Uganda here we are some times cheated by people who say no, no, that is in our tribe, it is in our religion.  When the matter becomes big and violent, then all Ugandans suffer.  Some times you find a Karimojong saying cattle rustling is natural for them.  When it becomes difficult, people of neighbouring districts suffer and then Uganda is called upon.  

So what is an issue of local character?  If it is a Constitutional matter, my view is, let the whole country discuss it and let us decide on it.  Because I should know what is happening in Rukungiri and a Rukungiri person should know what is happening in Teso, if he is a true Ugandan.  And this is the only way we shall ensure a sense of unity in this country.  But if we allow individuals to decide, then we are going to set up roads on each hill and each road will decide as it likes.  That is not the kind of spirit we would like to operate from.  So, there should be nothing like an issue of a local character in terms of a referendum.  The matter is national and it should be national and we should all be given opportunity to participate in it.  These candidates meetings that are guarded, are abhorrent, they are not democratic in them.  We allow people to go and approach and consult at their liberty.  How can you subject me to a candidate’s meeting?  The DA or whoever is the Returning Officer is going to set a meeting to take me to a sub-county where I feel may be I have already got enough support and I want to go to another one.  But he will force me through this candidate’s meeting to go to the cub-county of the choice of the Returning Officer.  This shocked me, and I do not support it and many people do not.  This fee of 100,000/=, do you mean to say that this is democracy of the rich people?  Because in my village, somebody with 100,000/= is not even heard of.  

The virtue of NRM Government is that many hon. Members came here despite the fact that they were poor and I am not afraid to say we enjoy politics in a situation where money was not a big issue.  But again it is the same NRM now telling me that you should turn round and make the Constitution.  When we came in here, Mr. Chairman, I remember we paid only 10,000/=.  What was it?

HON. MEMBERS:  Nothing.

MR. EKEMU:  You can even see, we paid absolutely nothing.  Now what has changed within this short space of time to make a potential candidate charged 100,000/=?  In any case, there is nobody in the village with that money.  I oppose that one and many people oppose it too.

Finally, there is a little question of information which hon. Minister for women I think mentioned.  I subscribe to that, but as we proceed with this exercise, there should be translations of this document and should be passed to as many people as possible even after we have made a Constitution.  If you ask, how many Ugandans know anything about the 1967 Constitution, the only basic thing some other people know is condemn.  But they have never read a single Clause in it.  The 1962 Constitution is in the archives probably.  So, one fundamental change that can also be brought about is that this time there must be full publication at least, as much as possible of the Constitution we are talking about.  I think this will help us a great deal.

Finally, I wish to thank you and Members about the time you have given us to allow this debate to be protracted.  I think this has helped us a lot to sober up and I hope we shall manage to get task done of having balanced machinery set in position.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS D. OPOT (Women Representative, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to talk on this Bill.  First of all, I would like to ask Members of this House and Ugandans of clear minds to condemn in the highest manner possible the ambush that culminated into the death of three personalities from Nebbi on Monday and the subsequent no knowledge of the whereabouts of the DA of Nebbi.  I would like to inform the House that, that is the situation we have been going through.  The convoy has only been treating the symptom of the real matter.  There is really need an early concern that we do away with the disease other than the convoy.  By yesterday in the afternoon some Members were raising issues that why did the DA choose to go through Paraa when there is a convoy system which has been apparently set?  All of us know that DAs are very busy people, maybe he wanted to be in Kampala in good time to catch offices and meet some relevant people and that is why he chose a route that was going to enable him to be in Kampala earlier.  But unfortunately, it landed him to where he is now.  I hope Government and concerned personalities will take this matter much more seriously than they have taken if before.

MR. MORO:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to emphasize on that point made by hon. Opot.  I think the DA chose to come through better route because of the problems that the people face between Karuma and Packwach because of this convoy.  A distance of less than 70 miles takes from four to six and a half hours.  Some times you travel at a speed of 20 miles per hour or even less.  A walking person could surpass you if you take that speed.  Although a bit of improvement has taken place, there is a lot to be desired and I would like to call upon the Ministers concerned to ensure that this convoy between Packwach and Karuma should be improved if you are to avoid the loss of lives of our citizens.  Thank you.

MISS OPOT:  I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Mr. Chairman, when we talk about this issue and when we look at the way Government keeps saying that the North has been pacified and the convoys were never stopped and life has continued going in the manner in which we are seeing it go, I think this House is called upon to discuss something and look into this matter.  On this note, I call upon the Minister of State for Pacification of the North to come to this House and give a statement on how he can get about this matter.  Because we have highly publicised that the Northern part of Uganda has already been pacified.

I would like to turn to the matter at hand.  I rise to support the Bill and I believe that there is need for the formation of the Constituent Assembly.  But, I have to say and join the others that this Bill is one of the greatest Bills maybe in the history of Uganda and in passing this Bill, I call upon Government and even Members of this House to be very diligent, to be sober and to be conscious so that by the time we pass this Bill, we leave no loophole to be exploited and we leave no room for exploitation and speculation.  If need be, I do not wish that passing this Bill must go to a vote.  Because once we put it to the vote, it will automatically set a division and setting a division on this issue is already the beginning of the destruction of the Constitution forming process, we must be see that is Government and Members of this House, to be acting together - that is the executive and the legislature working together for the formation of a better Uganda.  It is unfortunate in the introductory remarks of the Minister to this Bill a lot of controversial issues were raised and as such, the debate has been taking very crude trend in some events whereby there seems to be an attack and defence in one way or another.  This is completely uncalled for.  But what we have been going through shows clearly that there is mistrust within the House.  It shows clearly that there is lack of coordination between the Ministers or Cabinet that is the policy making body of Government, the NRC that is the highest organ and the Executive Committee of this House and Legislature.  

Otherwise, we would not have gone into all these if we were well coordinated and we exactly know what we are driving in for.  Because the way we are talking here, some people seem to be just making contribution and they are really entitled to their opinion and they deserve to be listened to.  Others seem to be protecting the interest, which is best known to them, and they also entitled to their opinion.  But, this is not going to take us anywhere.  The politics of NRM has been that of working on a principle of a broad based arrangement that accommodates all political views and in this particular matter, we are looking forward to a better making of Uganda and it is now in this House with this Bill that we are going to make a decision which may be one of the worst ever made before in this House.  As I mention that this Bill as tabled and in the way in which we are discussing it and in the way in which other people are responding to the papers, even Members of this House, is already showing that there is a loophole in Government.  It is already showing that there is no agreement between NRM and NRC and others are just going to play exactly on this.  Because already some people are saying look at this situation where Government does not trust -(Interruption)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Chairman, the information I wish to give the hon. Member holding the Floor is that, this debate has been healthy. It is the duty of Government to present its stand to the House and to convince the House to support it.  And it is the role of the Hose to criticise, to comment and to do all these so that by the end of the day, if the Government convinces the House, we go along.  If it does not convince the House, they reject their stand.  Therefore, it is healthy and it has been fine.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS OPOT: I thank the hon. Member for the information she has given and this is exactly what I am talking about.  We need to be cautious, we need to be tolerable, and we need to understand exactly what we are discussing.  There is need for Government to listen to what the Back Benchers are out with, and there is need for the Back Benchers also to listen what the Government is out with so that we come out with a compromise.  As the Minister put it, the people demand for an elected Assembly, well and good, that is fine, and now some Members of NRC also demand for their inclusion and participation in this debate, fine also, but as I mentioned earlier, there is need that we should agree and put the two bodies together, we should agree as one body and accept on what exactly we should do other than be seen to be acting in diversity.  The continuing process of give and take between Ministers and Back-benchers is normal party of Parliamentary life, it should not be seen as one part being defeated and other part taking it all.  

As CMs, we are giving an unbiased opinion and some of us are making measure judgments into what we think is going to become, or in what we think the Assembly should be, and we have to look at all these views and we have to accept each other, if need be that the Constituent Assembly be formed, by completely new people elected in and Members going to participate, we need to be convinced that, that is the right line of how we are going to do it.  And we must accept it very, very genuinely because if we do not accept it genuinely, immediately this Bill is passed, those of us who are here we have been hearing hon. Members are talking, some are very ready right now, to go and put on their old coats and begin talking in the language in which we are fearing, the language which they were talking before, and as a result, we are going to turn out with a very sectarian Constituent Assembly.  It may either be sectarian along the multi-party political lines, or it is may be sectarian in the Movement line, as a result one person is defeated because there are two people now arguing for one ground in Uganda.  

After mentioning that, I would like to make comment on the Bill.  I feel very disturbed if up to now Members of this House still do not trust the personality of the President, and when they keep making noise that Assembly must select its own Chairman, I do not believe in what they are up to, I feel very strongly that the President must appoint the Chairman to the Constituent Assembly, just as my Brother from Kumi mentioned, there is a possibility of this Assembly sitting electing its Chairman and within no time claiming sovereignty and saying we are only answerable to the Chairman, and the Chairman may also say, I am only answerable to the Assembly and as a result, there will be a complete break down in the system and that is exactly what we are fighting against, we want to form an Assembly which is going to be accepted, which is going to listen to the President who is the Chairman of NRM, who is the President of Uganda now, and who has a good will for this country, the way he has brought up to Movement up to the moment and up to this level, and at the sametime the way he has brought up the country shows clearly that he has full interest in a peaceful Uganda, he is not interested in Uganda where he is only going to be looked at as a hero, while the great majority of people are suffering. I believe to see him making good decisions and I strongly believe that our environment in this Parliament was partly and maybe, number one is his own suggestion because Ugandans are known to be selfish people. When the UNLA came and took over Government, first of all, they consider themselves as people who were from exile to constitute government but, here is a man who come and sat with his council and consider only the bush people, but also people who contributed even in other Governments and even people who have never participated at all to come and participate in making a democratic Uganda.  

On the issue of nomination of Members, or nomination of people by the President, the number of 15, it is true apparently appears to be too large and it has been attached from left and right, I think we should also accept, I request the Minister that we should accept compromise, 15 maybe a little bit too much, I would like to suggest a number of 10, when we look at the recommendation of the Constitution Commission, there are some people who are supposed to be included in the Assembly but they have not been put in the Bill, and I strongly believe that, if it is insisted upon, such are the people whom the President can nominate into this Assembly.  Our Motto says, ‘For God and my Country’, we are not going to do much, when we leave out the religious leaders. In one way or another politics in Uganda come through religion, whether you like it or not.  The Islamic faith has not been identified at the beginning with any political system is till struggling to identify itself with somebody, and as much, I strongly believe that the three strong faiths in this country must be represented into the Constituency Assembly.  Sometime last year, we got a memorandum from the Farmers Association, they requested for their involvement in the Constituency Assembly, I strongly believe that we should not look at them lightly for all this time long they have sustaining the economy of this country, I think there is need that we involve them and the right forum for their election can only be the President’s Office that is appointing them directly to sit in the Assembly. The disabled have been mentioned in the report, I think I do believe also that, there should be a representative of the disabled into the Assembly, and since there is no forum to elect these people I have talked about, when you look at the religious, the Catholic Church for one, it does not allow its leaders to be elected into political affairs.  We witness the two Priests whom we had, one went away very quietly, the other had a chance of being kicked out of this House, but I believe it was on resistance of the Church.  So, it is only the President who can appoint people like that to sit into this Assembly.  

I have no quarrel with the representation of the army, I strongly believe and I feel confident that, there is going to be one woman per district and I feel confident because there is a support for that, the number of that 8 youths as has been suggested in the report of the Commission seem to be too small, but I would suggest may be 12 youths to be represented on region basis.  

On parties, I am also going to take a different stand, it has been mentioned by the Minister in the Bill, that there should be two people per party, and these are the parties that will have participated in the 1980 election.  I have to say frankly that some of these parties are not known in other parts of Uganda.  The two commonly known parties is the DP and UPC, UPM has been heard of widely, CP is, I must confess is limited to central region.  For that matter, to put the four parties to have equal basis is not fair; I would suggest that they should be 14 people to represent the parties.  Out of which DP and UPC sends five representatives each and CP and UPM sends two each, so that we have a number of 14.  Mr. Chairman, I would have not been fair -(Interruption)

MRS. NJUBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the Member holding the Floor that, the idea was for the political parties to be represented and the idea of two per party is really to assist the parties to find how they will be represented.  It is not for each political party as a group to be represented.

MISS OPOT:  Mr. Chairman, I think the Bill clearly states two per party and that is -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Colleague holding the Floor that, the principle behind the wish for saying we in the Constitution Commission was based on a philosophy - candial philosophy of making a Constitution, that is to say, what touches all, must be approved by all.  That is why Parliament is here to make laws affecting the nation.  Now as a question of the Government of today for a law is tempered by the government with the day, but in principle, we recommended, if you read this paper our recommendations, we argued ably on fairness so that because these people are a social force and in the mechanism of our social course in the politeness and civility, they play a part of our nation, so they should be given opportunity to participate in making the National Constitution.

MISS OPOT:  Thank you for the information.  Mr. Chairman, just as the hon. elder got up to give me the information, I was beginning to address myself with the issue of the electoral areas.  It is clearly stipulated in the Bill that if a county has a population more than 160,000 people, then it should be divided and send two representatives.  I will be very unfair, if I do not address myself to Nebbi as a district. Nebbi has a population of approximately 320,000 people, and more unfortunately none of the counties has a population exceeding the 160,000 that the Bill is talking about, but apparently we do qualify for an extra electoral area for the Constituency Assembly.  I do not think we are just going to be taken for counties with less than that number and be left like that, because of the three counties we have in Nebbi, two of them that is Okoro and Padyere, constitute a population of 245,000 people, and as a result, they definitely qualify to have a third electoral area, so it will only be fair that we are given also what is due to us.  That we have one extra electoral area and already on the ground in the DRC, there was already an arrangement to split the two counties and get a third out of the two.  So, I beg the Minister really to consider even though we do not measure up to the matters as stipulated in the Bill.  On the issue of the delegates meeting, I think as Members have said, there is that need for open campaign, because whether we like it or not, just right now, some of us are here still thinking of how we are going to pass the Bill and what to do next, on the ground there is campaign, people are already campaigning for the Constituency Assembly, and by the time we pass this Bill, we never know there may be already candidates who are ready to come to Assembly.  So, to say that there is no campaign is just to deceive oneself, we should allow open campaign for these elections, because as a number one time mention, somebody may just come out maliciously to destroy you in an area and it is only upon you and your supporters to defend you, they can only do that in an open campaign, they cannot do it when campaign is not allowed.  

Lastly, I have to comment on the section of the Bill in the rules that says that, there should be no declaration of candidateship into electoral areas.  Here is a situation where the Minister was already gone ahead to amend the Bill by allowing women representative to be elected per district, and he has given his own criteria of the election of the women representative, I am scared that we are crying for universal suffrage, I do not know hoe the women who are going to sit in the Constituent Assembly are going to be treated because they may still be taken for people who are only be elected by an electoral college other than the universal suffrage.  In addition to that, the rule is one page 27 Rule 11, which is saying that, ‘there should be no declaration into two electoral areas’.  Now, if we are to go by the Minister’s Amendment whereby the woman can stand for an election at a county level and she may be interested in the district, but at the same time also interested in he county level, there is going to be no time to say that all these elections are going to take place on one day, and for a woman who will lose at county level, she may be interested now contesting at the district level, now if we keep that rule biding then, it means that some of the women are going to be treated unfairly.  So, I beg the Minister that when we reach the Committee Stage that bit of it should be deleted so that -(Interruption) 

MRS. MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member speaking that the system is already unfair for the women in that, while some women represent one county as a district, others represent three counties, other seven and nine.  So, I think the Minister should look at their personality that there is a basic number of forging to be considered for a candidate.  

MRS. OPOT:  Mr. Chairman, for the Minister’s attention, that is also a very useful piece of information, but otherwise, I beg that that section be deleted that those of us who may want to try the county level and maybe eventually turned to the district, have the room to participate into this very important issue, otherwise, for the numbers of 8,000 per electoral area, I support that.  And with this, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill very strongly and I thank you.  

MR. KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Bill, Mr. Chairman, I have lived in Uganda for all these years and I have never gone into exile.  Mr. Chairman, during all that period, I have experienced a lot of suffering but under the NRM Government, I have observed some sanity, peace and development taking place.  It is on the basis of that, that in my contribution I intend to give credit where it is due and to criticise where I feel I should criticise.  I am conscious of the position where we started off, because when we are talking of the making of the new Constitution, it was originally stated that it would be the NRC plus Army Council whose number people were not sure of.  Now, when the Government moves from that position and says, people should elect the Constituent Assembly directly, I think it is a step forward in the direction of pure democracy, that is why I feel this Bill must be supported by all Ugandans of goodwill. I also note that the election of the Constituent Assembly is also the will of the people of Uganda that we elected a new body, let it be so.  I am very aware that in the process of doing so, many of us are going to lose elections, but I am saying let us lose honourably, we shall not die, we were not meant to serve in these bodies all our lives.  In the spirit of what I have stated above, I am also persuaded to accept that the NRA be represented because of the historical role that they played all along.  

 I also agreed that the President should have some nominations, but I think the number of 15 is too high, even the one of 13 which the hon. Minister moved in his Amendment yesterday is still too high, the number should not exceed 10. I am also of the feeling that the consolation to the NRC Members that are going to lose in these elections, they should be allowed the 10 nominations that have been proposed because, my only wonder is, where we are going to elect the 10 Members that are going to represent the NRC?  Will it be after the general election of before?  Because I have a feeling that this should be after the other big election so that those who will have lost and even the historicals, who may not be having any Constituencies where to stand, have the opportunity to be elected within this House and go to this body.  

Having said that, I still have a problem on some special representation - representation of the women, the youth and the Trade Unions.  I do agree that the Minister has a point but my only fear is by so doing, are we moving the principle of one-man one vote?  Because, I have fear that they have a situation of say, a female lady who is married and she is 21 years, she will vote as a Ugandan, she will also be able to vote as a youth, she will also be able to vote in the Women’s Council, she may also be a Trade Unionist and also be able to vote there, she may also be an NRM Officer and be able to vote in the Army Defence Council, now you might find that the same youth is worth five votes.  I do not know how the Minister is going to reconcile this kind of position or I do agree that perhaps that he is going to go by George or there is a statement in Animal Farm, where they say, all animals are equal, but some are more equal than others.  I hope when the Minister comes to wind up he will be able to put my anxiety at peace.  I also note the following positive developments on the part of NRM in the direction of democracy.  The single ballot impresses me because in the past, the question of ballots has been a problem in this country.  Now that the NRM has taken that decision that we have one ballot, I think they deserve a pat on their shoulders.  

I am also impressed by the fact that we are going to use one ballot all of us, I know no one ballot paper, I know our people are not educated on that to be able to read the pictures, to be able to identify the candidate but I think, it is the duty of the Government to go out and educate the masses because I see this is the best approach to this kind of election.  Now, having said that there are some bodies that the Minister has forgotten to include, these are the religious bodies.  Uganda is known to be a very religious country, in this case, I have in mind five different denominations, I have the Moslems, I have the Protestants, the Roman Catholics, the Orthodox, and Seventh Day Adventists.  I pray, that these bodies should be considered in the representation at the Constituent Assembly.  I also feel that this being an agricultural country, you cannot prepare a Constitution and leave out the farmers, the farmers already well organised in UNAFA  (Uganda National Farmers Association), we also have the Uganda Commercial Farmers Association, why do not you have at least, each of these bodies sending us representatives?  Now the argument that people who are going to vote are farmers, those who will stand are farmers, does not hold water because you have already said that women from the majority in this country, but even after that fact, we are saying, let the women be represented in a special way.  So, in the same manner even the farmers should be represented in the Constituent Assembly.

I now wish to move on the question of population, representation as far as vice- versa the population, I feel we should be fair in all respects, the number of 160,000 that enable a country to be divided into two, I think is very high.  Let us move by the figure of 60,000 people, let the representation be based on population because the more people we can represent the better.  

MRS. SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It is not my habit to interrupt people when they are talking, but I think this issue has been repeated a number of times.  Secondly, the speaker on the Floor is known to me as a Nationalist, so may be when I give him this information, he will reason it out. I have looked at the population of Uganda and the distribution of the population, if we go for example and say that every Constituent Should have 50,000 people, let us use for me I prefer to be 50,000 because it is easier to divide.  The whole of the North that is, Karamoja, Kotido, Moroto, Gulu, Kitgum up to West Nile, we bring 60 representatives, the whole of the North that is cutting Uganda into two, then the rest of Uganda will bring 360 representatives in the interest of Nationality.  I want you to consider that, so that when you contribute, you tell us whether you really want to marginalise them that far.  Thank you. (Applause)

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  Mr. Chairman, we are making Constitution for human beings, and a way we represent human beings is by population, I do appreciate the problem of the scarce population in the North, but I think the Minister in his wisdom can take care of that having been fair on the question of population in those areas which are densely populated, let him begin off with the basis of 60,000 per delegate, then when he gets the North where people are few, he can solve the lower than the numbers proposed.  Mr. Chairman, having said all the above -(Interruption)

MR. NDEGE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member through you and as I have said before, I think the front bench is misleading us, the question whether they are strict say, 80,000 or 100,000 it is irrelevant, because first of all, each county is going to bring one representative and that means that any county in the North, South, East West will bring one representative.  Two how many people should constitute a constituency, whether there are 60, 80, 100,000 the proportion will be the same.  In other words, even if there are 80, the South will be represented more than the North according to population.  So, the argument does not hold water.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  The hon. Member is strengthening my point where I am saying it should be by population. Having pointed out the above, I now wish to pray to the Government not fall into the following traps because the Government has had a good record I said, I will give credit where it is due, but having had that good record, they should not spoil it by doing the following this idea of saying we should hold elections on parties, I think this is totally wrong because referendum, in the Draft Constitution we have before us, it is clearly stated that there shall be freedom of association, it is a question of saying what the majority do not want the parties, therefore we should not move by the parties.  I do agree that the majority may not like the parties, but you may have 10 people that are interested in the parties.  So, those 10 people have a right to be in the association, they have the right to be in the parties, and even in this House, there are people who believe in the parties.  I think the question should be, we hold a referendum as to how long we should hold on, we should keep the parties aside until such a time when the people are educated enough and they do not start cutting one another because of parties, and indeed the question of people knowing how to go by the parties is the duty of the government to educate the people the question is, has the Government taken the trouble to go out in the people and they teach that?  By belonging to different parties, people should not be enemies.  Has the Government done it?  They have not, instead what is happening every political seminar that we have in the villages one of the major issues is, the parties are very bad.  Do not support parties now, is this fair?  Shall we build the nation when we are building it on such biases?  I will have the information, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my friend and neighbour hon. Ssengo, that I personally as late as yesterday, I closed a passing out a parade yesterday which was attended by about 1,200 people, and these people had different political background, and in my address, I told them that experience had shown that when they start talking about parties, something happens to them, they just go crazy and I told them that it is possible to have political parties without getting on each other’s neck.  But if they do, it is the responsibility of Government to help them to keep peace.  Previously, I had also addressed the people of Kibibi, I do not remember having condemned perse in those closing mentioning and in Kibibi there were about 2000 people that I - because I had been to that place and I had been an organiser for parties in that district.  

So, I did not tell them that, it is not the principle that there is a problem, is that once they divide themselves amongst parties, they fail to live together.  This is a problem, and I do not think I have in those meetings where we come from the same district and where I was very instrumental in 1980, for political parties.  I told them the experience in 1980, showed that the same people when they were asked to live together, and govern themselves along party lines, I mentioned to them how many people in each party were killed and I said, and I think it is in the view of the NRM that is for one reason of the other, the Uganda people when you ask them to govern themselves along political parties, it is as if there is a spirit which goes in their heads and they start doing a lot of damages.  I do not think it is true that there has been a deliberate approach by Government to destroy the principle of people living along party lines, but experience has shown that when this has been tried, and, I will give an example.  In my own Constituency I used to represent in 1980, I have 12 people who were Chairmen of UPC, who were killed purely because they had been in UPC.  But also 20 Chairman of DP were killed for no other reason just because they were thought to be DP supporters, and these live examples hon. Ssengo Kalule if I mention these people you know them very well.  

So, it becomes very difficult for me to tell these people that you, please if you have tried a period of seven years and nobody has died because of political thinking, and also you have five years when all these people died because of political thinking, what do we go with for the time being?  And I think since I have been in these seminars and I have participated with a number of them, I thought it was important to clarify this position, I said it in Mpigi, I said it in Kibibi and I repeat it now.

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member was moreless contributing other than giving me information, because when I raised this issue, I never said that the hon. Member who was closing seminars, I am talking of those cadres that go out to teach in these seminars.  Indeed, I do congratulate the hon. member for having been so positive anyway, he was closing his seminars, but I did not expect him to speak for even cadres that are down there teaching.  Because I have been attending some of these seminars personally, and they have been going on in my county there are some still going on, but that is what is happening.  Indeed, only that Sunday, the Rt. hon. His Excellency the Vice President was closing these political seminars in my county, and he talked very nicely, he said, the reason why Government is afraid of parties is that, people have not yet learnt to behave themselves in the parties and he said government was only asking for more time, now that one can be acceptable.  But what I do not accept is the idea of saying we should vote and decide whether to have parties or movements, I believe that is totally wrong.  I will have the information.

MR. MUKIIBI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I want to give to the speaker holding the Floor is that, it is not true that it is during the seminars people are instigated as he said at all to hate parties, that parties are not bad, because this is tantamount to saying actually to under rating the intelligence of Ugandans because they have been in this country, they have lived under multi-partyism, they know what they have experienced under multi-parties.  So, it is these resolutions which are calling for suspension of parties which are passed by every seminars, they are done freely without any dictation by the NRM Secretariat because of the people know, so we do not want to under-rate the intelligence of the people of Uganda.  We are not the ones who are telling them that you are being killed, you are being imprisoned, you are being raped under multi-partyism, the know.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYENGO: Additional information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give hon. Ssengo Kalule some more information.  As one would call a basis for the referendum, by just common sense, freedom of association also implies freedom not to associate.  As much freedom as I have to associate, do I have the freedom not to associate?  So, if one wants to find out, would like to associate or would like not to associate, he puts me to a referendum and I differ. (Laughter)

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank all the hon. Members for the information they have given me, but let me answer in particular the information that I was given to by hon. Mukiibi.  Sometimes back when we had this political seminars in my place, people went into a session then they were told political parties were very, very bad, then shortly afterwards, they were taken into a session somewhere, then they were asked to give their opinion on political parties not just a few minutes after, surely a man you have been telling now that parties are bad, then you take him outside there to give you his opinion on parties, what do you expect him to say?  He will say they are bad.  So, I do not know perhaps the hon. Member, hon. Mukiibi has not taken trouble to visit some of these political seminar courses, he would really find it or he is failing to be sincere because he knows what is actually going on there.  However, I do not turn my debate into a quarrel with the hon. Member; allow me to proceed, Mr. Chairman.   
 
THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, proceed.

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Mr. Chairman, it is my sincere belief that a good Constitution is the one that guarantees even the right of minorities.  It should allow the minorities to uphold their principles while at the sametime, allowing the majority to enjoy their supremacy, especially in election.  Having said that, I now want to turn to this Clause of candidate’s campaigning.  Now, this is unthinkable, now when you start telling people that they will go and parade as if they are beauty queens, this is being very, very disadvantageous to some people.  Let us imagine there are five of us, and you take us to a candidate’s meeting, and I happen to be ugly now straight away you have put me to a disadvantage because these people who will come to attend -(Interjection)- yes, Mr. Chairman, I will accept the information.

MR. NJUBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that he is here through such elections and he was found ugly.

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Please, Mr. chairman, but what I am saying with these common meetings, there is definitely a disadvantage, because you are taking all of us as if we are beauty queens to be paraded and then straight away the moment you are ugly, you are rest assured that you are at disadvantage. (Interjection)- So, Mr. Chairman, I want to propose -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Mr. Chairman, the question of saying that by having common meetings people will not be partisan, does not hold water, because as I am talking now in our constituencies, there are already people campaigning, there are even Government officials who are telling people in some meetings that do vote X because he belongs to a party.  Now, surely, when you have such a situation, how do you expect people of these other parties not to campaign when some people are already campaigning.  I would, therefore, suggest, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, it is in order for the hon. Member to make such serious allegations against the Government that in his own constituency, there are government agents going round saying vote so and so or do not vote so and without substantiating?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please substantiate?

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether the hon. Minister want me to bring the people who are attending these rallies but that is what is going on, you can go and make inquiries there, there are some Government officials who have been telling people very openly that do not vote X because he belongs to a party.  You can go get anybody from Gomba County will tell you especially, those places where meetings have been held, and if you want, give me somebody to go with, I will take him there and show him the people.  I do not have to mention the names, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Mention the officials, officials from Government?

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  Some cadres, and I will stand by it, Mr. Chairman, I can give you the names later, but some cadres have been doing it.  I will give you the names -(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, I do not know why people should hate facts.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order please.  Mr. Chairman, if it is going to bring controversy, I withdraw it, but I have already state it, I have withdrawn it.  Mr. Chairman, allow me to make another amendment in these - the table on page 44, in form B(R) which is in page 44, we have been told that in the results form, the results will be tallied and then the Presiding Officer will sign.  We have had a situation in this country, where results have been tempered with and have been changed.  In the name of democracy, I want to request that let as many forms as possible be made available to the agents of the candidates, let them fill those forms and let the Presiding Officer sign on each of these forms to confirm the results that have been printed on those forms otherwise, if you just leave only one form behind, chances are something may happen to that one form and if there are any queries, you will have no way of proving it but once you have this arrangement, nobody will be able to query, because after all what you want is to make sure that the whole thing is free and fair so that there is no room for anybody to complain that there was any cheating.  Having said all that, I want to conclude by requesting the Government that those of us who have a belief in multi-partyism are prepared to sit down with those people that believe in the Movement system.  If you can really convince us with your good reason, okay, we shall follow you.  If we also have our good reasons, do please listen to those good reasons, if there is a way, we can marry the two sides and come out with one thing that is good for nation building.  Let us do that, because you would rather have peace than disturbances.  I think all that is bound to disturb peace, development, should be avoided that is why -(Interruption)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  The information I want to give the hon. Member holding the Floor is that, the broad based government was meant to convince them to see the alternative.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSENGO KALULE:  I thank her for information, Mr. Chairman.  I was winding up by pointing out that all of us have a duty to this Nation.  There is nobody we are going to throw into the lake just because he does not believe in what we are saying.  I believe we should also be committed to the good of this nation.  I feel we should discuss all issues very honestly, let us leave no grain of doubt on any of these issues, and I think once we have done that, the future for this country will be very bright.  Thank you very much. 

DR. OTENG (Erute County, Lira):  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I would like to pass the message from my constituency, greetings to the Chairman and through you to the Members of the House and Members would like to inform the House that Erute County being in the centre or central, has been quiet, the security is good, trade is going on, farming is going on anybody who wants to buy millet, simsim, cotton and soya beans can avail themselves.  The road has now been improved to Lira, so semi-trailers can go there if you want business.

The second information is we wish to thank those people who have contributed morally, physically and including the message from the Chairman during the burial of our beloved hon. Alip Mikele Atepo which was well attended and well represented, and he gave us a very high morale booster in that way, because some people say that up country is out of the way.  I just want to inform you that up country is on your way with peace and security prevailing, thank you, Mr. Chairman.

About the Constituent Assembly Bill, I would like to state categorically that people in Erute County had time to discuss it.  By the people I mean, the representative of the people in Erute County, which consists of (a) the Executive RC III, (b) the Executive RC IV, (c) the RC V, Gombolola Chiefs, the county chief and myself.  I was not in the Chair and we discussed these on two occasions one week apart.  Just to give you a picture, Mr. Chairman, when we introduced the idea of discussing the Constituent Assembly Bill, there was a mixed feeling and people were not sure whether it was really genuine that we have to discuss this Bill or there were rather apprehensive of the Constituencies.  It took me time to settle them down that it is better that they discuss rather than reject it as a hearsay, so that they appointed a week afterwards and all these people came and discussed in a very lively and were in free mood and they sent several messages which I am going to explain here in a general form.  

The idea of a Constituent Assembly Bill was welcome with reservation if it is done genuinely, and they had that principle or the important issue which they want this House to appreciate during discussion and they are four, that if you are dealing with constitutional matters, the discussion must be seen to be not sectarian and balanced, because we are dealing with people’s issues not individuals’ issues, not party issues or such kind, out it must be seen not sectarian and balanced.  The second one, as some people have already pointed out, it must have a clear idea and even protection that transparency and credibility is reigning because some people hide behind the scene and they do not want to see anybody hiding behind the scene.  Who are these people with any vested interest?  The past history has taught us a lot of these, some people come as well wishers, and they turn out to be some other people.  They come up with very good ideas and they turn out to be very different during implementation.  So, our transparency and credibility are important.  The third one is avoidance of undue government influence of over Constitutional decision.  Avoiding of undue government influence of the Constitutional matters, and their contention was as it is alleged that 1967 Constitution was a pigeonhole, in other words, the Government already influenced it and the 1962 Constitution was also over influenced because those people who went to attend it, were selected by the Government but now this is their Constitution.  So, it must be with a minimum, if any government over due influence.  The last one is to reduce obscurity especially, obscurity of the minority in other words, minority views must also be considered.  Those are the four principles on which they base their discussion.  As many people have already moved Amendments and so on, I am going to elaborate more on the principles regarding these four points rather than any re-elaboration.  Now, the first one of these is that the rural population is now being seen to be represented by Clause (iv)(a) that is election of people representative in the constituencies that exist plus additional.  

I would like to allay some other people’s fears about population differential; basically all the country 38 or 44 districts are represented.  Now, I think not only thinking, the Commission has taken what we call weighting, not waiting sitting down, but given emphasis on points to be considered particularly but, because somebody is not advantaged enough.  This is what we call weighting, now the Commission weighted in such a way that if they put a rider that - if the population is at least, is 160,000 there is a rationality or a reasonability to split that one in favour of those over populated areas, this is weighting, as again it is so quoted Kalangala District which is 16,000 or 20,000 for that matter.  So, it has given this comparative advantage to over populated people to be fairly represented but not over represented because the opinion does not depend necessarily on the number there when you say yes, it is number but the thing is something which goes to make that opinion is a substance which you put in credibility.  So I think it is reasonable that the 160,000 limit or base is a reasonable base and that is what they base it on.  

Now, coming to the municipalities, they also agree with the people who have said that all gazetted municipalities should thus be represented to make it easy.  Now, more on the municipalities is that, municipalities containing businessmen, traders and industrialists, teachers and all these elites, and if you are representing municipalities, you are in sense representing all those informed people that is why Kampala is very advantaged.  They have brought all the women who are highly educated into Kampala.  So, they can have a choice of women really high educated but a place like Lira where the woman who has degree and rest of it and holding a very high position, they can also elect.  So you will not find such a woman.  Anyway, I know that is destruction.  So, if you are representing people in the municipalities, you are in a sense representing these entire sectoral group - not sectarian, secretarial group like youth and other, even teacher, traders, manufacturers and all these people.  So, they say, that there may not be in real need to represent specifically these trade unions because they are already represented there in one way or the other.  And in fact, there are leaders in their communities.  So, in sense, they have sort crossed off the representation of Youth, Women in he Municipalities and Trade Unions as such, but they agree on the representation of women per see as has been their privilege.  

Now, about legislators, they say this august House contains mainly highly experienced, trained, educated people and also this House contains all the parties and if I can say, DP is represented very heavily here by the Second Deputy Prime Minister plus - that is executive already.  UPC here is represented by a defacto, I do not know, but they are not in the executive wing of the Government, the Secretariat. UPC is not heavily represented here; CP you all know it, is heavily represented by one prominent person who controls Finance and the President; and UPM we cannot say much about that, because it is overwhelmingly represented here.  So, it means that the parties really per se are already represented in this House and in a very big way though, this is a better representation probably that could be expected and also if you can emphasis or balance it up by probably appointing not more than five Members from the Executive, rather than the popular because some of the executives are not represented here.  That is what they suggest would be done.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I wish to inform the Member holding the Floor of the House that, he is misleading the House because this House came here on a principle base, broad based government and personal merits not on a formal, political party organisation or even groups. (Applause)

MR. OTENG:  Thank you for the information in fact, he has emphasised what they have said that this House here -(Interjection)- you wait for my conclusion or their conclusion.  This House is really well represented; you cannot get any better representation.  They also say that, representation of NRA is welcome but it should also include other disciplined forces like the police and the prison.  

Now, nomination by the President, they limited it saying that he should not necessarily nominate the Chairman of the Assembly but can initiate the formation of the Chairman but not a direct nomination by the President.  So, in short what they are saying is that sub-section II Clause 4, need be amended.  In principle it is sort of takes a trend as what has been presented by hon. Butagira in general. They also say that money matters should be considered but for representation, there should be adequate representation because they say, what cost more insecurity or forming the base for security? As we all know that insecurity has cost us misfortunes, so there is no need to spare some more money to make sure that they have got a base law.  In short, they compare the making of the Constitution to making law for games and sports.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MR. ONTENG:  Yes Sir, I am winding up.  They compare it with making rules and laws for games and sports.  People who are playing games play it on a ground that is well prepared, the ground is Uganda.  the rules and regulations are the Constitution and if these are right, I think there will be an honest game and also the parties and whatever you may call them are players and they must play with regards to the rules already laid.  So, this is what Erute County in its wisdom would like to present to the House to consider in a balanced way, I am leaving out the details of other games and if hon. Members could think also in that way, we shall be fully guided and avoid - I am trying to emphasise, avoid what some people are saying.  I went to the bush because nobody listened to us.  So will I want everybody to participate in the Constitution discussion irrespective of his or her alignment and agree on the principle of democracy is a referee of this game.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday 18th March, 1993). 

