Tuesday, 13 March 2012  

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this sitting of the House. On a sad note, I would like to inform the honourable House of the demise of Professor Anthony Ginyera Pinchwa who died yesterday in India. He was a professor of political science and public administration. He was a Deputy Vice Chancellor of Makerere University. He died last night. Arrangements are being made to bring his body home and also details of the burial arrangements will be communicated to honourable members later. I ask the House to stand and observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have deemed it appropriate to use this opportunity in communication from the chair to try and make a statement on what has been the subject of the press in the last two weeks. I have been prompted by fairly negative statements that have been made by the honourable members of the House touching on the credibility of the Speaker as presiding officer and several other matters that were contained in those statements, which I would like to recast members’ attention to. 

I can almost guess what the newspaper headline will be in the Monitor - “Speaker apologises. Speaker upset. Speaker annoyed by Members”. That is the type of headline I expect to come out from the Monitor tomorrow, but that is ok. I will take them in my stride as I have always done.

Honourable members, we are bound by the rules of this House, and I am one of the executors of these rules and I do so with extreme diligence. I am so proud of that. I have been accused of being a sycophant. Yes, a sycophant I am to the Rules of Procedure of this House! To that, I plead guilty. I am, I admit, a sycophant to the rules of this House.

When I ran for the office of the Deputy Speaker, among the things I stated is, “Jacob Oulanyah is a believer in a parliamentary system of representative democracy and is an ardent believer in procedural prowess and orderly conduct of business. He is a persistent and tenacious seeker of high standards of Parliamentary service delivery and capacity building for effective performance of the representative and oversight roles of Parliament.” I have stood by that every single minute. 

In my acceptance speech, I outlined five areas where if members could agree to adopt would have helped us in the execution of our businesses. I talked about facing facts. I said, “We should agree from the outset that we lay facts on the table and use them as a reference point when expressing sometimes divergent opinions”.

The second issue I stated was reason as a guiding principle – “We should agree that we will endeavour to use reason and sound logic in tabling our positions. This will enable us to derive the correct interpretation from agreed facts.” 

Thirdly, I implored the House to use tolerance and mutual respect - “We should agree that no view will be suppressed. All views will be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason. We must pledge to overrule intolerance”. I stated this. 

I asked for harmony - “We should agree that monumental as the task before us is and will always be, it is still important that we adopt a collegial approach and debate in such a manner that would bring our collective wisdom to bear on the problems presented before us. This spirit of harmony should and will keep us conscious that people did not give the task to any individual among us but rather to the august House as a whole. Therefore, we have a collective responsibility to work together harmoniously.” 

Finally I mentioned national interest above self and party – “In one’s lifetime, one can change political affiliation but it is unusual and indeed unlikely that one would change nationality or citizenship. We therefore must resolve from the outset that our supreme guiding star, unchanging like the true north of a magnet, would be the enduring interest of the people of Uganda. 

As individuals, we have interests and even as members of political parties we are party to partisan positions. These interests we should find occasion to declare boldly before this House and its committees and when decision time comes, we must measure them alongside the national interest. More often than not, we will find that the national interest rings true to all of us without exception. We will face moments when we will have to abandon strongly held partisan positions when the bright light of national interest is shown.” 

I concluded, “In short, our work will enable us to learn more about and from each other. Prejudices will be abandoned as we discover how much we all care about our country and our people. Convictions will be entrenched as we find new reasons to work together. None of us will claim not to have learnt something new in the course of our work. I can say, without any fear of contradiction whatsoever, that whether you agree with an opinion of an individual member or not, you find that you are all women and men of conviction determined to make a difference in the lives of the people you represent. 

You will work long hours at night, sometimes even over weekends. You will listen to sometimes very offensive view points. You will even endure threats of lawsuits and legal actions in courts of law or other veiled threats.” I stated this, so I am not surprised that statements of this nature are coming at this time. 

I read, and I was greatly dismayed by what I read in the Monitor of 9 March 2012. Why was I dismayed? I was dismayed and disappointed because we all know the procedures of this House and we know exactly what to do should a situation arise that requires a Speaker’s decision to be challenged. I was dismayed because the honourable members chose to go and explore their options in the press when the options are within the Rules of Procedure in this House.

I am disappointed because the honourable members did not believe that the Speaker who was sitting here was competent to understand the rules. For the information of the members, I made a living out of teaching parliamentary procedure and out of drafting over 19 rules of procedure for different Members of Parliament in different countries. I am therefore fairly knowledgeable in this subject. (Applause)

I dare any person to fault me on the Rules of Procedure of this august House or any assembly which you can think of. Why do I say so? The time I took the decision, I had borne in mind the provisions of rule 21 of our Rules of Procedure. What does it say? Rule 21 became a subject of publication in the newspapers as if members were seeing it for the first time. I had seen it many times and I had practised it in this House many times. Rule 21(1), “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote”. 

Rule 21(3), which was published in the newspapers: “At any time when a vote is to be taken the Speaker shall ascertain whether the Members present in the House form a quorum for the vote to be taken, and if he or she finds that the number is less, the Speaker shall suspend the proceedings of the House for an interval of 15 minutes and the bell shall be rung”. This situation did not arise. 

I sat here with all of you. Many of you saw me, before I called the vote, physically counting the members. I counted everybody who was present. I stopped at the figure of 132. I went that far because I discovered there were four ex-officio Members of Parliament - hon. Mutende, who was sitting where hon. Sara is sitting, hon. Baba, hon. Richard Nduhuura was sitting where he is now and the hon. Ruhakana Rugunda was sitting right behind me. I counted! I went to the figure of 132 because I saw there were four ex-officio members in the House. There was quorum in the House at the time I called the vote. (Applause) 

When I called the vote, the hon. Jack Sabiiti left, for whatever reason, reducing the number by one. He left; he did not vote. Let us be clear. Another honourable member, whom I do not recall very well, left from that corner and went out, reducing my quorum by two. I was still satisfied that I had quorum, and indeed I had quorum because only two people left when I called the vote. 

When I was preparing to put the question for vote, the hon. Seninde, not the Speaker, asked for members to vote by show of hands. I put the question. Why did I put the question? I put the question because it is nowhere in the rules that you can vote by show of hands. That is why I put the question to it, so that you could agree to it. The rules that are known to this House by our Rules of Procedure are clear; you vote by voice, you vote by division, and division can be by members standing or by the Speaker calling, and you vote by tally. There is no vote by show of hands. However, because the matter was moved, that is why I put the question, - no other reason – so that the House could agree on it because it was a procedure ordinarily not within the rules. 

Members agreed and we started counting row by row; the cameras can bare me out. Over four Members of Parliament did not vote for “aye”, for “no” neither did they abstain. What was the Speaker supposed to do? They were sitting right here, and if they are honest they would stand and confess before this House. If the House is full of quorum and four members opted not to vote, how could I have included them in the vote? 

It was after the vote was counted and the tallying was going on from this desk that I saw the honourable Leader of the Opposition bending down in front of me to look at what these people were tallying. He then whispered to the Opposition Whip, “There is no quorum” based on the tally he had seen on the desk of the clerks. He did not raise it on any microphone or draw it to the attention of the Speaker formally. 

As far as the Speaker was concerned, I had more than 125 voting Members of Parliament sitting in this House. The tally was brought, which the hon. Nandala-Mafabi bent over and saw, and it did not add. What did I do and what do the rules say? Look at Rule 79(1): “Questions to be decided by majority. (1) Except as otherwise prescribed by the Constitution or any law consistent with the Constitution, all questions proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting.”  What do you do to members who are present and not voting? The law is silent. 

When the law is silent, what do you do? You go to rule 7. What does it say? “In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided in these Rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practices of the House, the Constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth Parliaments in so far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.”

Honourable members – (Interjections) – Let me finish; I am communicating. When the Speaker makes a ruling - Why  am I saying this? It is because there was a gap in the law. They said that the decision will be taken by members present and voting. I was faced with situation where members were present and not voting. That is not taken care of in the rules. So, I had to interpret. 

If the Speaker makes a ruling, what do you do? You go to rule 73 - (Interjections) - I am communicating, honourable member. Rule 73: “Decision of the Speaker or Chairperson. The Speaker or the Chairperson of a Committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or Committee and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

Honourable members, that is the situation the Speaker was faced with. The ruling the Speaker made was based on a precedent of this House. When a similar situation arose in the Seventh Parliament, the Speaker who was present then, when a vote was taken and there was no quorum after the vote was taken and the results announced, the Speaker said the motion is lost. That is what I was bound by and that is what I followed. I sought advice from what my experience of parliamentary practice and procedure was and that is what I ruled. 

If my ruling was defective, erroneous, the recourse is under rule 73. But honourable members, to go to the public media and you call your Speaker a symbol of disgrace! Honourable Members, Parliamentary practice and procedure is premised on courtesy and mutual respect; mutual respect and courtesy. 

I used to be a communist. I read the communist manifesto and lots of other publications. The thing which stuck in my mind was what the communists said about children. They said a child is born into this world like a blank paper, clean. It is society that writes on it. So, the first people to write on the page of a child are the parents and then the teachers and then society and then the child picks up a character. I am not dismayed by the reckless statements made by some honourable members because I know I am comforted that when you see people who conduct themselves this way, you do not have to blame them. (Applause) You really do not have to blame them because the first authors on the paper could have made a mistake. 

Honourable members, that is what I said and those are the circumstances under which I made that ruling. The procedure is clear on how you can review that ruling of the Speaker if it is erroneous. Next item. 

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, you are right. I have been mentioned and even the Constitution is clear on fair hearing. 

Mr Speaker, you have talked about the issue. In your mind – (Interjections) - Engineer, please – I believe you came when you are upset and in that process you are talking from a point of anger. It would have been better to have caused a meeting or whatever and asked the members. I want to give you some information. You have read the Constitution and how it deals –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not read the Constitution 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, you read the rules. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the rules say the quorum of Parliament shall be one third of Members of Parliament entitled to vote. That is rule 21(1). You have mentioned it, and you know that in order to have a quorum you needed one-third. If you counted - I never saw you counting because I sit near you but the person I saw counting was our clerk when he was ordered to count the votes. In fairness, you are our boss but the way you are talking, you are assuming that when we see something wrong, nobody should mention it. I was here, I saw the numbers and I saw the totals and I said we do not have a quorum - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if that was true, you would have said, “Oh, I have heard something, maybe let me suspend the House.”  - (Interjections) - If you had suspended  –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on a procedural point, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you had done that, you would be ascertaining the number. 

I am happy I was in this Parliament which you mentioned, the Seventh Parliament, when hon. Kiwanda said, “Let the question be put” and the question was put. There was a motion to amend the already existing one, which was brought by hon. Mukula, that we should go for a referendum. The existing motion was saying no, we do not need to go for a referendum; we are already in multi-party politics and we can use another method. What was lost was what hon. Mukula had brought. 

In this case, on the Floor we had the Minister of Defence who had become the chairperson of a sub-committee. He had also brought more or less a motion saying, “From what we have seen, this is the issue.” In effect, we had two motions on the Floor, one of the sub-committee of Cabinet and the one of the PAC report. 

Mr Speaker, if we have seen something and mentioned it to you, I think as a leader you should not exhibit anger; you should exhibit patience. You should be fair. The moment you do like this, everybody will say our Speaker is not the best. 

I want to call on you – national interest first. In this case, when there was no quorum, you would have said “no decision taken” because the law is very clear. Having said that, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am coming to that. Mr Speaker, you talked for long because in that communication –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, really. I think you have finished.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you cannot be a judge in your own case. That is why the moment you bring it - this was a personal explanation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please sit down.  

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a procedural matter. With all due respect, I would seek procedural guidance from you. 

Mr Speaker, of course this is one of the trying situations we are in as a national Parliament. We must see how to get through it decently without making a bad situation get worse, especially when the whole country is watching. So I will try to be very cautious in my procedural request.

The procedure I am raising relates to rule 21 and rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure on which I would kindly seek your indulgence and interpretation. Rule 21 says, “Quorum of Parliament. The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all the Members of Parliament entitled to vote”. Rule 73, which you have just elaborated, states how the decision of the Speaker or a chairperson can be challenged. The purpose of rule 73 - the mischief it was trying to cure - was to avoid the kind of situation we are seemingly entering into, that once the Speaker has ruled, you bring a substantive motion and then it is handled at that level. 

My concern and that of many Ugandans is, at law, on that day we voted on the Mutebile issue, my interpretation as a lawyer is that Parliament was not fully constituted to make that decision. 

Under Rule 21, Parliament did not have the quorum to make any decision on that subject matter. So actually, no decision was made because we did not have the quorum. It is like going to a court of appeal and they tell you that you need five judges. The law allows you can proceed in certain circumstances when there are three judges, but you cannot go to court of appeal and say you are fully before court when there is no quorum. 

So, the procedural guidance I am seeking from you, in national interest and without challenging the ruling you made on that day which you have explained now, that at point of law, and now that you are in the chair, don’t you think that Ugandans out there want to know, within our rules, what Parliament has decided on the Governor Bank of Uganda. Right now, it is technicalities saving Mutebile - no quorum, Speaker’s ruling is final and so forth. Ugandans out there want to know what Parliament has decided on the Governor Bank of Uganda when there is quorum. When there is no quorum, no decision is actually made and I am not going to be party to illegalities. 

Finally, with all due respect, would you consider it prudent, Mr Speaker, on your own volition, to revise your own ruling, which we do not want to go through the process of challenging again, and allow these Members of Parliament representing Ugandans to decide on the fate of the Governor Bank of Uganda when there is quorum? Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was very fairly clear and I spoke in the English language on what happened. I was here. Rule 21(3) requires me to ascertain the quorum and I did. Well, that is your opinion. I personally did. When I put the question, people did not vote; do you want me to mention names? Hon. Baka, how did you vote?

MR BAKA: Mr Speaker, I know our Rules of Procedure very well. There is nowhere in the Rules of Procedure were I am required to vote, so I never voted. I never voted “Yes”, I never voted “Nay” and I did not abstain and I was here. I am protected under our Rules of Procedure. It is not only me, we were quite many here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the issue! You see, I am a transparent person. That is the situation I was faced with. Hon. Baka was here – (Interjections) – He was here; you can bring the records on camera to prove that. Now, what happens to the final tally? Really, be fair to me. 

To be fair to me, I call a vote and there is quorum and during the voting, only a few members vote and others do not vote; what do I do? That is what I am saying. I was faced with a situation that is not captured by the Rules of Procedure – (Interjections) – Please hold on. 

You see, what we are required to do is to be honest with ourselves and to be fair to victims of circumstances. Those were the circumstances I was faced with. He has just confessed. I had quorum. There were more people. The quorum hon. Mafabi is saying he raised, that is not how you raise the issue of quorum. You do not raise it after a vote is cast; you raise quorum before a vote is taken. Simple procedure! 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we thank you for your communication. In my history in this Parliament, it is the first time we are seeing members haggling with the Speaker, discussing the Speaker. I think it is indecent. I want to call upon you to ask your office to suspend this debate and then you discuss it later because the way it is moving, it is becoming ugly and indecent. This is not how we should be seen as a national Parliament. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MR DOMBO EMMANUEL (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The future Hansard readers will not find out how this matter has been concluded, so this matter must be concluded now. 

Mr Speaker, first of all, I have benefited from the technology installed in Parliament. I have been following debate from my office. In your communication, you did raise one very serious issue when you said that if those members were honest they would state it on the Floor of this House. Mr Speaker, I want to state on the Floor of this House that I was one of the Members of Parliament who were in this House and I neither voted “aye” nor “nay” nor abstained. I did this because I believed that at that time of the voting, there was omnibus voting on the issues and I felt the issues should have been separated. So I chose that way. 

On determination of quorum, Mr Speaker, you have guided. At what time do we determine quorum? According to the Rules of Procedure, quorum is determined when the question is going to be put. That was done and it was ascertained that there was quorum. What we need to do - We are in the process of improving our Rules of Procedure, so let us require the chairperson of the rules committee to make a provision for the issues that have not been provided for. 

Mr Speaker, yours was a communication and the procedure for challenging the Speaker’s decision is provided within the Rules of Procedure. I think it would just be prudent for us to go to the next item and the issues missing could be provided for in the next Rules of Procedure. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have cleared this issue. In my heart, I know what I did in this Parliament. I know the situation I was faced with, that we had full quorum of Members of Parliament and some did not vote. The vote tally that comes to my table is showing lack of quorum when there is quorum in the actual House; that was the dilemma I was faced with. If it is not a legitimate dilemma then I want the ingenious one of you to come and show me what I should have done. 

The rules guide on how the vote should be determined, but members are present and they have not voted; there is no provision in the rules taking care of that situation. That is why I sought in my memory that should a situation of this nature arise, how was it handled in the past, where you took a vote and there was lack of quorum; the motion collapses. 

The question I put was clear. I put the question and even first guided, and my guidance is now being put to ridicule. I guided that what we were going to deal with, the vote we were going to take, was on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. It was recommendation No. 4. None of us should go out saying we have removed the Governor because we have no such authority. What we are going to do is to make the recommendations to the appointing authorities to do the needful. That is what I said. Now that guidance I gave is being ridiculed by members of this House in the press. 

That was the situation I was faced with. You take a vote and the results of the tally show the people who voted do not make quorum when there is actual quorum in the House; my memory tells me in that kind of situation, the motion is lost and that is what I announced. So, if I did this erroneously, you follow the procedure of changing this. In my heart, I know I did what was prudent of a presiding officer. None of you can fault me on the way I managed that debate; why would I mess it at the end? I had been patient; we took all that time to do that. I think let us close this matter. Appropriate steps will be taken at appropriate times. 

2.58
MR MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise on a matter of public importance. On Saturday 10th of this month, I made a surprise visit to Soroti Referral Hospital and what I observed in the hospital was a matter of shock and awe. My visit was to Soroti Referral Hospital, which has got a catchment area of cases referred to of over two million Ugandans. Against that, when I got to the hospital, I found patients - mothers who are pregnant and some who had delivered - lying on the floor of the hospital. One of the things –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, in my right as a Member of Parliament of Soroti Municipality, I have a duty to represent the interests of my people and the lives of Ugandans. It is my duty as a Ugandan and Member of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, that same day, we realised that there had been no running water in the hospital for over seven days. Some of the mothers who had delivered and had gone through caesarean sections had not bathed for close to a week. This is a very serious matter because even the toilets were blocked and it was appalling for patients, especially those who had gone through caesarean cases and could not reach a pit latrine. 

Soroti Referral Hospital, particularly the maternity, has an average of referral cases from mothers who deliver premature babies of three to five babies per day. I also want to put it on record that the entire hospital does not have an incubator. 

It is also important for the House to note, as I speak through you, Mr Speaker, that the hospital had spent two days without adequate power because the generator did not have fuel. In fact that same night, there was no power. In the theatre where you have women who are referred for caesarean cases, without oxygen concentrators the lives of these women are easily put to risk. I had a case of a mother who was delivering when power went off and the midwife could not manage a safe delivery. I visited this mother in hospital and she had lost her baby. 

The drainage and infrastructure is wanting in the hospital. In the haematology department, blood is inadequate. Soroti Referral Hospital has a catchment area, as I raised earlier, of close to two million people. Patients are referred from Katakwi, Amuria, Kapelebyong, Kaberamaido, Ngora, Serere and many other areas. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the blood supply is inadequate. 

It is even more interesting and more intriguing that the manpower in the hospital is inadequate. Surgical equipment in the theatre is not enough. I now raise a very important issue; Soroti Referral Hospital supports a number of districts – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mukula, would you like to make it brief? 

MR MUKULA: Yes, Sir. The question I would like to bring before you and honourable colleagues is that this matter is appalling. The maternal and infant mortality rate is high. I call upon Government, the Minister of Health and the Prime Minister to make an adequate and effective response to the demands of the people of Soroti and to ensure that the very appalling state of Soroti Referral Hospital and the surrounding areas is addressed as soon as possible. I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we are still handling this issue. Yes, hon. Emmanuel Dombo.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Capt Mike Mukula, the former Minister of State for Health – (Laughter) - for raising some of these issues.

When you look at health – I am going to call on my party chief whip and I am going to state this at the risk of being misunderstood. One of the things I have observed is that – this should not be said – since last Parliament, I have been called to party meetings to discuss individuals, something that at times has pained me a lot. I am saying this because whereas there are many burning pertinent national issues, every time I have been to a party caucus, we have discussed individuals. This is – (Interruptions)

MR SEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter that hon. Capt Mike Mukula, although when raised by him becomes a very serious matter, is something to which you have allowed three contributions. However, the first contribution from hon. Emmanuel Dombo is actually about meetings that do not concern this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order?

MR SEMUJJU: Is it therefore in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to turn this serious institution into a party caucus to discuss personal issues and not the matter that has been raised?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter that has been raised is a constituency based issue with a national context. I find it raising no issue of concern in terms of order.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to continue to state that we have the benefit of having a back bench with former ministers including a former Vice-President – (Laughter) – I experience a lot of pain at individual level because on many occasions former ministers fail to deliberate to cause change while at the front bench, but when they come to the back bench we would love to benefit from the issues that they take on while they were still at the front bench. I thank you so much.

3.10
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I also would like to thank hon. Capt. Mike Mukula for raising this important issue. Actually, Soroti Referral Hospital is where I was born. During the very good old days, you would never imagine that a mother would lie on the floor of the hospital ward while waiting to deliver or after delivery.

I would like to also submit that Soroti Referral Hospital is just a tip of the iceberg. This situation is everywhere in the country. Whether you go to Itojo, Kiryandongo, Kabale hospitals, or even in Kanungu where the Rt hon. Prime Minister comes from, you will find this happening. My submission, therefore, is that this Government has stagnated in as far as health service delivery is concerned. I am happy that this matter has been raised by a whole vice chairman of NRM, eastern region. That probably will send a strong message to our friends in the NRM that as we articulate issues, we should focus on the suffering of the voters and not ourselves because we are able to fly out of this country to seek treatment.

Hon. Capt Mike Mukula forgot to talk about the lack of medicine in the hospitals and with nobody seemingly doing nothing to mitigate this situation. In the circumstances, I would like to implore Government; rather than letting us come here to lament, take action. Why aren’t you taking action, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

Actually, Mr Speaker, allow me propose that Government presents a comprehensive statement to the House to explain some of these issues. I can see H. E the Vice President is feeling uncomfortable, but these are real issues that affect us. So, as Parliament, we should demand that the front bench comes up with a clear explanation why our mothers still lie on the floor while delivering or after delivering. Why – (Interruption) I will take it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from hon. Bitekyerezo?

3.13
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. Mine is based on scarcity of drugs for TB in Southern Western Uganda hospitals. 

I was in Mbarara just two days ago but what I found there is a bit alarming in terms of the health of TB patients. Mbarara Hospital has not had TB drugs for the last two months yet we have about 400 patients on TB drugs. I bothered to know about other hospitals and got to realise that Kabale Hospital as I talk does not have a single TB drug. The same information was given in respect of Fort Portal Hospital.

I would like to inform the House that TB is an infectious disease that can attack anybody whether you are in a necktie or not. It is a disease that is so common with patients that are infected with HIV/AIDS, and you know that we, by record, have a number of patients with HIV/AIDS. When patients do not take these drugs on time, they suffer from prolonged illnesses and disability. That is one. Two, such patients transmit to other patients this TB, which may be resistant. Three, there are many possibilities of death. 

What is very important to note, Mr Speaker, is that when you develop drug resistance tuberculosis, you transmit drug resistant tuberculosis. I have been consulting with Ministry of Health officials. In Uganda right now we have 285 patients who have MDR-TB and have been sent home to die because nobody has that drug. I have a conviction that this should be brought on the Floor so that the Minister of Health tells us exactly what has gone wrong. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, wind up.

DR BITEKYEREZO: We know there is low funding. I have found out that the budget of Ministry of Health in terms of TB treatment comes from donor money. I had raised a similar problem in our committee meeting. I said in an event where the donors refuse to give us money, is Uganda ready to contain TB and HIV/AIDS and other diseases in this country? 

I want the Minister of Health to explain to us why TB patients have been left with no drugs for all this time. Secondly, what plans does the ministry have to ensure that this does not happen again? Thirdly, what has been done to these 285 patients with multi-drug resistant tuberculosis in this country? Fourthly, is the ministry prepared to alter its budget allocation to cater for its own people instead of relying on donations? Lastly, the ministry should tell us how they are procuring these TB drugs. I beg to submit.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhuura ): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, hon. Mukula, the former Minister of State for Health in charge of General Duties, who handed to me that very office in the year 2006. 

Hon. Mukula tried to reach me this morning but I was attending a meeting. I did find two missed calls from him and a message, which was saying that I should call him. I called him twice but he did not pick up. All the same, I am happy that he has raised these issues because we get informed of what is happening through colleagues. (Interjection) A colleague here is wondering why I do not know. I cannot know what is happening at every point at every minute. So, it is good that you bring up these matters. 

In the case of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, previously, and I think this is what these challenges were attributed to, we had a director who mismanaged the hospital. Thank God in 2010 I visited the hospital and we had a meeting with various stakeholders and we took a decision to remove that director. We replaced him with a director whom I think is doing a good job so far. With the development budget that we sent to the hospital, he has been able to complete most of the structures, for example the private wing of the hospital and accommodation facilities. 

We are convinced that the new director of the hospital is doing a very good job and we need to support him. As a matter of fact, we have increased the budget of the hospital. (Interjection) I hear my colleague talking about non availability of drugs. I can assure you that I even called the hospital before I came here. I was assured the situation is not as bad as is being portrayed here. (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from you, Mr Minister, is: are you aware of what is happening in Mbale with regard to the cholera cases? 

The situation in Mbale is pathetic. Cholera has been on the increase, and one of the reasons is that there was no water in Mbale Hospital for two weeks. The sewerage pipes that were put there by the Europeans many years ago have broken down and faeces go to River Nabuyonga where people use this water. Are you aware about this situation, which is very pathetic, in Mbale?

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the situation in Mbale. We – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of guidance from the honourable member for Masindi.
 
MRS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. After hon. Mukula’s concerns, we had contributions and most members intimated that throughout the whole country, hospitals are in dire need and are in a sorry state, and that all of them needed to be addressed.  I thought the honourable minister would inform this House that he is going to come up with a comprehensive statement on how the government intends to address this situation throughout the whole country. (Applause)

I sympathised with hon. Mukula but there are hospitals like Kiryandongo which have been doing without water for almost eight years, and we have been raising these issues here. There are hospitals like Hoima and Masindi hospitals.  Mr Speaker, I beg that the honourable minister comes up with a comprehensive statement on how they intend to handle this situation throughout the whole country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I ask you to take that guidance so that you are more comprehensive in the way you approach the issue. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, that was going to be my concluding statement. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude with that so that we move forward. 

DR NDUHUURA: I thought I should respond to the concerns raised by hon. Wamai –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just conclude with that so that we can move forward. 

DR NDUHUURA: Yes, but the one raised by hon. Wamai is very urgent because it is cholera. We have set up an isolation camp at one of the Health Centre IVs. As a matter of fact, I am travelling to the region on Thursday. I will be in Mbale the whole of Thursday and in Kumi the whole of Friday. One of the issues I am going to look at is Mbale Regional Referral Hospital and the isolation camp.

Mr Speaker, a few months back, my colleague, hon. Epetait, reminded this House that he had made a special request to the Speaker to set aside a day when matters of health would be debated in this House. At the Ministry of Health, we are ready to inform you about our plans, about where we are in terms of alleviating the problems that afflict our people in as far as their health is concerned. I thank you.

3.24
MR OKUPA Elijah (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of public importance. I have two issues; one is related to the health department and I have written to the PS Ministry of Health –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have resolved the issue of health. Please move to the next issue. He has made an undertaking on it. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence just for one minute. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move to the next issue. He is not going to stand up and respond to the issue of health again. 

MR OKUPA: I stand here on an issue of public importance. On the 21st of February, one of the schools in my constituency called Ogelak Primary School in Bugondo Sub-county had the roof of a block of eight classrooms blown off by the wind and thrown about 100 metres away from the school. Up to today, we have not got any response from the district to alleviate the situation. Much as the pupils are at school, they are studying under trees and yet the school has 687 pupils. 

So, I have come to appeal to the government, the office of the Minister of Education, the office of the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, the Minister of Local Government and also the Prime Minister’s Office to come to the rescue of this school; one, in the short term by providing tents to enable these pupils to continue studying in the meantime. Two, provide scholastic materials because the hailstorm that blew the school happened at night and all the scholastic materials got destroyed. In the long term, provide financing for the reconstruction of the school. 

Finally, - (Interjection) - I cannot be guided on the Kasilo issues where I represent - I would like to ask the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, and the hon. Minister of State for Health to help me with one district health officer who has taken our ambulance of Apapai Health Centre IV for the last seven months. Women and children have died and I have written to the PS on this matter but I have received no response. So, can you take action on this district health officer?  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, disaster struck a school in Kasilo; we need clear statements on this and then move forward. These matters are for information and not debateable. 

3.28
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Dr Stephen Mallinga):  Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. The stage where this problem is has passed disaster and is now a responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Local Government. I deal with dire situations where there is need for food and treatment at that point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about tents? 

DR MALLINGA: He has never been to my place to ask for tents. I would have given them to him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Education, say something.  

3.29
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): I appreciate that the hon. Okupa consulted me over that school and the disaster that struck it. I also appreciate the leadership of the school because they reported the matter to Serere District and Serere District relayed the matter to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

This Parliament knows that in the last financial year, Shs 2 billion was allocated to the Ministry of Education and Sports to handle emergencies like that of hon. Okupa and others like collapsing toilets, floods and too much drought in schools etcetera. What I can report to the House is that so far, the ministry has spent all that money which was allocated in the last financial year. 

Mr Speaker, because it is a matter of emergency, what we are doing is to work closely with the local government and now we are also going to work with hon. Mallinga to find alternative emergency measures that we can put in place so that learning can continue. I thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. 

3.30
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. Just yesterday, we, the backbench commissioners, were having a meeting with the Speaker of Parliament and we were stormed by students from Makerere University. I am sure some of you saw a huge crowd of students from Makerere who were at the gates of Parliament. The Speaker did allow that she could meet a few of their leaders. So, we had the privilege of listening to the students as they brought their concerns to the Speaker of Parliament. I want to raise this matter as that of public concern and request that the minister gives us information on what is going on. 

Mr Speaker, we have also been watching television and reading in the newspapers about the strike in Makerere. We have been watching the confrontation between the Police and the students of Makerere University and as we speak right now, there is that fracas at the great Makerere University. As we interacted with the students they presented a number of concerns, both policy and administrative issues, but the major ones which were presented as having caused the current standoff were that: 

One, students have been receiving special faculty allowances in their various faculties but the administration of the university has struck off this allowance and it is arguing that this money will be used for the general administration and improvement of the university. They are removing it without adequate explanation to the students. 

Secondly, the students also pay Shs 100,000 for internship every semester. For a course of three years, - most of the courses are three years - they pay Shs 600,000 with the understanding that when the students are sent on internship, this money will be given to them to enable them go through. However, they informed us that the university only gives them half of that money and it is not explained where the other half goes. 

It is like at the time of internship, the administration knows parents and students might be hard up so, they request them to deposit Shs 100,000 every semester so that when time for internship comes, which is usually in the second year, the university gets the money and gives it to you. So they deposit the money with the university and at the time of the payment, the university gives them just half. So, that is one of the concerns that the administration could not adequately explain to the students. 

The other concern, which sparked off the strike, was the poor sanitation. The students say the toilet facilities at the university are inadequate. They actually advised us that if we are to visit the university as Members of Parliament, we should go after having utilised our own facilities. Do not expect to use the sanitation facilities at the university because they are appalling and almost not there. 

The other issue was the hospital. Like we are raising the issue of the condition of our hospitals, they raised the issue saying that their hospital is even worse than the average hospitals in Uganda with no drugs and no supplies and yet students pay money to get services from the hospital.

They raised other issues, which I will not go into but, among others, that lecturers sometimes lose the marks of students and then students are penalised with re-takes, and so forth. There were very many policy and administrative issues, which they raised.

The reason why we stood here is to ask the responsible minister why, for instance, she waits for the situation to degenerate into that kind of state before she intervenes, and two, whether she is aware that this strike is going on. Thirdly, what she has been able to do to bring calmness and restore sanity at the university?

As members of this House, when we met the students we did call for calmness. We promised them that this matter will be raised on the Floor of Parliament and that a solution should be found so that the strike can be suspended and normal life returns to the university, so that our students can continue with their studies. So I want to ask the Minister of Education to explain to us what she has been able to do to contain the situation at Makerere University. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have the honour and privilege to address the Parliament of Uganda for the first time since my election. Before I go further, allow me to congratulate all members upon their election to the Ninth Parliament. On the same note, Mr Speaker, I would like to congratulate you for your election to the Office of the Speaker and congratulate this Parliament for the work so far done in this Ninth Parliament. It is a commendable job. Actually, it fuelled my desire to join this august House.

For the record, I want to appreciate that I am not the first person to serve as a Member of Parliament of Jinja Municipality East Constituency. On that note, I would like to appreciate my predecessors for the contribution they have made, and most especially my brother, hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta, for the job he has done both in the House and in the constituency. As you may have heard, my brother decided to quit politics at a time when this country needs him most. I and the people of Jinja Municipality wish him the very best in his retirement.

I come to Parliament at a time when this country is faced with a number of political, economic and social problems ranging from high cost of living, the pathetic health conditions in this country-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, even if you are making a maiden speech, the rules require that you be relevant to the subject.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The preamble to my speech is that actually I come at a time when the entire country is looking at Parliament to provide solutions to these problems, like when you talk about the pathetic situation in this country. When you look at child and maternal health in Jinja Municipality, its constituents and the country at large it is very pathetic.

Today we are aware that blood is given free but there is no decentralisation of blood services in the entire country. Actually, when you go to Nalufenya in Jinja, we lose over 15 children per day because of malaria. The people of this country are looking to Parliament for some of these solutions. 

The public is also looking at this Parliament to solve the problem of corruption. Whereas there are government efforts to fight poverty, some government efforts contradict these same efforts. Where I come from, whereas Government abolished the tax on road licence, it did not abolish the taxes on the boats. At the same time-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, come to Makerere now.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I am coming to Makerere where there is a very big problem. Hon. Baryomunsi has mentioned a very pertinent question concerning this incompetence, which you have seen in Makerere, which causes academic coursework of students to get lost. This is the same thing which goes through all the departments of government.

At this moment we are looking at education, where parents are sacrificing all they have to pay tuition for their children. For a child to miss lectures because there is a strike yet he is not a partner in the management of the university is very deplorable. I call upon the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business and the relevant minister to take appropriate action to save the situation there. Whenever it happens, the Police respond by brutalising demonstrators. They do not diagnose what the problem is but they deal with the symptoms, which are the people on the streets.

On that note, I would like to thank you for this chance to address this Parliament. I pledge commitment and discipline to this House so that we build this country as a team. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are very welcome, honourable member. This is a family and that is why when you see some family members misbehave, the head of the family gets a bit upset.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Alupo Jessica): Mr Speaker, it is very gratifying to note that the members of this House are concerned that learning should be ongoing in our education institutions including Makerere University. That is equally the concern of government.

In light of the concerns that have been raised about Makerere University, the ministry has been aware that there were some problems that the students of Makerere University were confronted with. We have been working very closely with the management and the administration of Makerere University together with the student leadership to try and resolve these matters logically. One of the matters has been raised very clearly by hon. Baryomunsi, and that is the issue of internship fees. Makerere University has been charging internship fees of about Shs 600,000 per student. This money has been paid by students as they pay their internship. 

The information I have is that for a period of three years, a student in Makerere University has been paying Shs 600,000 in instalments for internship. The issue came up because the University Council changed the policy, and this change caused uproar among the students’ body. The change in the policy was such that the Council now passed that instead of the students paying the Shs 600,000 together with their tuition every semester, they would now pay only Shs 200,000 direct to the administration. The students were then asked to keep the Shs 400,000 until the end of the course when their parents would facilitate them to go and do internship.

Just like the Members of Parliament have a question, when I got this information my question in the ministry was also, what does this Shs 200,000 do which is allocated to the administration in Makerere University? So, I will not be able to respond on that Shs 200,000 here but I would choose that when my technical people bring up a comprehensive report, which I have asked them to do, I should then be able to articulate exactly what the Shs 200,000 does. This is because it is one of the reasons the students have been striking.

Secondly, the other issue that caused a strike in Makerere University is that of special faculty allowances. This is the money given to students, for instance, for buying gumboots, overcoats, and dissecting kits in order to facilitate their practical lessons. The information I have is that the University Council also chose to change the policy – instead of directly giving the students this money, it is now used by the university administration to buy this equipment itself. The reason they gave when I asked is that they realised the students were not using this money in the right manner. For example, they would not buy the requirements for their practical lessons – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for accepting to give me this guidance. When you talk about faculty allowance, I know the faculty or department which gets the largest amount of faculty allowance is the Department of Social Work and Social Administration. And during my time there, it used to get Shs 6,000 while other faculties were getting probably Shs 200. It used to be used for fieldwork because the students were expected to go for an extra term. Now, if you are telling us that the University Council has changed the policy, and yet for issues that involve procurement of goods, they are able to take over that; and one can seemingly accept that explanation. What about in terms of those who are supposed to have that money in their pockets and are attached to an agency somewhere out for three months? How are they expected to go if that allowance is being withdrawn and yet it does not involve procurement of gumboots and dissecting kits, but rather it is for feeding and accommodation? 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find the Minister of Education and Sports in a very difficult position. My reading is that it looks like the University Council has been taking decisions without informing the ministry. The ministry is now left to deal with the tail end of outcomes of their decisions. I propose that we re-visit the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act because university councils seem to have grown horns; we need them to provide regular reports to the Ministry of Education and Sports. We are now pumping the minister with questions here whose answers she cannot be confidently armed with. I propose that the technical team first interfaces with the University Council to get the concrete responses to issues raised by hon. Baryomunsi. At the same time, there may be need for this House to amend the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act to enable coordination of these universities by the ministry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What procedural matter have you raised now?

DR EPETAIT: The procedural matter is that since she is not armed with the responses to the issues raised by hon. Baryomunsi, I suggest that her technical team should first interface with the university administration rather than subjecting the minister to answer issues she is not very familiar with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, now you have raised a procedural matter. (Laughter) Honourable minister, from what the honourable member has said, you can see the difficulties; are we going to extend it? We have lots of urgent business. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate that I am a teacher and it is one of the things I really love about myself. I listened very attentively to the minister, but the responses coming from the position articulated by hon. Baryomunsi seems to me that the students came here to petition this House to come up with a way forward on what is going on. It, therefore, seems to me that there are more parties in this matter than the University Council that the minister is reporting about or more than even the students. And I think we should get the social services committee to intervene and call all the stakeholders in the matter of these allowances, including the minister. Makerere is just one boiling point in this country; today it is allowances, tomorrow it can be meals and the next day it can be anything. Everyday there is something about something in Makerere University. Thereafter, we will bring you a comprehensive report and we shall thrash out this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the way we have been proceeding might not help this House to make any meaningful decisions. I find hon. Alaso’s proposal persuasive. We should, therefore, refer this matter to the social services committee and we give them one week. This matter is urgent because the strike is ongoing. When the committee comes back with the recommendations, this House will then be able to take a decision.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY REGULATORY BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, House is suspended for five minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.53 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.58 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR COMMUNICATION (ICT) (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012 be read the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is the accompanying certificate?

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Mr Speaker, the certificate of financial implication was delivered with the Bill at the Clerk’s office and everything is okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not have a copy to lay on the Table?

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Mr Speaker, I did not think that was necessary. When we were submitting the 450 copies -(Interjections)- when we were submitting the 450 copies the certificate of financial implications was delivered to the Clerk’s office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House has got to be satisfied that the certificate is there, honourbale minister. We will bring it back tomorrow. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INFLUX AND SETTLEMENT OF NEW REFUGEES FROM THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, you remember we referred this particular matter to a committee of Parliament. I hope that the statement you are going to make will not bring debate that should have been resolved in the committee. So, I am allowing you with that caveat.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of procedure because the honourable minister was very kind to us. He circulated the statement he is about to read to the House. I got a copy. I have read through the contents of his statement and they are mainly pre-empting the work you assigned to the committee. When you read his statement on page 2 paragraph 2 -(Interjections)- I am telling you I have read it. 

I am raising a matter of procedure. You will discover that he is informing this House that with effect from 19th which is Monday next week, he is going to start moving these Congolese refugees to this Rwamanja Refugee Camp. And as far as this House is concerned, the matter that was referred to our committee is the conflict that is arising from this particular refugee camp. I am asking, is it procedurally right for him to proceed and present the same statement that is going to pre-empt the work that we are going to do, which we started today, and we have invited him to our committee tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Namayanja had risen on a point of procedure. You cannot raise procedure on procedure normally. That is why I did not pick you.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it would be procedurally right - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ruling? (Laughter)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: I am seeking your guidance; the honourable minister to make a presentation to us so that we get the content and then we understand what the minister is presenting and then we discuss - 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, if you refer to our rules, rule 67 which is on page 99 - I am now aware that there are various copies of the rules in the House but this particular one is rule 67 on page 99, and it talks about anticipation (1) and then (2), but I want to refer to sub-rule 3 and it says “In determining whether a discussion is out of order on the ground of anticipation, the Speaker shall have regard to the probability of the subject matter in anticipation being brought before the House within a reasonable  time.” 

Mr Speaker, I have listened attentively to the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, and he seems to say they are actually dealing with this matter and the minister is appearing before them -[HON. TUMWEBAZE: “Information.”]- Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is on a procedural note. You are giving information on procedure? Let the honourable member finish the procedural point then you can – 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, following up from hon. Tinkasiimire, I get the impression that this is a matter which is being discussed right now and given that we have a lot of other pending business, doesn’t this really constitute anticipation in our Rules of Procedure? Should we continue with it?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, today with my honourable colleague, the Woman MP for Kamwenge, we were petitioners and witnesses before the Presidential Affairs Committee. As you rightly remember, this came as a matter of national importance raised by myself. The minister responded and we engaged in a lot of arguments. In your wise ruling, you referred it to the committee. Today, we have made our presentation. We presented our evidence. The chairman made a ruling when we were there that tomorrow the minister and his team were going to appear and the following day the committee will be moving to the site. Now, I wonder and I become more suspicious why the minister is very anxious to pre-empt the work of the committee. I request you to guide us on that one. 

4.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, this matter in addition to what has been happening in Parliament, was referred to me and –(Mr Ssemujju rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right Honourable, please, proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, there is someone who is exhibiting incredible levels of ignorance. (Laughter) 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, you have given hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi the opportunity to speak on a matter for which I have not said anything and I patiently waited to see whether this time he has a point to make. As it has become a habit, the first thing he is uttering is that someone is exhibiting incredible ignorance and he is mentioning my name. Is he, therefore, in order not for the first time, but for the second time, first to waste the time of Parliament, but secondly, to make it a habit that each time he does not have a point to make, he must mention my name?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter of the ignorance of hon. Ssemujju is becoming a matter of national importance. (Laughter) But our rules prohibit debating anything in anticipation. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister was anticipating the display of this ignorance which he knows very well. He is, therefore, ruled out of order. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Next time, I will wait long enough because I know for sure, it will come. This matter was brought to my attention by the honourable Members of Parliament from Kamwenge and we had agreed that we should hold a meeting to discuss and come to a solution to the problems that they are facing.

After the minister had indicated that he wanted time to speak on the Floor today, I held a meeting with him and we agreed that this matter should be pending, waiting for the meeting we are going to hold next week and then he can come to Parliament and make a statement after we have concluded that matter. I, therefore, wanted to inform you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues that this planned settlement of refugees, which is supposed to start on Monday 19th will be put on hold until we have sorted out this matter. Thank you. (Applause)

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.11
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole House to consider the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of the Whole House to examine the amendments to the Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

Rule 160

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we have only two amendments to Rule 160. We propose to amend sub-rule 1 in the following terms:

“(1) Each sectoral committee shall consist of not less than 15 and not more than 30 Members selected from among Members of Parliament.”

Mr Chairman, you notice this is a fundamental departure from the proposal in writing because most of the proposed amendments fall by the way side.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, this is a new one, it is not in the text of the report.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Actually, in the text of the report, but amended slightly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is by -

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Composition of sectoral committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we agreed on this principle before.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes we did. This only captures what we agreed on and No.2, we propose to insert a new sub-rule 8 to read as follows.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What document are you looking at honourable chair?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We are at Rule 160.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is the sub-rule 8?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Next page after the justification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are inserting a new sub-rule 9.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It should actually be sub-rule 8 not 9 as a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is also consequential, honourable members. Any issues you are raising?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: This is substantial. This is a new proposed amendment - subrule 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, sub rule 8 is a new amendment; I am asking honourable members, any debate on this issue? Any issues you are raising? Read the amendment.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The proposed amendment is, “Without prejudice to sub-rule 7, 40 percent of the leadership of committees shall be women”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposed new amendment is to the effect that, “Without prejudice to sub-rule 7, 40 percent of the leadership of committees shall be women”. Any debate?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to amend that proposed amendment because as of now, it is saying, “Without prejudice to sub-rule 7, 40 percent of the leadership of the committees shall be women”. My amendment is to the effect that we have 40 percent as the minimum, so we insert, “At least 40 percent” so that when we can have 100 percent, it is even better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, are you agreeable to that?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I accept the inclusion of the word “At least”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Alright.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I want to seek guidance from you or maybe from the chairman. From my calculation, women are not 40 percent of this House. Why don’t we take the percentage that we already have in Parliament which is about 33 percent? Also, I think it would be erroneous for Parliament to be moved. I am very sensitive on gender issues, but we should be mindful of the precedent we are setting. 

Supposing in future, we have males or females sometimes who do not measure up to the task, but you have it already -(Interjections)- it does not have to be women; it can be males. But the first point is that, it is guidance and clarification, I am seeking by way of proposal. Why don’t we go by the percentage of women in Parliament?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal which has been agreed to by the chairman of the committee is that at least 40 percent. (Applause) The honourable Ssemujju is proposing 33 percent -(Interjections)- I will put the question to the amendment by the honourable Ssemujju. 

I put a question to the proposal by hon. Ssemujju to amend it to change it to at least 33 percent.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendments by the chairperson of the committee, including the amendments in the new sub-rule 6.
 
I put the question that the amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee be adopted.

(Question put, and agreed to.)
 
Rule 160 as amended 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I rise on an issue to do with, “Members shall belong to one sectoral committee.” I think this is redundant. 162, “Every Member shall belong to only one sectoral committee.” It has never happened that a Member belongs to two sectoral committees. Even in the current rules -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the only amendment is in the word sectoral instead of sessional.

MS AKOL: Okay, if it is sectoral, then that is fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what it is.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I am finding an amendment proposed by the chairman, which we dealt with in our Rule 37 that talks about – that “Each committee shall elect from their number, a chairperson and deputy chairperson.” We dealt with that matter long time ago and dropped it. I think it is also redundant for it to appear on this rule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is dropped, that is consequential now. I put the question to Rule 160 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 160, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 167

MR ODIO-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub-rule (3) to read as follows, and there is a bit of correction here. “Sub-rule (1) shall not apply to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker while presiding over the Business Committee and Parliamentary Commission.” [HON. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: “It is redundant.”] The justification is that the Speaker and Deputy Speaker chair more than one committee of the House; the Business Committee, Appointments Committee and several others.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposed amendment excludes the Speaker and Deputy Speaker from the limitation of a Member chairing only one committee. 
I put the question –

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, that would be redundant because Members,  if you read 167 it says, “No Member shall chair more than one committee,” and if you go to the definition of a Member; it means a Member of Parliament. In the definition section, the Speaker has also been defined to mean Speaker or Deputy. That means a Speaker is not a Member -(Interjections)- if I can only present my case. Rule 167 says, “No Member shall chair more than one committee.” The word Member has been defined to mean Member of Parliament. In that same definition section, the word Speaker has been defined; so my interpretation is, if you are a Speaker, you are not a Member. This amendment will be redundant because it will not affect the Speaker. He is not a Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, suppose you add the phrase, “for the avoidance of doubt?” (Interjections) You mean definition of the Speaker? 257?  Article 257? But the actual definition is in 257?

A Speaker, under Article 257(1)(b) “Speaker means the Speaker of Parliament and Deputy Speaker shall be construed accordingly;” 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  But Mr Speaker, I refer you to Article 82(2) which says, “The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall be elected by Members of Parliament from among their number.” That means the Speaker must be a Member of Parliament. [MS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: “Amendment.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we clear this first? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, it costs nothing to even leave it there. So, I have withdrawn what I tried to postulate. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am proposing that we delete the words “Parliamentary Commission” and we put there a “Committee of the Whole House” because the Parliamentary Commission is not a Committee of the House. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: What was that, honourable member? 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Chairperson, the amendment reads, “Sub-rule (2) shall not apply to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker while presiding over the business committee and the Parliamentary Commission”.

But the Parliamentary Commission is not a committee of this House. So, I would like to propose an amendment that we delete “Parliamentary Commission”, and substitute it with “The committee of the whole House”. Therefore, it will read, “Sub rule two shall not apply to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker while presiding over the business committee and committee of the whole House”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is Appointments Committee, there is Committee of Supply – you want to list all the four committees: Committee of Supply; Committee of the whole House; Appointments Committee and Business Committee?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: If we simply stop at Speaker and Deputy Speaker – “Sub-rule (1) shall not apply to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That really covers that subject clearly. Okay, it has been reviewed accordingly. I put the question to the proposed amendment to rule 167.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 167 as amended.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Rule 167 as amended constitutes part of our rules.

(Rule 167 as amended agreed to.)

Rule 168

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, we propose to rephrase sub-rule (5) of Rule 168 as follows: “The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson in respect of whom proceedings for removal have commenced, shall not preside over any proceedings of the committee until the removal proceedings have been concluded in his/her favour”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is clear, I put the question – 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, the rule which they are trying to amend – the genesis of this rule was to avoid influence peddling in the committee. And when somebody is being investigated on and they stay in office, then it does not give them leeway for the investigations. 

The rule states, “The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson, in respect of whom proceedings for removal have commenced, shall not preside over any proceedings of the committee.” I remember, when we were drafting this rule in the previous Parliament, we thought it wise that somebody still doing the duties of the committee cannot be fully investigated. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is what it says here.

MR KAKOOZA: No, the amendment says that you should not leave office until all the investigations are done. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is; “…will not preside over a meeting”. You can remain chairman, but you do not preside.

Honourable members, I put the question to the proposed amendment to sub-rule (5). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Rule 168 as amended agreed to.)

Rule 170

MR ODOI- OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, we propose to redraft rule 170 as follows: 

Rule 170:

(i) “Each committee shall have a committee staff as shall be designated by the Clerk.
(ii) 	The committee may also engage the services of technical consultants.”

The justification is that these officers are resource persons to committees and give valuable technical assistance to committees when handling matters of a technical nature. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Parliament has committees. For example, the Committee of the Whole House, there is a clerk who assists. When you go to another committee, you will still find a clerk. So, this clerk who is designated is enough – that person must be a clerk, deputy clerk or assistant clerk; whatever the designation may be, but should be a clerk and not just a committee staff. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that appearing – I am looking at the current rule 170.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My current proposal is that the current rule is sufficient. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, he proposes that we retain the current rule. Would you like to withdraw this?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The proposed amendment is not a fundamental departure from rule 170. I can withdraw it.

Rule 171

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to delete rule 171 and the justification is that it narrows the general functions of committees provided for under rule 133. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, rule 171 tries to limit the scope of the debate of the House on the subject matter brought to the House by the committee. Now, to delete it means that if the Committee on Social Services has brought something today about education, I am free to talk about any other thing which they may not necessarily have brought to the House. I think that is very dangerous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, would you like to reconsider this?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is seriously persuaded by the arguments of hon. Otto and so am I. So, I withdraw it. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chair. I think differently. I am only discouraged that the chair of the committee has quickly withdrawn his position. But reading through rule 171, I thought that it was not talking about deliberations on the Floor of the House. I thought it was talking about committee business; maybe I read it badly. “Subject to any instruction by the House, the deliberations of every committee shall be confined to the matter referred to it by the House and in the case of a committee on a Bill to the Bill committed to it and any relevant amendment -”

My view is the old view of the committee; that this was very restrictive. It is the committees that provide a wide area for catchment of issues that we bring into this House and I think we have more time in the committees to analyse so much more and package it for the House. If we constrain ourselves so much using the old rule, we will not benefit from the interactions we have with stakeholders out there. 

If I could pursue the chairman to jump back and give his old position – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Alaso, this one is talking about a matter that has been referred to the committee by the House. Should we allow the committee to go and enlarge that matter; a matter that is specifically referred to the committee by this House?

MS ALASO: Mr Chairperson, I think, for instance, this afternoon, we referred the issue of internship allowances to the Social Services Committee. Somehow in the process of that deliberation, you also find another thing brewing and another strike that is coming up. Wouldn’t it be helpful to this Parliament that the committee even analyses that matter? Wouldn’t it help? Or should we just stick to what you said on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For orderly conduct of business in the House, I think it would be appropriate to do that. Honourable members, that rule is not amended. 

Rule 176

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute for sub-rule 2 the following: “Meetings of the committee shall be held at such times and places as may be determined by the chairperson of the committee or in his or her absence by the deputy chairperson in consultation with the Speaker.” The justification is that if the committee chooses to sit outside the precincts of Parliament or in the field, the Speaker should be consulted. Honourable members, that is very consistent with other provisions of the rules; that you need permission of the Speaker to get out and do business. Even if you are going to do private business, and even if you are going to transact business for the House, you need the authority of the Speaker. I think there is consistency. You do not just leave and go for your meetings. The Speaker needs to know. I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee to rule 176.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 176, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 177

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to redraft the entire rule 177 as follows:

1.	“A report of the committee shall be signed by at least one third of all the members of the committee and shall be laid on Table. 

a)	The members of the committee making the report shall be collectively responsible for the decisions contained therein and shall not debate the report on the Floor of the House. 

b)	In case of a complaint as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation, who shall report back to the Speaker before the next sitting of the House. 


c)	Upon receiving the report from the Clerk, the Speaker shall inform the House of the findings and a decision will be taken on both the complaint and the report. Hon. Chair, the justification for the first leg of the proposed amendment is to address complaints made in regard to tampering with reports and the proposed amendment also puts in place a procedure for handling such complaints.

2.	 Debate on a report of the committee on a Bill shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on Table by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or a member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker and this is to provide the Members an opportunity to read and understand the proposals in the report in order to enable them engage in constructive and informed debate. 

3.	The chairperson or a member of the committee may move in the House that the report from the committee be adopted.


4.	The report of the committee shall also form part of the record of the House.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, the proposals are in the terms proposed by the chair. You do not need any guidance from the Speaker; just make your contribution on this issue. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Whereas one third of the Members will make quorum, I do not know where the House or the Members who signed the report would have our position. I have seen situations where the chairman will quickly withdraw yet we agreed that we are one third of the committee and we signed, and yet on the Floor of the House, it becomes his report all of a sudden. He withdraws and concedes yet we, in the committee, have not conceded. Mr Chairman, I also think we need to look at this. Whereas we could have signed the report as a third, I do not know whether it could actually be us to own the report even on the Floor of the House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Propose an amendment.

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Chairman, where there is an element of doubt, the matter be referred to the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is not what you were explaining. The issue you wanted to capture was in the course of debate in the House, that the chairperson will only alter committee positions in consultation with the Members. I think that is reasonable. I just tried to recapture what he said. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, with all due respect to my colleague’s submission, I think when a committee of Parliament is working, it is working on behalf of the entire Parliament. They are doing delegated work. So, the moment a committee report is brought to this House, it has to be improved. Someone can say, delete letter a) you are saying the chairman has to consult before saying I have conceded. I think we would have no purpose of bringing that report to the House because at the end of the day if the committee says x and the House says y, the rigidity of the chairman of that committee will not help to change the opinion of the House. 

So, we should allow provision of chairpersons of committees to make certain concessions on the Floor of the House other than tying his hands that he has to consult the members every other second a new issue emerges. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, chairperson. As hon. Odonga Otto has said, the committee has worked on our behalf and when the report is on the Floor of the House and we form the whole committee, we have the right to dissect, to delete and to add to the report. It is our report and if as a member you feel that in this report the chairman is answering not according to your will, you can stand up and argue, and debate it until you convince us. Otherwise, we are a committee. We can decide and the chairman has the right. If the majority say it should be like that, the chairman has a right to concede. We cannot take back the report to the committee. Thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I rise in support of hon. Kyamadidi’s proposal and in so doing, I want to explain why. You see in (a) we are saying that all members of the committee will take collective responsibility for the report and they shall not debate it on the Floor of the House because their presentation is in the report. What hon. Kyamadidi is saying is that members of the committee, therefore, whether the chairman or member, should not on the Floor of the House depart from that report; if they were to depart from it, they would have to go back as a committee and take collective responsibility for that departure. That is what he is saying. Therefore, the idea that it should be conceded to by the chairperson directly contradicts that principle of collective responsibility. So, therefore, hon. Kyamadidi, I presume is amending or proposing an amendment –(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: If hon. Kyamadidi is proposing an addition that will bar the chairperson of a committee from proceeding, it is acceptable to the committee because it adds value to the rules.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Really, I have made my point that if we adopt paragraph (a) as it is – and I am going to propose that we amend paragraph (b) when we get done with this. I hope I will have the opportunity to do so.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When will you do that?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: After getting done with the amendment moved by hon. Kyamadidi -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Kyamadidi has already raised the principle of his amendment. Why don’t you raise yours as well?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank the Prime Minster for giving way. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the technicalities involved. If hon. Odoi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline had to go to consult every now and then, I do not know whether we would be done with just a page by now. But also, who is he going to consult? Will it be the one third that appended their signatures or those who never signed at all?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, what the amendment is saying is that it will be up to the House to take the decision without the chairman of the committee conceding. The House can take its decision, but the chairman of the committee does not have to say they concede.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The amendment moved by hon. Kyamadidi, is in good faith, but I think it might create disharmony amongst members of the committee. Why we should leave that right to the chairperson to concede to an amendment on the Floor is because such decision will not be taken abruptly. It will be taken after a debate has been delivered. I am saying this because the chairperson must be left with discretion to make judgments. Because you cannot always sell out your members of the committee; you should be mindful of the consequences. My suggestion is that the status quo should remain.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is what Members are thinking of, it is okay. But I think what I am talking about is very important as well. If a report has been presented by a committee, the members of that committee should be in the House to defend it, which is a very vital element. And if they are not present in the House, it means they have delegated the authority to their chairperson.

So, Mr Chairman, for me, while the committee chairman can have that leverage –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You see my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who ran away from the cold, what you need to know is the fact that once the committee makes its presentation of the report to the House, that report will now belong to the House. That means the House can do the following: Tear it apart, adopt it in total or reject it completely. That is within the powers of the House.

The question of the chairman of the committee conceding is only relevant in terms of time, where the House can say okay, if he concedes, then the debate is shortened or something like that and that is all. So, the idea is; once a report has been presented by the chairperson of some committee, that is the end. And according to rule - members of the committee are not supposed to debate it because they cannot debate what they have presented with their arguments being well articulated in writing. That leverage should be left to the House to determine what to do with that report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before hon. Jack Sabiiti comes in, let me say this: What happens to the committee report is that we adopt it. But when the report comes for debate at the committee stage, it shows that the House has not adopted the report because the House will at that stage still be dealing with amendments that might be missing in the original committee report. That is the distinction. So, if you want to make that distinction, that will make sense. When you look at the report, you realise that the signature page takes only a few pages, the rest of it contains only amendments that are missing in the original report. 

That also means that when we adopt this report then, we do not adopt these amendments because they are just coming in as new proposals from the committee. If you relate this to the Bill, you will arrive at the same point. The Bill comes for second reading with a motion and that motion is passed. The report of the relevant committee is approved together with the second reading of that motion. Not so? But at the committee stage, we will not be dealing with the report in its original form; we will be dealing with the amendments proposed by the committee. I don’t know whether I have made it clear.

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, I think this has come at an appropriate time. Hon. Kyamadidi’s concern has validity in the sense that we have had problems relating to this amendment in the past parliaments. In those parliaments, you would see a chairperson of a committee just withdrawing for certain reasons either due to pressure or otherwise. For example, in the Seventh Parliament a similar situation happened about twice when we were about to pass the budget. 

The chairperson represents a committee. And so for that chairperson to withdraw the proposal from the committee without thorough debate – if we do not allow thorough debate for different Members to give their views, the chairperson can frustrate the whole essence of the amendments.
 
Therefore, whenever the chairperson feels that a proposal should be dropped, the Speaker should give more time to Members –(Interjections)– yes, to analyse that issue. This is important because there is always a reason why – either the chairperson of the committee could be - or he did not just understand the implications of that particular amendment.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is known that after a committee has submitted a report to the House, that is our report. The committee will defend its position, but when a position is being changed, the committee members should be convinced of the reasons for that change. I want to agree with my brother, the Prime Minister, on that. The committee should be convinced on why we are diverting from their position. So, if we are to do that, the committee should be allowed to defend its position. In those circumstances, the chairman of that particular committee alone, cannot get up and say “Aye, I agree.” He might tell other people that you write the recommendations and when you bring them to the committee, I will I agree. This is very dangerous for the committees. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. From simple logic, if Parliament delegates a committee to do work, then the committee reports to Parliament. It is like you are giving someone an assignment to go and help you sort out something on our behalf and bring it back. When it is back on the Floor of Parliament; we make comments, adjustments and all that; so we own the report. 

So, I do not think it is proper to again take it back to the committee to discuss and bring back to the Floor of Parliament. It would look as if we are making the committee appear superior to the House. If we are to own our report and we are saying as the Committee of the Whole House, we have decided on this; that is it. I think the committee should just concede at once, and not even consult the chairperson. I thank you. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The mischief hon. Kyamadidi’s amendment is trying to cure is chairpersons usurping the powers of committees without their consent. Committees of Parliament are constitutional bodies. They are not institutions whereby a chairman can just come here with a report signed by members of a committee and just say, “I am conceding,” “I am withdrawing,” or “I am amending”. That would not be fair to the committee and to Parliament itself.

Frontbenchers, for example, if I come with a position from Cabinet and Members debate and find that my position is not correct, I cannot just concede without the consent of Cabinet. However, I may not go back for the Prime Minister to reconvene Cabinet, but the Prime Minister can give me permission to concede or withdraw. 

So, the point we are making here is that it should be prohibited for a chairperson of a committee to depart from the position of the committee without reference to that committee. [MR WAIRA: “Objection.”] 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I hear an honourable member raising a point of objection. It has not yet been included in the rules. (Laughter)   

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to concur with what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said that the committee has collective responsibility for this report and when they are here they should not debate that report. But I don’t want us to imagine – we are right now handling Rules of Procedure and all those amendments are amendments by the committee. However, what we are witnessing here now is that the Chair, after debate, after consideration of all the views that come, is given an opportunity to rise and say, “I concede”. That definitely should be, and it is what has been with all other chairpersons. That when a report is presented here on behalf of the committee by the chairperson, the moment it is presented, it becomes a report of the House. But when there are issues in that report, and through that overwhelming debate which really shows clearly that maybe the Chair should concede, then the Speaker, as you have always done, puts it to the Chair that do you concede. Indeed, the Chair normally concedes. 

I want to propose that whenever there is such contention by the members of that committee, the Speaker permits members of that committee to speak on that matter other than returning this report to the committee. We will be going back and forth even a hundred times because some Members would want to defeat the purpose and yet it is a report of the whole House. The issues for amendment were generated in the House. It should still remain in the House. Thank you. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. I would like to agree with the position put by hon. Akol. I want to believe that the chairperson comes here with the full authority and endorsement by all the members of the committee. He will have listened to the debate within the committee. Now, when he comes here, that position is enriched by the debate in the House. He should be in a position, considering what took place in the committee and considering the views that were for and against the position that is being put forward, he should be able to stand up and say, yes, I concede. 

If he finds that it is very difficult for him to concede, considering the previous debate, then he should be able to ask the Speaker to allow him to go back – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. That is not what happens. The purpose is this. I think we are not construing this properly. The purpose of consulting the chairperson of the committee is to see if there is need to vote. Should the chairperson not concede, it will not go back to the committee; the vote will be taken immediately. If the chairperson says no, I stand by my committee position, the Chairperson or the Speaker will put the question. So, it doesn’t go back; there is no back and forth issue. 

The current position is, if the chairperson concedes, then there is no need to vote. But if he or she doesn’t concede, we take a vote. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, even where the Chair concedes – and the most recent example is the PAC report. Even where the chairman concedes, as I said earlier, it may shorten the debate. We don’t have to prolong debate on it. But still, if it is in the report of the committee, we pronounce ourselves on it, on the entire report. 

Last time on the issue of the Solicitor General, hon. Katuntu rose and presented an argument and the chairman agreed. But when we came to recommendations, this House pronounced itself on that. Therefore, the point we were making is, once a report comes here, it is a report of the House. There is no question of the committee going back. The committee will not go back. The only thing we are saying is, if the chairman is to say, “I concede”, as if he is speaking on behalf of the committee, he should do so after he has consulted his colleagues. That’s all. But it does not have anything to do with whether we continue with the report or not. The House will not stop debating the report because someone has said, “I agree with your argument”. 

MS ALASO: Thank you. I am very agreeable to the old practice where we come here and the report becomes a report of the House. The House does with it whatever it wants and for courtesy’s sake, you inquire from us whether we concede and if not, we proceed to vote on it. My problem is something that has not been mentioned and it has to do with the Budget Committee, where I hand over my powers completely to the Chair and then the Chair goes ahead and decides that all the recommendations we made including the monies we cut from Education and Health - like last financial year, we can’t even find money, where the Minister of Health conceded and said, “Now we cut off this money and put it here.”  When these people went to the Budget Committee, everything disappeared. So, I am agreeable to the old practice for as long as it doesn’t apply to the Budget Committee.   (Laughter) 

My prayer is that with the Budget Committee there should be reference back to the parent committee which is familiar with the sector. How could the chair of the sessional committee go and come back to us as if we didn’t do any work in the committee - all the recommendations were trashed; it is very disappointing to committee members! So, can we create an exception here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to take a vote on this, otherwise we are not moving.  What is before the House is that a proposal has been made by the chair of the committee in the terms proposed to redraft Rule 177; an amendment has been proposed whose drafting has not yet been captured. So, I need to capture the drafting, then take a vote on it and then move forward.
 
MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that we amend (b) as follows: “The chairperson of the committee shall not depart from or change the position of the report of the committee....”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which (b)?
 
MR KYAMADIDI: Where you had stopped, Mr Chairman.  I am making an amendment - it is (c).
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Immediately after (c)? 

MR KYAMADIDI: Add (d) that: “The chairperson of the committee shall not depart from or change the position of the report of the committee without reference to the committee.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, that is the proposal. I am going to put the question to it. I will ask the Member to justify and then we vote on it. I am not going to allow this debate any more.
 
MR SSALI: Mr Chairman, I would like to amend his proposal and insert at the end “...until reasonable consensus has been reached.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Who determines the reasonable consensus?
 
MR SSALI: The Speaker –(Interjection)– Yeah. Mr Chairman, because whenever a chairperson has conceded, there have been signals between the Speaker and the chairperson about the consensus. And I think that we would take up hon. Kyamadidi’s proposal and end with “...reasonable consensus in the House.”

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This committee of 20 to 30 Members works on our behalf. We give them work to do on behalf of the 300 of us who may not be having the time. We tell them, “Go through this report and make some recommendations,” and then the committee, which is part of us, brings the report with recommendations to us; the Committee of the Whole House. As human beings, they may have left some things out which are amended here, with the members of the committee present to either clarify or defend their position. 

So, we should remember that this report is for the whole House and the chairperson is just a reporter with the Speaker as the chairperson because they are the ones to rule. Whatever is decided here can be debated until a consensus is reached.
 
I know there is a situation where we send the committee back with the report. It is only when the chairperson doesn’t agree with the minister on the Floor of the House that we request them to go and reach a compromise. But if it is the chairperson, it is our report and they cannot take us back because they want to stick to their position. 330 heads are better than 30. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Kyamadidi that we include those powers barring chairpersons of committees from conceding on positions on the Floor of Parliament.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I rise to move an amendment which I know hon. Otto will support; (b) says, whenever there is a complaint about the authenticity of the report by members of the committee, the proposal here says that then the debate stops and investigations commence. Now, I don’t think we really need to take this route. The cure for this is to say - because in the rules they are saying the report must be signed by the chairperson and at least a third of the members. Here we should say: “The members signing the report should initial every page so that there is no possibility of anyone tampering with the report.” So, once the report comes and the debate goes on, we finish with it.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, that is the proposal by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the proposed amendment to (1)(b) be altered - I am trying to see where it is located.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You see, actually, it should be in the introductory part of that rule 177. Presently, it reads as follows: “A report of a committee shall be signed by at least one-third of all the members of the committee and shall be laid on the Table.” The other detail is about the debate to follow. I am proposing, therefore, that we amend that introductory provision to the effect that a report of the committee shall be signed and each page shall be authenticated by initialling of at least one-third of members of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you consider just introducing a new (2) to say, “Members signing a report shall initial on every page.”

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I accept the amendment.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, indeed, the proposal by the Prime Minister is a cure, but I am trying to see the practicability of it and I am happy it is the Leader of Government Business because sometimes you are under pressure to bring the report.

Getting members to initial all those pages - I am just trying to be practical because a Member will come and say I agree with what we agreed on, give me a page to sign because tomorrow I am not there. Gathering all the 15 people to initial a report page by page I find may constrain the speed of our business. That is my fear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, first of all, every member of the committee must read the final text of the committee report. That is the only way you get bound by it because we do not have signatures that are hanging in the air that just fall on paper at the right moment. That is the belief and that should be what is supposed to happen. So, if you are going to read the report page by page until you finish, why are you not able to initial the page you have read?

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it would be very difficult for ten members - even the way the page will look. For example, we have committees, which have 30 people as members. To require that ten people sign every page, I think is not practical. We could let the chairperson and vice chairperson endorse every page of the report, but the other members of the committee to sign as we have been doing. I beg to move.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. By the fact that members accept to sign the last page of the report and append their signatures to a page, which has a title of that report, the date and the matter being discussed, means that I am fully informed and agreeable to the contents of that report. I do not see what it is curing by signing every page if I have accepted to sign and appended my signature to the page that says I accept the contents of the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in the last Parliament, we had a situation with the Budget Committee report. Two sets of reports were circulated in the House and it brought a lot of tension. This was from the same committee. Hon. Jack Sabiiti raised it and I was chairing, I remember. That I think is the background to this; so that there is no contestation. Once the report is released, it is the report of the committee. So, how you handle this is the issue we are trying to harmonise.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find myself agreeing with the proposed amendments as a cure. It is not the first time that such a very important report of Parliament is displayed and disowned. Whereas it might be very difficult to initial every page, you rightly guided this House that signing the last page is not signing the report, even according to our rules. I have not seen anywhere, where it says that you should sign the last page. In fact, inserting that additional initialling would be quite appropriate and corrective in a manner.

But I would only try to shorten it and say, as an amendment to the Prime Minister’s amendment, without necessarily introducing a new one, that a report of a committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one-third of all the Members without necessarily -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay, accepted. I am going to put the question. Members we have debated this thing long enough. I put the question to the amendment - Hon. Alaso, please. Clarification?

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, thank you. You know some of these things go with a bit of education on my part. So, if my shortcomings are upon me, please just help me. When you talk about initialling you mean just putting - My name is Alaso Alice Asianut; so, putting AAA is what you want me to do, and that is more difficult to forge? Is that what you are worried about; that somebody can write AAA and then OJ, something? Is that really hard?

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The initial is the short form of your signature. That is how you initial the documents.

MS ALASO: So, Mr Chairman, we will have a procedure that allows us to first bring the authentic initials here for accreditation and then secondly we want to do away with the question of investigation. I thought this has to do with a bit of natural justice; if I have a complaint I think that the Speaker should maintain that aspect that allows him to go for an investigation. It could be about the staff and may not be about the Chair. There should be a provision for this investigation. Those are my pleas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Alaso, if the proposal by the Prime Minister as improved upon by hon. Oboth is adopted, then there will be no need for the Speaker to do any investigation. Hon. Sewungu, sit down.

NR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have been in Parliament for a long time and reports have been substituted. Some of our colleagues who did it are sitting on the front bench, and that time they were our chairpersons. 

But initialling does not bar you from sending an investigation because somebody could have forged somebody’s initials. So, it is important that when it is raised, you should put a committee to verify those initials as right. So, it does not stop you from investigating. Even somebody can forge somebody’s signature. So, for that one, it is not true and you will continue to investigate again because somebody might say the signatures are – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, when it is authenticity of the report, are you now talking about the authenticity of the signature? I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 177, as amended, agreed to.

Proposed new rule

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new rule as follows: 

“Contents of a committee report. 

A report of the committee shall include, among others:

(a)	all arguments or proposals submitted to committees or delegations;
(b)	the committee decisions on the arguments or proposals submitted;
(c)	how decisions of the committee were arrived at; and
(d)	a statement of quality assurance.”

The committee was of the opinion that the House needs to know the rationale – first of all, the materials that the committee receives and the rationale for arriving at every decision or every recommendation that the committee makes to the House. The committee also felt very strongly that it is important to have a minimum standard of reports submitted to the House. And, therefore, the members of the committee must attach a statement of quality assurance to every report submitted to the committee. I beg to move.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I am looking at sub-rule (a) which says, “All arguments or proposals submitted to committees or delegations.” If we are to make all these part of a report we will have a very huge report which I do not know how it will be debated. The practice has been that you can present minutes and attachments. But let us assume that there is an anti-homosexuality discussion and there appears over 80 people with different arguments, how many pages of that report will you bring with all those arguments? (Interjection) I can hear the chairman say you summarise, but I would rather that - because if you say, “all arguments” you are not talking of summarised arguments. But if “all” arguments are to be included, the report will be so voluminous that it might not be read. However, if you talk of laying minutes and attachments, that one is realistic. So, I advise that sub-rule (a) will be too much. 

Looking at (b) “The committee decisions on the arguments or proposals submitted.” I think we have been doing that. Sub-rule (c) that, “How decisions of the committee were arrived at.” This is methodology and we have been – but the first one will be a little bit clumsy, in my opinion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, has there been a problem with the structure of the reports we have been receiving in this House? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] That would have been one of the justifications if they were deficient in one area or the other. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, you cannot say with certainity that the reports of all committees are of the same standard or format. The formats are as different as there are committees. And I think the answer is that yes, there is a problem with the way we report. They are also defective to the extent that we do not bring out a summary of all the arguments that we receive before the committees and how these decisions are arrived at – are they by way of voting, consensus? All that needs to be reflected for purposes of the record.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Rule 80

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We also propose to introduce a new rule with the sub-title being, “Response by shadow ministers”. A shadow minister, not being a member of the committee reporting to the House, may make a response to the report of the committee on matters raised in the report relating to his or her sector.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the situation we were faced with last time during the Budget debate was that all the shadow ministers were members of those committees whose sectors they fall in. How then do we handle it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, our Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, Section (6)(e) talks of the role and functions of the Leader of the Opposition thus: “The principal role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep the government in check.” The other one is: “The Leader of the Opposition shall, under sub-section (i) in consultation with his or her party leadership appoint a shadow cabinet from Members of the Opposition in Parliament with portfolios and functions that correspond to those of cabinet ministers.” It is very clear and it means that these people appointed as shadow ministers are supposed to respond to the portfolios they oversee. So, the only thing to do here is either to make an exception or exclude them from committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what do we do?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I propose that the shadow cabinet members are free if they have anything in response to the committee reports.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do I understand you to be saying that shadow ministers should be removed from being members of committees so that they remain shadow ministers just like the frontbench on the ruling side. This will give them ample time to come and get a slot and respond to reports as well as appear before committees to present their alternative policies. Is that your position?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they are free to be members of committees they wish to be in. If one decides to be a member of a committee that does not preclude him or her from making a comment on that report. So – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the difficulty we face is that we have a rule that says a member of a committee shall not debate that committee’s report. So, we had to struggle during the Budget debate to find an arrangement to allow comments. That is when I discovered that most of the shadow ministers belong to the sectoral committees they monitor. So, we had to make an administrative arrangement to allow them at a certain time to make a response to the committee reports, which was completely irregular. This is the time we should correct it. 

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I happen to be a minister for information - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shadow. (Laughter)

MR OGUTTU: I happen to be a shadow minister for information - (Laughter)- but I do not sit on the committee under which the portfolio of information falls. That is a fact. And also because when we formed a shadow cabinet it was smaller than the Government Cabinet, it is also true that there are ministries where we do not have ministers sitting because you have to sit on one committee. So, there are situations whereby actually, the shadow cabinet minister did not attend and is not even a Member of that committee where the ministry falls. I think that it is proper that we allow the shadow cabinet minister to make his statement.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Whether the shadow ministers sit on those committees or not, they are actually represented by their members and they are bound by the principle of collective responsibility. In case one does not agree with the committee report there is a provision for a minority report.

My understanding of the committee is that these committees are actually a representation of Parliament and, therefore, we only request for a response or a statement from the Executive. It would be very difficult to see a situation where we are now requesting a statement from ourselves. So, I think this amendment should be dropped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we do not want to go back to the old problem we faced. Take the example of the Bill that was introduced today, but will come back tomorrow. That Bill is going to a particular committee. You have the minister going to speak to the committee on the Bill. Isn’t it appropriate for the shadow minister responsible for that sector also to be invited by the committee and he or she makes his or her submissions there? Now, the difficulty is if that shadow minister is a member of that committee, do we invite a member of the committee to come in a different capacity to address the committee?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, that is what we need to resolve. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am now specialising in all those who have not contributed.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to give an example of what has been happening in the last two sessions: One in the last Parliament and another in this session, when we were considering the policy statements of Defence. Hon. Kaps Fungaroo is the Shadow Minister for Defence. He attends all the proceedings of the committee; he even probes the ministers and gets all the details. He says, “No, I will not sign the report.” Then he comes on the Floor after being part and parcel of the deliberations of the whole thing and says, “Now, I am coming as the shadow minister to respond to this,” which he has been party to during the deliberations.

So, it is better that either they say if at all a Member is a member of the committee, when you are handling the policy statement, he can either excuse himself and not be party at all, and if he wants to make a separate report on the Floor or they totally say perhaps we will not post ministers on the same committees they are serving such that at least we have a way of checking what is happening. Thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Because an item under 79 was dropped, I thought the spirit of what is being discussed is trying to minimise as much as possible the production of minority reports. I am a Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social development. Because I did not want my hands to be tied and bogged down by being a member of the committee, I opted not to be a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. So, I think this is practical enough because I do not want to be a party to - each time there is a divergent view I produce a minority report. I decided to forfeit the activities of the committee. So, I thought this would be left to the discretion of a particular shadow minister and then we end up going by this amendment where, if I am not a member of that committee, I should not be tied. I should be left to produce my report and my views and I give my suggestions to this House. So, I would strongly – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First wait. You see, you are responding to the committee report. You are not responding to the minister’s statement. That is not what it is supposed to be. But that is what we had to do as an emergency arrangement. What a shadow minister is supposed to do is not respond to the committee report. It is the minister’s policy directly. In other words, both the statement of the minister and the statement of the shadow minister must be discussed by the committee so that by the time you are coming here we finish our deliberation and the shadow minister responds, the minister on the front bench responds and the House takes a position. If you limit it to you alone responding to the committee report, I think it is too limiting.

MS EKWAU: Let me just wind up this bit. Mr Chairman, if everything was moving on as we see, then it would be okay. But most times, even fighting for the little space becomes too much. At times you struggle to be heard and to catch the Speaker’s eye or the chairman’s eye, in vain. So, that is why I feel a leeway should be made -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Ibi. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to provide to this House is that when we are discussing the matter of how the shadow cabinet should proceed, I think we should be guided by about three or four issues: The practices in the Commonwealth, where we all owe our parliamentary practice here; then an attempt to make a distinction between the work that is done in the committee; then the role of the shadow cabinet minister; and then the need for space for the Opposition. 

Mr Chairman, since you have allowed me, I would like to say that if you look at the practice in the Commonwealth, where there is functionality in systems, in the UK for instance, systems are working; it is completely in order and very practical for a person called a shadow cabinet minister to write to the Secretary or to whoever, permanent secretary, as it were in our case, and obtain all the relevant information. It would be given officially. There is nothing to hide. Here, you cannot write to a PS and get that information -(Interjections)- I beg you to listen to me. Just do not be intolerant. Just listen to me and then you respond. 

So, at the inception of the multiparty Parliament, the decision we took was so that the shadow cabinet ministers would benefit from the information that is given in the committee and I think it augurs well with positive criticism. You do not criticise me on the basis of lack of information. So, the shadow cabinet ministers would go there and get information and make informed decisions. That was one.

If you look at the Administration of Parliament Act, it provides for the role and functions of the Leader of the Opposition and specifically (6)(e)(iv): “The Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government with his or her shadow ministers and attend committee deliberations on policy issues and give their parties’ views and opinions and propose possible alternatives”. 

Let me make this distinction. So, we would like shadow ministers to attend the committee. We would also like them to have opportunity to give their parties alternative positions. Sometimes I think I am a little bit brilliant even when I am not, but I get so pained when I hear colleagues say, “What is the alternative” and then when you want space to make the alternative, they are so intolerant and they do not want you to bring out that alternative. So, my prayer is that when the shadow ministers go into these committees, they learn and they get the information. When they come back on the Floor, they articulate the alternative that they have. Otherwise, we would go back to the Movement system of governance.

Those committees are actually policy committees; the policy of a sitting Government. They are the policy of a sitting Government and if you look at, again other parliaments - you need to go to our neighbours like in Ghana or somewhere - they will tell you they try to be as non-partisan as possible. You do not bring in your very radical view from Najjanakumbi and try to bring it into the policy of the NRM Government. It is wrong because here in the sessional committee, you are dealing with an already defined policy of the NRM Government. They want to create 150 districts, that is it. You have to scrutinise that. That is the policy of their government. Those are policy committees. Then your alternative view in Najjanakumbi - we do not want 150 districts. So, in the FDC, we want to come on the Floor, to be on the record as saying, we do not want this. 

Mr Chairman, my final conclusion is that we allow the shadow ministers if they choose to go to the committees, to go and benefit from that information, but principally, we create time for them to respond to the minister in Government on the Floor. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is what I was proposing. I was proposing that instead of the shadow minister responding to the committee report, which they have been party to, instead of being blocked by the rules under that, and instead of trying to create exceptions under that, space should be found where the committee will make the report then the shadow minister and the minister from Government will be given their slots to make their comments on the thing.
 
That is what I was proposing; but for the shadow minister to respond to the committee report - because this is what this proposal is saying. You are a shadow minister for social services, the Committee on Social Services has come and presented a report and you want to respond to the report of the committee. I thought that was now bringing you to another level other than that of a shadow minister; unless there was a shadow chairman. (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, my experience as a former minister of works is that we have always responded, not to reports of the committee, but we have critiqued and offered alternative policies to the policy of Government. That is what has been happening; that was the practice and this is what we did. My experience too is that sitting on a committee that supervises a ministry that you shadow is of great benefit.

You will appreciate that ministerial policy statements coming to the House take a lot of effort, not only of the minister, but the whole array of technocrats within the ministry, to produce that report. They take months or almost a year getting this statement in place. Now, to expect a shadow cabinet minister to look at this policy quickly and critic it within say a period of three weeks or one month, is expecting too much of them. Remember that they are not very well facilitated; remember that they do not have the resources to go out. If I have to call on the example of the Works Ministry, where under Uganda National Roads Authority, Uganda Roads Fund and the parent Works Ministry, there are lots of kilometres of roads undergoing either construction or maintenance -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please make the proposal so that we can move forward.

MR AMURIAT: My proposal is that the status quo remains and that shadow cabinet ministers be allowed to sit in the committees that relate to their ministries and that they be allowed to present alternative polices and critic the polices of Government on the Floor of the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal by the committee is for the introduction of a new rule for shadow ministers in the term proposed by the committee; is the proposal on response by shadow ministers. I put the question to the proposed amendment to form part of our rules.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek your guidance because these shadow ministers will attend committees according to (6)(e)(iv). So, at what stage will they make their alternative proposals? That is what I want to find out from you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Propose.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, I want to propose, Mr Chairman, that after the minister has made a policy statement and the committee report-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under which rule are you proposing this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We can insert it somewhere because we do not know where to insert, because we are now moving on. We want the shadow ministers to work and we want them to be audited also and that is what I am trying to propose. “A shadow minister shall... “-(Interjections)- Okay, “May” but let me make it “Shall” so that I can do disciplinary - nobody will fail. If they fail, I will discipline. “...shall provide policy alternatives in the House...” -(Interjections)- Please, I am coming to that because the policy statements are presented and taken to the committee. After the committee report comes in, that is when the shadow minister will make – “A shadow minister shall, after the minister has presented a policy statement, provide an alternative policy statement and present it on the Floor of the House.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is what happens. Let me just take the example of the ministerial policy statements. The ministerial policy statements are not introduced by ministers on the Floor of this Parliament. They go to committees. When they go back to the committee, the minister is required to make those responses. Not so? I am trying to see where to fit hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal. When the minister is speaking? Wouldn’t that also be the proper time for the shadow minister to do the same at that level because the minister is going to defend? After the report, the minister is going to defend the policy. That is where I was saying the same slot could be given for the shadow minister to –(Interjections)- at that level of the minister because the minister is defending the policy vis-à-vis what the committee has said. We also allow the shadow minister to do the same.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the need as requested by the Leader of the Opposition that his ministers must work. Normally, policy statements are presented after a budget is read. I believe what the Leader of the Opposition is trying to suggest is that after policy statements are presented by the government side, they would like an opportunity to also present alternative policy statements by the shadow ministers and both statements be referred to the sector committees for further analysis. That is the gist of the matter because if it is committee reports – what we have here is even Members of the Opposition actually sign and accept recommendations, but where they defer or where anybody defers, a minority report is allowed so that the views of those who are deferring are allowed. I think the Leader of the Opposition wants an opportunity for his ministers to present alternative policy statements that will also be referred to the sectoral committees for further analysis and a report to the House given by the committee. That is what I imagine. Maybe the amendment should be towards that, but not responding to a report of a committee at committee level. Thank you. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you had the Floor. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please close that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to insert at 80 a clause that “The shadow minister shall, after the minister” – you will create a space my brother. I am the acting attorney-general. I have enlisted the support of all. “A shadow minister shall present the alternative policy to Parliament immediately after a minister has done so.” 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much honourable for giving way. Just for clarification; you are talking of alternative policies, alternative proposals. I need some clarification. I thought we had only one Government in place at one time and all you can present are comments, responses, views; but for you to present an alternative policy statement -(Interjections)-, I find that queer, honourable Leader of the Opposition.

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I think constitutionally, in a democratic process, alternative manifestos were presented during elections and we are operating with a manifesto -(Interjections)- that was voted for by Ugandans. Therefore, we expect that the policies for the manifesto that was voted should be the policies that we should debate. What we expect from the Opposition or shadow cabinet is to criticise, comment or that, but not to bring an alternative policy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, (6)(e)(iv) which hon. Alaso brought - let me read it: “The Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government with his or her shadow ministers and attend committee deliberations on policy issues and give the party views and opinions and propose possible alternatives.” 

This is a law. You are not going to say because of your -(Interjections)- So, Mr Chairman, what I want to propose is that for now – 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr  Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition is absolutely right in his reading and interpretation of (6)(e)(iv) which says, “The Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government and attend committee deliberations on policy issues and give their parties’ views and opinions and propose possible alternatives to those statements.” (Interjections) If only the Members could listen to what I am saying. I said he was right. Yes. What I was suggesting to him is that instead of raising it where we are now, let them go and look at the rules, see wherever we are supposed to make policy statements as a Government so that we have a provision that satisfies this (6)(e)(iv). Go and do it neatly and then come in clear satisfaction of this statutory requirement. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is only that this matter has been brought out at this time. But we dealt with it when we dealt with the issue of the Budget Committee and the Committee of Supply – the sections that were introduced; the proposed sections 132, which is on page 33 of 61 which we approved - if you look on top, there is a number marked, 132. 

If you put in a policy statement at that stage then of course you have the right to make some responses on the matters because the committee will have examined it and also raised issues on it. So, then you will have an automatic right to make a response just like a minister would have automatic right to make a response. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us look at it further because you cannot introduce a policy – you study and avail the alternative. So, here, the Prime Minister is right; that would be ideal if I said I want to do x, y and z. But now, in this matter, that can only apply to our Minister of Finance, who can present the general framework of what we believe this side should be. But for the policy statement comments, it is ideal for it to be given after the minister has presented. So, I am going to do the redrafting and come back later. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, ministerial policy statements come to this House by the 30th June and we have to make sure that they do that. That is why in these provisions, they have put 15th July to allow two weeks for the shadow minister to look at the policy and then submit the alternative to the committee by 15th July. 

So, when the committee reports here, both the cabinet minister and the shadow minister have a responsibility to make responses on what has been presented on the Floor because they are also defending some positions that they have proposed. So, there is a 15th day gap to allow the shadow minister to examine.

The thing that we need to enforce is that ministerial policy statements have to be in this House by the 30th of June; then all these other things will work properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: One time when hon. Akol was the chairperson, one minister came here and said, “I brought the policy statement long ago”, yet the policy statement had not come. So, we must provide in our rules that whenever the policy statements come, they must be laid on Table so that it becomes a record of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is proper because the policy statements are stuffed in the pigeonholes and you do not know which is which. Sometimes they find the pigeonholes full and they have nowhere to put them. So, it might make good sense that the minister lays a copy of the policy statement on the Table so that it is captured on the date it is laid. I think that would be good practice. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I may be the most experienced in this one here. Our policy statements are handed in officially to the Clerk. They even acknowledge receipt of them and you must give a minimum number of copies. So, this business of laying them on the Table; you know the debate does not begin – we are required to bring them in by 30th June. What we do is to submit them to the Clerk with enough copies and there is acknowledgement of receipt so that the Clerk then does his/her work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this would help the Cabinet. Once you have brought it to the Clerk, come with a copy and lay it here. Distribution is the responsibility of the Clerk, just like the report; but this might help you.

MR AMURIAT: I am reacting to what the Prime Minister has said. I know he has been here long enough to know that there is a way matters are introduced in the House. If it is a petition, even if it goes through the Speaker, somehow it has to find its way - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that is finished. Hon. Kakooza, the Prime Minister has agreed to laying of these documents on the Table here and then it goes to the committees. We will put it in the rules.  In other words, the proposed Rule 180 is abandoned. We go then to Rule 178.

Rule 178

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub-rule (3) in the following terms: “In preparing a minority report, a Member shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the Office of the Clerk”. It is not provided for in the rules. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It has always been done, but now they want to regularise it. I think that is proper. I put the question to the proposed amendment by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 178, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 183

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 183(1), we propose to delete the words “Or Parliamentary Counsel”. The justification is that the practice is that the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is usually requested to attend committees through the Attorney-General. This is intended to advise the committee on legal issues. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rule 183(1) as it stands: “A committee shall have power to request the Attorney-General or Parliamentary Counsel to attend upon it and give such legal assistance as may be required.” The proposal is that “the Attorney-General” be deleted. You want to leave “Attorney-General” and delete “Parliamentary Counsel?” 

MR MWESIGE: I would like to support this amendment, Mr Chairman. The legal advisor to Parliament is the Attorney-General. That is settled law. Actually, in the past, when I joined this Parliament in 1996, the Office of the First Parliamentary Counsel was located in the Parliamentary Buildings to give instant advice to Parliament. So, if you leave “Parliamentary Counsel” I don’t know who this Parliamentary Counsel is, because this is not First Parliamentary Counsel because the Office of the First Parliamentary Counsel is in the Attorney-General’s Chambers. So, it should be the duty of the Attorney-General to afford committees of Parliament legal advice and guidance in their work. So, this ambiguity of putting “Attorney-General” or “Parliamentary Counsel” should be removed. In fact, it is illegal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that we remove the phrase “Or Parliamentary Counsel” from Rule 183(1). I put the question that the clause be amended to that effect.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 183, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 184

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft sub-rule (1) as follows: “The evidence of every witness shall be recorded and a copy of it sent to him or her” and the justification is that with modern technology, the evidence of witnesses is usually electronically recorded as opposed to being written down. The rule as it stands, Mr Chairman, is that “The evidence of every witness shall be taken down in writing…” which is a very archaic practice. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That “The evidence of every witness shall be recorded and a copy of it sent to him or her”; recording is okay, but how can it be done to send copies in case the witnesses are over 100 or 80?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one is already in the rules. What they are changing is just the recording bit.

MR SSEBAGALA: And sending the copy to the witnesses?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one is already in the rules. It is not anything new. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, writing is just one form of recording. I suspect that what the committee is trying to say is that it will be recorded electronically and probably sent electronically or by CD or other forms of recording information that are in line with modern technology. I would like to suggest that this particular provision should be subjective. In what form would we like this information to go back to the witness? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the term recording is wider. It captures writing, video; so, it should be submitted in whatever form it is recorded in. I think it is a wider embrace. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The justification the chair is giving is that with modern technology, the evidence of the witness is usually recorded as opposed to being written down, but sometimes we have power outages here and where there is power outage, the method of recording will be writing down. So, it should be both. The recording method should either be written down or electronically. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Akol, the justification does not form part of the rule.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My amendments will take care of that. I propose to amend this as follows: “The evidence of every witness shall be recorded.” I think that is correct and it is wider than just “in writing” and “a hard or soft copy of the recording sent to him or her.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do we agree on that? 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. In the amendment that the Prime Minister has just suggested, to me it proves that he wants that whatever has been recorded can be sent in either hard copy or soft copy but in my understanding, the evidence of every witness shall be recorded or written down. That is what I wanted to amend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. We said that recorded is wider: it encompasses writing, video, audio, it captures all.

MS JOY ATIM: Then it should be sent in either hard copy or soft copy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What they have said is that the evidence of every witness shall be recorded and a copy of the recording sent to him or her. 

MS JOY ATIM: Is it in hard copy or soft copy?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is a copy of the recording. It depends on what the recording is. If it is electronic, you cannot have a hard copy. It is a copy of the recording which is sent. Honourable members, any other issue on this or should I put the question?

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, thank you. I understand that sometimes laws are revised based on previous experience on their practicality. But I am trying to understand this particular provision of record and send. I have no problem with recording and I have just quickly consulted the few chairpersons around me to find out whether they have ever sent. They don’t send; it is cumbersome. So, isn’t it time that we relieve ourselves of this sending and we stay with the recording. Moreover, hon. Oboth has just advised me that even in court, when I give evidence, they record, but they don’t send it to me. So, wouldn’t we get rid of that portion now? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Should we add “on request”? “Shall be recorded and a copy of the recording may be sent to him/her on request.” Is that better and captures all the issues? Because if the witnesses’ requests, you will have difficulties in saying no to that request. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the formulation now is, “The evidence of every witness shall be recorded and a copy of the recording may be sent to him/her on request.” Agreed?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, the phrase “may,” could mean that the request can be rejected. So, using the word “shall” is appropriate. This time, I agree with the Leader of the Opposition on that point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no that is about going into the legalities of interpretation. If you say, “Upon complying with 1, 2, 3, the commissioner may issue a certificate….” But if you comply with those, the “may” becomes “shall.” So, it does not matter whether we use the word “may” or “shall” it is all captured in the interpretation. For avoidance of doubt let us use the word, “shall.” 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, if we use the words “on request” it disqualifies the meaning of the word “shall.” If you are saying the copy shall be sent to him on request, then he/she does not need to request for it. It must be automatic that they have to get it. I think the use of the word “may” – and this is a humble opinion – what has been the practice in Parliament? Have we been giving out such evidence? What is the rationale? What are we trying to cure here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The rules already provided for it.

MR OBOTH: Yes, Mr Chairman, but as hon. Alice Alaso said, I have some difficulty appreciating that. I need to be helped to appreciate the use of the word “shall” acquiring an optional interpretation. The use of the word “may” could be judiciously – I don’t think if we used the word “may,” there would be any harm.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The use of the word “may” is actually a smarter way of drafting it.

MR OGUTTU: I support the use of the word “shall” because it means once I have requested for it, you have no right to object to it. The purpose here is that once you do the request, that information must be given to you. But if we use the word “may” they can refuse even on request.

MR OBOTH: I would like to think that the discretion should be left to Parliament to either accept or reject the request –(Interjections)– yes, there is the Access to Information Act, but if you use the word “shall” you have no option. So, for whatever reason, you have to give. But really, here is a situation where somebody has testified on oath and the circumstances under which that person comes back to ask for a recorded testimony – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Oboth, if it is my evidence, what reasons would you give to refuse to give me a copy of the recording of that evidence?

MR KATOTO: I would like to support the use of the word “shall” because if it is my evidence; I am entitled to have a copy of that recording. But the use of the word “may” means you have the liberty either to give it to me or not.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I am being intimidated by hon. Fox Odoi, but I would like to say that this is really a question of how to draft it. Anyway, if we are to use the word “shall” why don’t we delete the phrase “on request?” Let us make it mandatory that they get it – we maintain the rule as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment as moved by hon. Oboth that we use the word “may” instead of the word “shall.”

(Question put and negatived.)

I put the question to the proposed amendment that the evidence of every witness shall be recorded and a copy of the recording shall be sent to him/her, on request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 184, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 186

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to introduce sub-rule (2) to read as follows: “For purposes of this rule, witness means a person who testifies before a committee upon issuance of summons by the committee and does not include a person who appears before a committee to give evidence in his or her official capacity.”

The justification is to provide for categories of people who are entitled to receive allowances from the committee. The argument of the committee was that if a person is a Government employee and they appear before a committee, there is absolutely no reason for such a person to be paid an allowance to attend to proceedings of a committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that makes sense. If they have been getting it – the limitations are very appropriate. I put a question that the proposed amendment by the committee form part of the amendment to Rule 186.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 186, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 187

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, in Rule 187, we propose to redraft sub-rule (1) to read as follows: “An order to attend to give evidence or to produce documents before a committee shall be notified to the person required to attend or to produce the documents by summons signed by the Clerk issued by the direction of the Speaker.”

The justification is that the person authorised to issue summons is the Clerk under the direction of the Speaker. This is stipulated in Section 9 of the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the current rule is very good; we have used it for many years. In the current circumstances, this does not work. If you do this, you will be bogging down the work of the committees. In the current rule, the clerk assigned to that committee and the chairperson suffice to issue letters demanding documents. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am looking at Article 90 sub-article 3(a): “(3) In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament – 
(a) may call any Minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.” 

This Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act was passed in 1955 and the Constitution was passed in 1995. Article 274 requires that all existing laws be saved with necessary modifications. So, the one that requires going through the Speaker is inconsistent with Article 93 of the Constitution. I think we should go by what the Constitution says. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you. That notwithstanding, the Speaker’s office is a very busy office, I wonder how it would keep the pace with the operations of committees. So many committees are engaged in different investigations and probes, I wonder how many times you will appeal to the Speaker to grant permission or write summons. So I appeal to the chairperson of the committee to consider withdrawing this proposed amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I wonder how many members constituted the LEGCO, then sitting as Parliament, in 1955. They might have been the size of a committee.     

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, Mr Chairman, of course we cannot sit as a Parliament and nullify any provision of the laws that we may have passed in this manner. We can amend it, and the procedure for amendment is not what we are doing now; there must be a specific Bill for that. 

Secondly, I actually do not see any inconsistency because section 9 is saying that any order to attend a committee shall be notified by the clerk issued by the direction of the Speaker. I would interpret this direction to be deployment. Let me read it: “Any order to attend to give evidence or to produce documents before Parliament or a committee shall be notified to the person required to attend or to produce the documents by summons under the hand of the clerk issued by the direction of the Speaker.”

Committees of Parliament are serviced by the bureaucracy of Parliament, including the Speaker and the Clerk. So, my interpretation of this would be that it is not necessarily inconsistent with Article 90(3) (a) - (Interjections) - I am not challenging the Speaker’s ruling at all. I am just giving my interpretation. 

My proposal is that we go with section 9 of – because there is the Article which you read, 274, it had (1), which was preceding it saying that the President within one year would republish all the laws so that they are consistent with the Constitution or the existing laws then. Of course, the assumption is that all these laws have been published and they have been found to be consistent with the Constitution. Of course, this may not be the case but if it is not the case, then the only way to challenge it is the usual way of challenging the unconstitutionality of a statute.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt hon. Prime Minister, that text is the original text of 1955. The laws were again revised in 2000. I am just trying to see if we can get the revised edition of the laws and if that is captured, because it might have changed.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the rules as they stand - “An order to attend or to produce documents before a committee shall be notified by summons signed by the chairperson of the committee.” 

Most of the work committees do is investigation, bringing documents from our constituents. Supposing a Speaker has a conflict of interest and says, “Do not call that person to come”? Why do we intervene in the work of the committee? Let them do their work - call witnesses and they bring their documents, subject the witnesses to cross examination, write a report and bring it on the Floor of Parliament. We are politicians; it will give leeway for the witness to come to the committee with their documents and without prejudice.
  
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would think as you are waiting for that Act to be brought, it would not substantially affect what the members’ concern is. The current rule allows the chairperson of a committee to sign. There would be nothing wrong with this amendment if you would want the clerk to sign. 

However, what I would persuade Members of Parliament to do is to get the Speaker of Parliament out of this. So, we only have to decide whether we need the chairperson of the committee to sign or the clerk of the committee to sign. We are overwhelming the Speaker. There are over 30 committees operating, including select committees. A committee can decide that today you need to summon someone but then you have to get to the Speaker. I think if we leave it to the clerk, they are already regulated by the Office of the Clerk and they cannot go to the extreme. So, I would really like to persuade members that we leave this issue of direction by the Speaker and leave it to either the clerk or the chairperson of the committee. 

In this case, we could leave it to the clerk because hon. Odoi whispered to me that if politicians are to sign, you can get into political problems or you may be dragged to court. So, we leave it to the institution of Parliament - the clerk of the committee - to sign.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I really do not understand what mischief the committee wanted to cure in this. The decision to summon a witness or to ask for any documents is that of a committee. The committee decides this and the drafting of the summons, through my experience as a chairperson for COSASE, is done by the clerk. I only look through to see whether there are areas that I would like to correct or make additions and then sign.

Now, I think this is a very efficient way of getting summons out of the way. If we go in the direction of the committee, we stand a risk of having to go through the red tape that would go with going to the Speaker and then having the clerk having a bit of doubts as to whether to sign or not, which doubts normally a political head would not have. After they satisfy themselves that it is good enough, they sign the summons. In any case, sometimes if in doubt, the chairperson would be advised to seek a second opinion from members of the committee. 

When we look at the size of Parliament now, with the number of committees that we have and the responsibilities that the Speaker and the Clerk have, we are going to clog these offices with information. I really think that the rule should remain as it is because I do not see any problem the way it is working currently. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you have guided very well and I would ask my brother, the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, who ran away from circumcision, to agree with me. The chairperson of the committee at that particular time is the chairman, just like you are here. In fact, he is representing the Speaker at the committee level just like the Speaker would represent Parliament elsewhere. So, if he is like the Speaker, then he or she is entitled to sign summons as the Speaker and not the clerk. In fact, if the clerks have been signing, then we have been making mistakes. 

I have discovered that the rule says, “the chairperson of the committee”. In fact, here it talks of the committees and not the Speaker. So, Mr Chairman, I want to plead with the Prime Minister that we are - (Interjections) - I know, he is not afraid. I plead that we leave it as it is so that we can move ahead for the good of the operationalisation of the committee. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we trying to say that we leave the Speaker to determine who the committee can invite to the committee? That would be the implication - that the Speaker would have to be involved in determining who the committee invites.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The current rule says the summons shall be signed by the chairperson of the committee and we would like to leave it as it is because the chairperson is acting on behalf of the Speaker. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think to make life easier, and since we have not consulted the current statute on this, we may be safer to maintain the status quo.  

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We withdraw the amendment. 

Rule 190
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The committee proposes that we delete rule 190.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. I would like to raise a procedural concern –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Alaso, can he finish what he is saying before you raise your issue? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete rule 190. The justification is that the Supreme Court in Constitutional Appeal No.1 of 1997, Gen. David Tinyefunza v. Attorney-General, and Constitutional Appeal No.1 of 2002, Paul K Ssemwogerere, Zachary Olum and Juliet Rainer Kafire v. Attorney-General, found that the rule contravenes articles 28, 41 and 44 of the Constitution.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the law is not saying that the information will not be given; it can be given but first there must be leave of the House. So, I do not think there is any problem with the current rule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the current section under which this rule was extracted was nullified by the Constitutional Court. 

MR MWESIGE: I support the chairman’s proposal. You see, once court nullifies the requirement for special leave, then the entire role collapses. The whole purpose of the rule was to require that before a Member of Parliament or a staff of Parliament or a committee of Parliament gives evidence in courts of law, you need special leave of Parliament to do so. Now the Supreme Court said that is unconstitutional. So once the requirement of special leave becomes unconstitutional, then the essence of the whole rule is no longer there. So you cannot save anything in this rule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that rule 190 be deleted as proposed by the chair of the committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 192

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub-rule (2) and redraft sub-rule (3) as follows: “Upon the expiry of the 45 days under sub-rule (1), the House shall proceed to deal with the matter in question without any further delay.”

What we are basically deleting here is the sub-rule that allows the extension of time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we dealt with this matter when we were dealing with Bills and this particular proposal was rejected. The principle is the same. Do you want to change the principle in this one or -

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I will withdraw this.

Rule 195

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to rephrase the entire sub-rule as follows, and it is a long one:

“195 Contempt of Parliament 
(1) An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a Member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his or her duties or affronts the dignity of Parliament or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce such a result shall be contempt of Parliament. 

Acts which constitute breach of privilege or contempt of Parliament
(2) The following shall constitute a breach of privilege or contempt of Parliament:

(a) 	any act or conduct calculated or intended to deceive or mislead Parliament or any of its committees;

(b) 	disorderly conduct on the part of strangers such as unruly or disorderly action by strangers to hinder or promote the passing of a Bill or other legislative measure or motion or any other matter pending before the House;

(c) 	misbehaviour on the part of witnesses appearing before Parliament or any of its committees;

(d) 	deliberate or persistent disobedience of the general rules or orders of the House including its committees designed to prevent, delay, obstruct or interfere with the execution of the orders of the House or of its committees;

(e) 	blatant disobedience of a decision or directive of the House by a Member, officer or such other person in the exercise of powers possessed by the House;

(f) 	presenting to Parliament frivolous, false, disgraceful, groundless or fabricated documents or such allegations in a petition; 

(g) 	misconduct or corruption in the execution of official duties by Members or officers of Parliament; 

(h) 	publication of false, perverted, misleading, distorted, fabricated or scandalous reports, books or libels reflecting on the proceedings in Parliament; 

(i) 	causing or effecting the arrest of a Member or officer of Parliament during the proceedings of Parliament or in the course of his or her duties; 

(j) 	molestation of Members or officers in connection with the performance of their duties in or out of Parliament;

(k) 	attempts by improper or corrupt means to influence Members or officers in their parliamentary duties;

(l) 	attempts to intimidate by threats of Members in the conduct of their duties;

(m) 	obstructing or deterring by arrest or molestation, persons summoned to attend Parliament as witnesses;

(n) 	molestation of witnesses on account of their performance in Parliament or before any of its committees; or 

(o) 	any act or omission which affronts the dignity of Parliament or which tends either directly or indirectly to bring the name of Parliament into disrepute.

Complaint of Contempt of Parliament

(3) 	A Member may, at any time appointed for complaints of contempt of Parliament under rule 22, bring to the House any complaint of contempt of Parliament if he or she has previously notified the Speaker.

(4)	In urgent circumstances, a complaint referred to in sub rule (1) may, with the prior permission of the Speaker, be made at a time other than that appointed for it.

(5) 	Any such complaint for contempt of Parliament may be referred by the Speaker to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for examination, investigation and report.”

The justification, in summary, is that we wanted to very clearly provide for contempt of Parliament and breach of privilege, and we hope we achieved that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I think it is a good idea, and it is the law and practice in many places to create the offence called contempt of Parliament. However, I think we should not create it in the Rules of Procedure. We cannot create this here. At any rate, by our constitutional provision, when you create an offence it must be created by law and the penalty must also be specified.

My suggestion is - like in Canada, Australia and so on - we should get this, maybe improve on it and have a statute which provides for contempt of Parliament as an offence and we deal with it as such. We should do that rather than in the rules, the way it is done here. The way we are trying to do it here I actually do not think is consistent with the Constitution.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the timing of this amendment is also worth noting. However, we are not creating an offence. There is nowhere in this rule, if you read it again, where we are trying to create an offence and inserting that particular offence in our Rules of Procedure.

What is actually being done, in response to the Prime Minister’s concern, is that we are formally stating what amounts to breach of parliamentary privileges, which is very right for this House to do. If we do not do that, what would be the basis of referring, say me, to the rules and disciplinary committee? These elements are very elaborate that I can get myself into the rules and disciplinary committee of Parliament. So, what the Prime Minister is concerned about for now is not much called for because we are not stating an offence here.

Secondly, I think this provision should be applied retrospectively from the beginning of the Parliament, if members would agree with my – (Interjections) - This is a principle of law - (Interjections) – It is a principle of law. If it is the intention of the legislator that a law has a retrospective effect, – like the way we did with the Pensions Act; we passed it in 2006 but my benefits started from 2001 - we can make it so. 

I am persuading members that we can make it retrospective because if we do not, then we should as well now stop the other committee which was handling issues of contempt of Parliament from proceeding because it would not have been defined in our rules. That means that you can even read their report now before they go far. 

Mr Chairman, those are my two concerns. one, that the concern of the Prime Minister does not arise because we are not creating offences; we are just listing the types of conduct that amount to contempt of Parliament and to breach of parliamentary privileges. Two, I propose that it has a retrospective impact from when this Parliament started so that we can get some people who are still at large by the types of conduct that are specified in the current amendment. My colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi, would appreciate – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odonga Otto, I would like to ask you that should the committee find that a member is in contempt of Parliament, what happens?

MR ODONGA OTTO: You are taken to the rules committee upon a formal complaint - you can be represented by an advocate – and they bring a formal report to Parliament. 

One of the recommendations can be that the culprit apologises or else they are suspended from the House for three weeks. Actually, in the last Parliament I went to that committee. So, it will still undergo a formal process. It is not that once you are mentioned for contempt of Parliament then you go home immediately. After appearing before the committee, you may be forced to apologise or the Speaker may name you and you may not be allowed to speak for six consecutive sessions or be published in the newspapers. 

It is important that we have mechanisms of ensuring that even the Chair is respected. Supposing I am being brought to order but I am persistent, something bad should happen to me so that it does not make it lucrative for me to handle the Chair with disrespect.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me just guide on the legalities of this. Where you are prohibiting a conduct and prescribing penalty for it, that falls within the principles of criminal legislation and the Constitution prohibits retrospective application of these matters. A matter that did not constitute an offence at the time it was committed, a conduct that did not constitute an offence at the time it was committed cannot be made an offence retrospectively. That is the core principle. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I withdraw that aspect of retrospective application. I just wanted to sound a loud bell to the Prime Minister who was attentively listening to me. Now that he has heard, I withdraw it.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, I am persuaded by both your guidance and the submission by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. However, hon. Otto’s point is so critical that we must look at it. What happens to members who misbehave here and there; how do we handle them? 

I am persuaded by your guidance because beyond Parliament, what happens to those who breach our privileges? For example, what happens to those who come to the committees and have problems with us? They are not Members of Parliament and so we cannot prescribe punishment for them under our rules. The Speaker says that we may need to create separate offences under a separate law, but what happens to us here; what happens when hon. Odonga Otto misbehaves like he did last time? (Laughter) There should be some sanctions to enforce discipline. What happens when honourable colleagues misbehave and are referred to the rules committee for investigation?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the sanctions are appropriate and the regulation of conduct is appropriate but the question is: when do they start working? Do they apply to the past cases or with effect from now? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I think we are not disagreeing in principle; we are trying to cure a lacuna of defining what contempt of Parliament is. Without diverting your attention, the concern of the Prime Minister is: should it be in the Rules of Procedure? 

Suppose this elaborate definition of the grounds for contempt of Parliament was laid in the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act? My proposal is that we have it in the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act instead of the rules. Couldn’t it set grounds for reference by any committee like the rules committee in case of any dispute to adjudicate on? Couldn’t it solve the problem?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I am looking at rule 22, which sets out the order of business. When you look at sub-rule (2)(u), it mentions complaints on contempt of Parliament. There is the basis on which a complaint was also sent to the rules committee. There is another rule which I have tried to look for but failed to get – the rule which indicates that that complaint shall be forwarded to the rules committee to investigate - (Interjections) - Rule 195 says that: “A Member may, at any time appointed for complaints of contempt of Parliament under rule 22, bring to the House any complaint of contempt of Parliament if he or she has previously notified the Speaker.” But there is another rule which – (Interjections) – Okay; the Prime Minister has helped me. 

Rule 149 talks about the functions of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Sub-rule (1)(a) says: “to inquire into any complaint of contempt of Parliament or breach of privilege or any matter of privilege which may be referred to it and to recommend to the House such action as the committee may consider appropriate.” The difficulty which we will have if we are to move it away from the rules is that we will have to delete or move all these other provisions to the Powers and Privileges Act.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I wish to help my colleague, hon. Amongi. In rules of procedure, there are two branches of law, substantive law and procedural law. Creation of an offence is a substantive issue and it must be defined in a substantive Act. Contempt of anything is an offence and a breach. 

My understanding of contempt of Parliament is that it is an offence against the privileges, immunities and dignity of Parliament and it must be punished. Contempt of court is punished by the courts of law. So contempt of Parliament must also be punished by the laws of this Parliament. It is not out of place. All these provisions, rule 22, rule 149 and rule 195 are not out of place. They are in the right place because they prescribe the procedure of handling complaints of contempt of Parliament. 

As the Prime Minister did propose, we could review the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act and elaborately define what contempt of Parliament is and even prescribe the sanctions. Here the committee has just attempted to define what contempt of Parliament is but they do not tell us what happens when anybody commits contempt of Parliament. So we need to go to the parent Act, and I think the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act would be the right home, to define contempt of Parliament with its ingredients and create sanctions. We then leave it to the rules to tell us where a complaint is lodged and how it is handled when an offence of contempt of Parliament is committed. That is my proposal, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we need to find a day when we can discuss the position of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament vis-à-vis Acts of Parliament. Why am I saying so? It is because the Rules of Procedure of Parliament are a creature of the Constitution; they are not a statutory instrument. This is made by the authority of the Constitution, Article 94 - “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution - it is only subject to the provisions of the Constitution - Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees.”

So we might have to seek an advisory opinion of the Constitutional Court on this issue so that we are guided. Where do you place the Rules of Procedure of Parliament? Acts of Parliament are made from these same rules. We use the same rules to process Acts of Parliament. Should what we use to process Acts of Parliament be subordinate to the laws we pass? We need to find time and have someone interpret this thing for us. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Like you have guided, the Constitution is very clear. It empowers us to make our own rules and I think the lawyers, particularly the Prime Minister, is making reference to Article 28(12), which I think he is misinterpreting. If you allow me to read, it says, “Except for contempt of court, no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty for it prescribed by law.” 

Our rules already are making reference to a behaviour which can be interpreted as contempt of Parliament and the question has been that it is not defined. We are not saying that Parliament will convict you. I think by conviction they mean the courts of law. We are only making a procedure to regulate our own behaviour within the House. We are not saying that if we find you guilty of contempt of Parliament, that is conviction. No! I think the Constitution should be interpreted properly because even for us paralegals, we can understand it. 

I think the committee is right to define what contempt of Parliament is because there is behaviour in this House which we interpret as contempt. So, if you say we do not provide for it, then what shall we be doing? Let us not try to defeat justice because of what has happened but let us make our own rules. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in fact somebody is better off being charged with contempt of Parliament and not contempt of court because (c) here says: “Attempt to intimidate by threats of members in conduct of their duties.” I can tell you my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, if you were intimidating us outside we would have taken you somewhere bad but here you intimidate us and we leave you here. (Laughter) So, it is better to be charged under this law than under the other one.

Mr Chairman, what I want to bring out is that our Rules of Procedure are law and we should -(Interjections)- Yes, if you had not known, ask hon. Amama Mbabazi, my big brother, and he will tell you. They are laws and if they are laws, we should make clear laws which govern us. 

I would propose that as much as some of those institutions - I will not attempt to define it but there are some institutions which have attempted to define contempt of Parliament. Ghana has attempted to define it, and it is in their rules. I think it will also be good for us to try it. If we discover it is not doing very well, we shall remove it. But for now, let it be there. It will create some discipline in this House and it will bring a sense of belonging to the House other than bringing a sense of belonging to the outside world. So, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Sorry. The information I want to give is that the other day I was driving and I was listening to the radio in the car. I heard an announcement by an NGO condemning MPs on the issue of the vehicle scheme. They are even appealing to the public to observe and to monitor us - (Interjections) - Radio announcements! – (Interjections) - It is their right but honestly speaking, these are the kind of activities that may demand that some people be summoned for contempt of Parliament. (Laughter) That is the information I want to give. 

Yes, they are the rules of the House but they are the rules that help the House. In fact, from the definition of the rules it is an activity which tends to undermine Parliament from performing its duties. So we must not be shy.

The information I would want to add is that we can have it both in our rules and in the statute books the Prime Minister is suggesting. As the chairman of the committee following assurances, we may talk today but we might take another two years until we have another big problem and then we shall realise that it is not there in the statutes. So, for now I would advise that the worst case scenario is to have it both in the Rules of Procedure and then the Prime Minister can take it to whichever statute he wants, even in the Constitution. It would still not be injurious to the intentions we have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about honourable members of the House who give false, perverted, misleading, distorted, fabricated and scandalous reports on statements? It is not here- (Interjections) - Where?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is (f). It should be (f).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is publication. That is by the newspapers. What about going and yapping there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are free to get those ones yapping at press conferences under other courts of law - (Interjections) – Yes, that is true. They can do it. As long as it is a publication, you can deal with it outside. It is not here but those ones here, we can have rules to discipline them. Also, this will make sure that everybody will act responsible. Short of that, we are going to have a big problem. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, under contempt of Parliament, I think the list is not complete. It should include those who absent themselves - (Laughter) - causing lack of quorum and do not vote. There are those who register their names and then go away. That is dangerous contempt of Parliament. It should be included.

Secondly, I also want to ask Parliament to know the hierarchy of law. Let us all know, perhaps if we do not know, the hierarchy of law. The highest law is the Constitution and then from the Constitution, the Parliament here enacts an Act of Parliament. To facilitate the minister or whoever implements the Act of Parliament, we allow the ministers statutory instruments. 

We should see where the rules fall in. If it is under Acts of Parliament, let us also bring it out; which Act of Parliament has brought the rules? If it is there, let us know. If it is not there, let us bring it out. If it is mentioned in the Constitution, which is right, even offices and so on are created in the Constitution and then the Parliament is asked to come out with the enabling law. So, I think the Rules of Procedure will let us know which Act is now implementing the Constitution which has been referred to.

I am glad that hon. Odonga Otto has withdrawn that retrospective idea. I am very happy because he knew why he could not go further with it. We would not accept it. We would even have taken him to the Uganda Law Council. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me conclude. Misconduct or corruption in execution of official duties by members is there. So, those who sign and run away, this one will help us. 

I also want to withdraw the statement that my brother is threatening people. I have withdrawn it. You do not threaten; you talk. It is important that we put this here to deal with conduct of members, and people will stop signing books when they know they will not attend Parliament. Let us know you are absent with leave of Parliament but do not sign and run away and eat money.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I agree with you that where there is no clarity, we may be safer seeking an interpretation which is binding on everyone. 

I just want to make a point. I admire the courage of hon. Baryomunsi to try and interpret the Constitution as a paralegal. (Laughter) I would like to inform hon. Baryomunsi that actually, even a paralegal has to meet certain minimum qualifications. (Laughter) 

If you look at our Constitution, if I can actually start with what he was reading, which is Article 28, clause 12, it says; “Except for contempt of court, no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty for it prescribed by law”. So what does “law” mean?  If you look at the functions of Parliament, which is Article 91, it says, “…the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President”. So, that is the process.

When you come to what you have listed here, just to give you an example - I do not want to go into details because I want to remain at the Baryomunsi level, which is understanding the little meaning of what we all can read, if you are literate. This is the point he was making. If you are literate, you can read these and, of course, give them interpretation. The difference between a literate person and a lawyer is that a lawyer does more than just the reading; he does interpretation - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, our rules stipulate how you refer to a colleague; you do not just refer to a colleague casually like “Baryomunsi level”. I think he is an honourable Member of Parliament and we should use the right words to refer to a colleague. So, is the Prime Minister in order to refer to a surgeon, an honourable doctor, as just mere Baryomunsi? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt hon. Prime Minister, hon. Baryomunsi was giving a surgical interpretation of the Constitution and he is a full member of this House. Refer to him with his full titles.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If you look, for instance, at what they are proposing in (f) - “Presenting to Parliament frivolous, false, disgraceful, groundless or fabricated documents” - actually, this is already covered in our law. Some of us here think that you can come and do this now and get away with it and you will be insulated by the powers and privileges of Parliament. I am afraid this is not so. Soon, of course, we will show that. 

In the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, in part iv - offences in Parliament - section 18(g) says, “Any person who presents to Parliament or a committee any false, untrue, fabricated or falsified document with intent to deceive Parliament or the committee commits an offence and is liable on conviction before a court to a fine not exceeding four thousand shillings or to imprisonment for any term not exceeding two years or to both such fine and imprisonment”. 

I can read for you more but there will be time when I have the occasion to address these offences, which already exist in our statute books, arising out of conduct of Members of Parliament in Parliament. So, when we read this provision 28, clause 12 which my brother, hon. Baryomunsi, was reading, it is simply saying that if you are to be convicted of a criminal offence, that offence must be defined and in the law that creates that offence, even the penalty for it must be described. These are very critical points. It is very critical, therefore, that when we are talking about these things like contempt of Parliament and engaging in these types of behaviour that are listed here, you are actually talking of creating offences, some of which already exist in our laws.

So I agree with you, Mr Chairman, that we could go and seek interpretation of the court on this so that we are properly guided. However, as things stand now, I do not think it would be fit for this Parliament – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, and the member on the Floor, lawyers say that they are learned; doctors are educated. 

I just wanted to seek clarification from the Prime Minister because 28(12) says that no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence. Within the meaning of this provision, is it your view that when, for example, a committee of Parliament makes a report and we say that you apologise, you interpret it as a conviction with a criminal offence within the meaning of law? When Parliament says just apologise to us, is that a conviction as understood in this Constitution?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Many of these things are already catered for. I had shown my colleague who asked that question that there are other provisions in the rules or statutes which talk about misconduct in the House. You remember we have provisions which deal with repetitive presentations in Parliament. There is some behaviour which can lead to naming. There is some behaviour which can lead to what happened to my young brother, hon. Odonga Otto. That was behaviour which was very well covered by the existing Rules of Procedure. So yes, these rules actually already cater for those. We are simply talking about contempt of Parliament and the things that have been listed. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, just for clarity. I have heard the hon. Prime Minister make mention of my name and earlier hon. Steven Baka also did the same. Those who were not there in this Parliament may not understand what they are talking about.

We had a situation where some Members of Parliament found themselves locked out of this institution - physical locking of this door - during a plenary sitting. So we had to force our way in. As fate had it, those members who forced themselves in, five of us, were dragged to the disciplinary committee of this Parliament. So the question remained, was it the problem of the person who locked the door or the problem of the one who broke the door to get themselves inside the House? It is almost like the chicken and the egg. 

So, when the Prime Minister is mentioning our names, I do not want you people to think that something very international happened here. It was about getting ourselves inside Parliament to represent our people, which we did so gracefully. I just wanted to give this information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, if you look at part 13 of our Rules of Procedure, it deals with what we call order in the House and talks about naming members. In rule 76, a member may be suspended from the precincts of Parliament. So, we have in our rules already provisions that deal with specific behaviour of members in the House.

On contempt of Parliament, we know what happens elsewhere. I cited the case of Canada and Australia. They all have this as an offence defined by law with clear penalties, and I think this is how we should go about it. I think all these are good ideas, which should be specified and should be covered by the law. I am only saying that I do not think we are safe to deal with them under the Rules of Procedure. So, my proposal is that we follow your proposition that we seek interpretation of that in the courts and we are guided on the next action. My expectation would be that we would have to legislate to create the offence.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I rise to move a motion under rule 46(c), motions without notice. It reads: “any motion for the adjournment of a debate.” 

Mr Chairman, it is coming to 8.00 p.m. and nature dictates that we attend to people at home. I therefore move a motion for the adjournment of the debate. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, a proposal has been moved for closure of debate on the matter before us. We have matters that were pending and I am required to put this question without any debate on it. I put the question that debate on this matter be closed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure and handled rules 160 to 192 and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that brings us to the close of today’s business. I had a proposal to make. We have Bills ready for processing, ready to come for second reading. The Companies Bill, I am told, is ready and it is one big one, and several other Bills are ready for processing. 

We are beginning to move into a very busy session as part of our calendar. The papers from the ministries are going to start flying in and the committees are going to get very busy. We need to move quickly on some of these issues. We need to conclude on the rules and all pending matters so that we can clear the way for the next businesses to come. I was proposing that tomorrow we start at 10 in the morning, work for two hours and then we return at 2.30 p.m. so that we can make some –

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, tomorrow is Wednesday and it is Cabinet day and every minister is obliged to attend Cabinet. May I request that we come at 2.00 p.m. sharp? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am always here at 2 O’clock. We can think about doing it morning and afternoon on Thursday and Friday, two hours in the morning. We shall adjourn before midday to allow our brothers of the Muslim faith say their prayers at 1.00 p.m.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: For the reasons you have just said, those who are not going to pray must continue. For us, we shall go and pray and then come back. If you just say everybody goes, including those who are not going to mosques, that is also under deployment. So, hon. Odonga Otto, Dombo and so on should continue working – (Interjections) - Not kafir; they will go on Sunday. Those of us who are going on Friday should go and come back so that at least business goes on; otherwise, I do not know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow we will need to have our colleagues in Cabinet deal with the business there in the morning and we report here at 2 O’clock, and by 2 O’clock I mean 2 O’clock because I will be here at 2 O’clock. The House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 March 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
  
