
Wednesday, 18th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate Continued from Tuesday 17th March, 1993).

MR. MOHAMMED MAYANJA (Pallisa County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this very important and crucial Bill.

I support the Bill and before I go any further, allow me to thank my Colleagues the hon. Members of this House for having acted democratically during the recent recess and went back to the people to get their views on this very important Bill. (Applause)  That is a sign that the Parliament we have is composed of people who value democracy and who value the people they represent.  The moment we are in is very important but it is not only important but also a difficult moment.  And when one is in a difficult moment, one has got to suppress emotions so that logic prevails.  So, the moment we are in calls for superb virtues.  These virtues include understanding.  This period in the history of Uganda when Ugandans should reflect back in the past that we have had and be able to handle the present with a lot of caution and understanding.  Short of that, we are likely to make mistakes, mistakes that will kill the real fabric of democracy in this nation.  The period is also very crucial for the stability and the political development of this nation and we have got to be objective.  We have got to be sober in our thinking, and political fanaticism should not possess us because once we do that, then self-interest will prevail and the role we are supposed to play as representatives of the people, will be derailed completely.

A constitution-making process is another landmark in the list of achievements during our time and especially so the nature of constitution-making that we are debating now or that we are about to debate.  It is unique because nowhere in the history of Uganda have people been given the opportunity to pave their own destiny by way of a constitution-making process.  A Constitution is an appropriate political institution through which the people can exert power.  The constitution-making process is a mechanism of democracy.  The people are the purpose and the means of democracy.  Once you forget the people when you are speaking about democracy as the purpose and the means of democracy then you are likely to lose course.  One statesman wrote and said that in a democracy the people are the Gods and the leaders and therefore as their representative must submit to the will of the Gods.  And, I think I agree with him because since they are the means and the purpose of democracy whenever we seek a mandate to represent them, we go to them and they determine our being here and, therefore, they are the Gods.  Perhaps I would say that we are messengers, we are the angels if I can equate democracy to the heavenly creation.  We have God and then the Angels and then we who are on earth, his creatures.  When God want to send a message to his people he goes through the Angels and, therefore, in a democracy, where people are the Gods and we as their representatives are the angels then Government becomes the people. I think you get me. (Laughter) So, in a democracy the people are the gods and we must therefore submit to the will of the gods who are our people.  

Having said that, I would like to emphasise my point by touching briefly on what leadership is vice versa democracy and representation. The provision of leadership is a calling.  We are called by the Almighty to come and lead the people and in the process of providing good leadership we lead them to certain heights.  That is to say leadership entails transforming society so that where you found poor people as a result of your leadership, the people should be transformed and their standard of living must appear better than it was.  Good leadership must also relinquish power to the people.  It must give them a voice as the NRM Government has given voice to a community that was voiceless.  Leadership must also be open minded and receptive to modern ideas and change.  A good leader, therefore, must have a free volition that which is for the people and being undemocratic is being anti the people.  A leader must learn sacrifice.  He must learn to postpone for the sake of better ideals in the future.  He must forego comfort, self-convenience and self-esteem at times where you feel for the sake of your people you must cease being called a honourable if it is for the sake of the people why not forfeit it?

Having said that, let me pay tribute to the NRM Revolution and in so doing, allow me to quote one English writer, Agathe Christine.  She was not a politician but her literature has got a lot of wisdom that we may benefit from.  Agathe Christine one day said, that one does not recognise the importance of these few years that the NRM has transformed this country from the abyss that it was in, to the present glory then we shall regret tomorrow when it is too late, when we cannot have NRM coming back again to rescue us out of the hell that it found us in.  The NRM era has been both an important moment and a golden moment for Uganda.  The ideals for which the NRM started this revolution should be sustained and even perfected so that those who will live after us will be able to see a good Uganda.  

I tend to the argument to decry by colleagues and others who when talking about the NRM they refer to the NRM as ‘they’ even during the interim period when we are part of the whole system.  They refer to the NRM as ‘they are NRM’ and whoever I try to phase out who these ‘they the NRM’ are, I fail to understand because with out broad baseness, I do not think, Mayanja having been say, a DP. I can dissociate myself with the ideals and achievements of NRM.  Let us look at the results.   NRM has been result oriented by delivering the peace, by delivering the unity and I do not think I would be sane to dissociate myself from the peace, from the unity, from development, however little it is by referring, by appearing to refer to NRM as something amorphous and which is very distant from me that ‘they the NRM’.  I think colleagues we need to appreciate though it is very easy for one to sympathise with a friend’s misfortune as one writer says, it is very difficult for one to sympathise with a friend’s achievements, but let us be sympathetic and appreciate to the achievements of the NRM and give credit where it is due. (Applause)

Now, coming a little bit to the Bill, as I wind up, I would like to inform the House what the people Pallisa District said in a meeting that I chaired as NEC representative for this district.  I was executing the role that you entrusted me to.  The Pallisa people, though I may defer with what they said as a person, as Mayanja or any other colleague from Pallisa may defer with what they said but at least, they said it and we are duty bound to articulate what they said in this meeting.  They said for the sake of avoiding legislative stalemate in the nation during the Constituent Assembly debate or during the adoption stage of the Constitution, NRC should continue with its legislative duties and therefore they proposed - because these are proposals - they proposed that Members of NRC should be barred from contesting for the Constituent Assembly elections -(Laughter)- these are their views.
 
AN HON. MEMBER:  You are right.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. MAYANJA:  That was the cardinal contentious point as far as the people of Pallisa were concerned.  The rest they were favourably in agreement.

Now, having left that point, I would like to lament the future that awaits us.  I hope we shall be able to pass this Bill in one way or another whether with amendments or without amendments and then the Constituent Assembly will be constituted and start debating the Constitution.  My discomfort, however, lies in unpredictability of our politicians. As hon. Nasasira one day said, some of our politicians seem to have a very short memory for the past and lack adequate vision for the future and that is where my discomfort lies.  But if we could commit ourselves as leaders, as clear-headed leaders then the stage where we are now is likely to usher us into a better Uganda that will be good for every one to live in.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.  Before I make my contribution on this debate, permit me to make some general remarks.  First of all, I want to thank through, hon. Members on behalf of my constituency for having responded to our invitation to visit our area over the weekend and the generous contributions that you pledged and paid, were seriously considered when the Vice President was in my constituency.  So, I wish to remind those who have paid that we are very grateful and that those who have not please make sure that this is done before we go for elections of the Constituent Assembly.

Now, to the debate, generally this is one of the most difficult debates I have participated in since I came to this House because the views expressed by the members have been so good, almost each and every Member who has spoken so far has thought about this Bill, has consulted about this Bill and was talking with the powers of conviction and every time I was also going along with them but then the opposing views became finally distinct and very clear and finally I had to sit down with my own conscience and decide which side I am going to take.  Therefore, I want to assure you hon. Members that I have had a very serious personal search with myself and I have therefore taken a very strong position having considered all the matters.  First, I have found that there is one area where Members have not concentrated on, and using a little bit of advantage of having been a student of the hon. Minister of Constitutional Affairs, I looked at this situation and I wish to bring it to his attention and this is the establishment section.  The Members have not seriously addressed the role of the Constituent Assembly.  Section 4(i) says; for the purposes of scrutinising, debating, enacting and promulgating a new Constitution, it is in other words the power of the Constitution. Section 8(i) buttresses that position further and it says, that the functions of the Assembly shall be, ‘to scrutinise, debate and prepare a final draft of the Constitutional text prepared and submitted to the Minister by the Uganda constitutional Commission under the provisions of sub-section (6) of Section 6 of the Uganda Constitutional Commission Statute 1988, and (b) to enact and also to promulgate a new Constitution for the Republic of Uganda’.  

I want to draw the attention of the Members that we are giving too much power to the constituent Assembly and I would like Members to be very conscious of the powers they are handing over. There are two issues which have been quietly planted in these sub-sections (4) and (8) that might have really escaped you.  One, the power we are delegating to the Constituent assembly is simply a little bit too much in my opinion.  We are forcing all our constitutional eggs in that basket yet we are the ones who created the Constitutional Commission to do that work which Justice Odoki and his Commission has brought.  So, for five years these Commissioners were traversing the country, getting views, hearing from the people, attending seminars, speaking to political parties, speaking to Universities, to doctors, lawyers, to interested people, traveling abroad, collecting information from different constitutions and finally they came up with what they call a consensus document.  But now we are saying that that Draft Constitution of Justice Odoki is useless.  If you read the Section 4 and 8 carefully, the Constituent Assembly is not obliged to deal with Odoki’s Commission’s Report.  It is not.  This is a very serious omission in my view.  How should we for give years spend so much resource, get so many views and then give power to 180 people plus or 300 people or 400 or 800 or whatever number and you say, you have more power than what the RC I, what all these people described have felt.  Supposing those 180 men and women plus a few others as proposed by the Minister, besides that what is popularly agreed, for example, that the President be elected by one man one vote and here by one man, I mean women as well, supposing the 180 people plus a few others decide no, no, it will be Parliament to decide who the President will be and there is no question about it and they all agree and there is a consensus -(Interjection)- yes, the people as consulted wanted one man one vote.  This Parliament must now decide who should have the last say.  Should it be the people there who said what they said to the Constitution Commission that you set up five years ago, or should it be the 300 people whom you are setting up now.  The issue is not contentious, the 300 have agreed.  Therefore the issue is no longer contentious, however, the people have already spoken through this report.  My view is that this issue should not escape our attention nor should it escape the attention of the Minister -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Matembe.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I wish to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House in general through you is that the main concern of the people as we went around was how sure were we as a Commission that the Constituent Assembly once established will not overturn their ideas over there.  It was a very major concern in the minds of the people and it will remain a major concern in the minds of the people.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Additional information from the Minister of Commerce.  

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to give information through you to the House, information that is already with Members that the Government has already considered that position and I believe the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs has distributed a document on which on page that very point if you may care to look at is squarely addressed.  It is on page 4 in the amendments proposed and I quote, without prejudice to Sub-section (i), ‘whenever any decision of the Assembly on any matter of a national character is at variance’ i.e. except the point raised by hon. Karuhanga and as supported by hon. Matembe, where there is here a matter of national character is at variance in a substantial way with the views or proposals contained in the report of the Uganda Constitutional Commission on any matter the Chairman shall immediately in writing notify the Minister of that fact and you will note on (5) upon receiving notification the Minister may after carrying out such consultations as may be appropriate refer the matter to a national referendum.  So, the point is this, I think hon. Karuhanga is raising a very valid point that you could have a smaller body to scrutinise, debate and end up coming to a conclusion in their judgement that is at variance with what people expressed.  The Chairman is under duty to bring that to the attention of the Minister who may cause a referendum to be held, that is, appealing to the people uphold what they think is right.  I thought Members needed that explanation.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAVUMA:  Information.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to additionally inform this House through you, Sir, that I think the language has also been taken of.  This Bill talks of a delegate to the Constituent Assembly not a representative.  Those two words have two different meanings in law.  A delegate is supposed to convey what the people tell him to the conference where he goes whereas a representative has the discretion to defer from what the people say.  So, I think there is enough care taken over a situation where a delegate may cone and betray the people who sent him here because they will be listening and then they have the opportunity to take appropriate action.  I think there is enough protection, Mr. Chairman, Sir.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, people in my constituency threw me a question that is that you are debating this Constituent Assembly Bill, initially when the NRM came to power you had said they were going to be there for four years, then later on they called expanded NRC and then from there, having called expanded NRC at the end of the year 1989 they said we want to extend the period for the purposes of establishing a Constitution in place.  One is the police, the army and the Judiciary.  Now, they say do not you think the Constituent Assembly that is going to be elected will not the NRM Government manipulation to say you have been elected directly and therefore we do not need an election?  they have given me this question and they say they want to be answered whether they are going to be manipulated or not.  Thank you, Sir. (Laughter)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to assure Members that I have taken note of the information given by hon. Matembe that the question has been bothering people a lot and it has also bothered people in my constituency and I wanted Members to be aware that if they had brought the attention to this fact, it would have as well bothered the people in their own constituencies after all.  I have also taken note of hon. Kaijuka’s information and I am really very grateful to it because when I was preparing for this contribution, although I read the Minister’s sections, I aimed at those sections for which were disturbing me and I never got the attention of this.  I am glad that the Minister has made an attempt he has made and the answers he has come up with.  What the Minister is saying if I understand it and I have not read it very carefully if I am mistaken but I got it from hon. Kaijuka. What he is saying is that if what the people told the Constitutional Commission which we set up Statute and there was a consensus on an issue and if the Constituent Assembly as elected, as proposed of 180 plus, decide that for them they have a different opinion from what the consensus is from the people, the proposal is that the Minister will be informed about that difference and the Minister may make consultations and may ask for a referendum.  Now, it is a very good attempt as an answer but it is not very satisfactory to me.  Supposing the Minister is not informed and this ‘may’ is a legal terminology meaning he will decide that I actually favour one of the groups, so I keep quiet.  It is up to his discretion not at the Parliament’s discretion.  Are you going to give this power to my teacher, hon. Njuba?  (Interjection)- Well, he taught e, thank you, but now we are at a different stage, we are representing people.  

So, my proposal is that first I am not satisfied with the method of resolving the issue through the Minister.  I think the matter should be addressed further.  I have my views now but as I said, they are not very well prepared and I am not going to rush them because this is a very serious issue I do not want to make a mistake on it, but I would invite those who have not spoken to address this question and I ask the Minister to think about it because the answer that is provided here in my view is falling too far short of what we would like to see.  Something definite must take place.
  
The failure by the report by this Bill both in Section 4 and in section 8 to compel the Constituent Assembly to discuss the report of the Constitutional Commission cannot pass without an amendment.  We must tell that Constituent assembly that they must discuss the report of the constitutional Commission in clear and unambiguous terms.  They must not come here and say, ‘well it is not in the law’.  So, I would have an amendment which would read, if you permit me to read it now that, ‘the function of the Assembly shall be...’ that is to amend Section 8 and these really are my humble opinion - the function of the Assembly shall be to receive for consideration and debate from the Minister the draft Constitution of the Republic of Uganda prepared by the Uganda constitutional Commission under provisions of Sub-section (6) of the Uganda Constitutional Commission Statute 1988, and thereafter (b), to write and enact a new Constitution for the Republic of Uganda so that the issue is not - they have got a specific assignment.  At the moment, they may not receive and mind you, I have used the word ‘enact’ and stopped there.  I have not added the words ‘to promulgate’ nor have I added the word ‘to proclaim’ which is in Section 19 because Section 19 talks of the effective date of the new Constitution and has now been amended to limits, by the Minister now in these amendments.  Section 19 has been amended because there is now introduced Section 19(i) and Section 19(2) in the new Minister’s amendments.  

So, now the time of the President to asset and proclaim has been limited.  He has only a number of days to do his work, 60 days, and I welcome that amendment from the Minister, I am very grateful about that but supposing the President does not do it in 60 days -(Interjection)- we have not said so, we have only limited him.  Supposing he does not, we are just assuming that President Museveni is a good man -(Laughter)- we have to write it down, if he does not sign in 60 days something must happen in law not on whims.  I ask the hon. Minister in charge of this Bill to compel the President to proclaim within that period, if he does not the Constitution may be should come back here or should become effective or something should happen but I am asking the Minister since he had addressed himself to Section 19 to be serious about Section 19.

Hon. Members, you know that the legal - the law making organs are all taken care of in this Bill.  The President normally assets to Bills and he is taken of by Parliament, the supreme law making body has not retained something so that this Bill, this Constitution is really a Constitution of everybody, all the leaders so, I am keeping one word for Parliament. When the power of the Constituent Assembly to debate has been finished to write and then enact, they should bring the Constitution to Parliament because there are some of us who will not want to go to participate in the Constituent Assembly, but we are still legislators and the law is made here, all laws are made here.  Those fellows should bring it, pass it on to the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs who should come to Parliament, speak before our Chairman, and say Members you delegated some powers to some people, now do what we normally do in tabling Bill, laying it on the table and they ask us to promulgate the Constitution so that all the leaders, because we are not compelled to go and stand, but we still have a role to play here, don’t we? So that the President has been secured in Section 19, we are also secured in Section 19, I want to make an improvement on that Section 19 by introducing another section and the Constituent Assembly is doing its work and then all the leaders can feel -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the speaker holding the Floor in light of the statement made by the President about the composition of this House and in light of the general attitude which we gather were the position of the people, whether in case of the Constitution being referred to this House and the House takes a different decision then who resolves the problem in view of the fact that the delegates who will have formed the Constituent Assembly would have had a better mandate in light of what we have heard so far.  I would like the speaker to clarify since he is a good student of law and most of all a student of the Minister who is presenting the Bill -(Laughter).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I have already said that the power of the Constituent Assembly is being exercised on our behalf.  We are delegating this power to this committee, this task force called the Constituent Assembly; we are the ones creating that body. That animal we are creating is our child -(Interruption)- we are the ones who are empowering it, we are the ones who are giving it a mandate, when it is through with its work and it is satisfied, it brings back the work to us for promulgation.  Promulgation does not open debates, it pronounces, Parliament pronounces just like the President just announces and attached his signature -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from the Mover. 

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, permit me to inform the speaker on the Floor so that he does not mislead the House.  This House - what this House is doing now is setting up machinery through which the people who are sovereign will set up a body to enact the Constitution.  We are not delegating powers, we are providing a vehicle to the people of Uganda through which, as sovereign, they will mandate those that are to enact the Constitution.  That is why we have provided that where there is an appeal, where there is a problem and conflict with the report; we go back to the people.

MR. KARUHANGA:  With respect, I beg to differ.  This House for example can decide that we debate this Constitution.  This House can decide that there will be no elections for Constituent Assembly Members.  This House is only creating a body for which it is delegating its work, although the business of the Constitution so supreme and we attach so much importance to it, it does not mean that we are not giving it the power and it is not a question of semantics here.  Parliament is a supreme organ, it makes and it can make as hon. Nekyon likes to say the only thing it cannot do is to turn the woman into a man, but that is not the important debate we are handling.  The reason why I am suggesting this is because I know that there are some people by the nature of their work will not have a chance to participate in the affairs of the Constitutional making process.  Yet really they need to do their - you know this business we are creating is symbolic, it is not that people we are failing to debate this constitution far from it, we are just symbolically trying to involve everybody.  Because, this Minister is capable of writing a Constitution and we can trust him but we have to make sure that everybody is involved and this is the small job we are asking for Parliament to do, it is not asking to debate, he is just saying document is passed, it is brought we recognise it as our Constitution, that is all we promulgate.  It is snot so important, if it is not felt like that as I said, it was just a simple humble opinion.  So let me go to my next.

Composition, the composition of this House has become the cracks of the debate and I am very sure this is the reason why this debate has had to take long.  There are two prominent views that have now presented themselves before us, two very distinct views and I would like to summarise them with your permission.  One is that NRC should not go to face election but should be retained as presently is constituted and we should add another 300 or so directly elected delegates, mutatus, mutatus to join us and we do the job of the Constituency Assembly.  That is one very sold clear distinct view that has found a room in this House and a very strong room. (Applause)  

The other view which is clear distinct and equivocal is the one advanced by the Minister on behalf of Government that is, that we authorise in this Bill the people of Uganda to elect new people coming from their Constituencies and they together with a few names added to form the Constituent assembly and those are the two views, which I have concerned myself with if there are other views they have not penetrated in my -(Interjection).  Now, those who propagate the two views know very well how deeply I have concerned myself with their views and how extensively I have consulted with them.  The first view is the one I would like to take and that is the one which is spear headed or as initiated by hon. Butagira but has really been adopted by very many and I am no longer sure whether it is still Butagira’s Motion any more.  But they have very good reasons that they have advanced and those reasons when you get them, they are like an attractive woman who is very good looking and when you want to marry, you see a very attractive woman you can easily rush to grab. (Laughter)  They have got a lot of a very good temptation to depart from the Minister’s proposal and to go for those attractions.  But if I may be allowed to give some of the reasons advanced for the view they include the fact that we have experience of working together in diversity which we have accumulated as legislators and therefore, we know how to tolerate each other and we can do with prejudices or we can accept prejudices or stand them that is one of the attractive view. The other one is that the consensus principle which we have now learned is very good for our country, any other group which comes will take a long time to understand what this consensus principle is all about.  The third one is that, we do not know who is coming, we are not very sure about who is coming, if these people come and they do their thing and that thing is not good for us, they do their thing we do not know them, we are not sure and we cannot predict what the out come can be that is another attraction to that view.  The other one is that after all Parliament is supreme and that some of our Constituencies have said, we are good enough to continue doing this thing, and when they say that, I also feel that they are right because in my constituency they said, when they see me they see Parliament -(Laughter)- and they assume every Member of Parliament is like their representative -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please try to wind up.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am not happy with that view having considered all these points, I would like to remind you of the initial skepticism of the people when the constitutional Commission was established.  People said, no we cannot talk to you, you Odoki and your team you are just plants of NRM, you have come here just to - you have a hidden programme.  They said NRM had a secret Constitution which it is bringing, they said that -and these were the detractors of NRM, it took a long time for them to really - they even some of them boycotted participating in the constitutional process although now they have accepted to participate in the elections.  But, yet we want to aim at getting a document that can be accepted by them, they are easy to understand unless you have not been living here.  Some people think, and it is on page 10, paragraph 20 of the Constitutional Report, that what NRM is doing is too good to be true so there must be something hidden.  Too good to be true, how can they be so good?  There is something they are aiming at, we must aim at a document with less aspersions, less rancor, less labels, less armory for those who want to see chaos return here in order to prove that NRM is also like them and NRM has also failed.  Remember they are present everywhere, yesterday they took the DA of Nebbi, they killed the RC.V Secretary for Finance of Nebbi, they killed another citizen, they are not only armed, they are just everywhere.  We must remember that these labels they will attach to us will be very difficult to rub, they want nothing short of chaos.  NRM has promised us in the first edition of the Resistance news that the people of Uganda will have a new Constitution and people to discuss that Constitution will be directly elected people.  If you want, find that on page 21 of the Resistance news that was in 1981 NRM said it then and it better keep its promise.  But the people to discuss the Constitution will be directly elected people they said it in 1981, why should we now dodge?  In any case this option was also considered by the Commission, this option of us plus others you check on page 29 of their report, paragraph 69, it states ‘the five other options for composition of Constituent Assembly enjoyed much support among those who want a concession Assembly they are the composition of NRC Members together with a new and directly elected Members.  Read paragraph 70 it says, ‘the level of support for each of these options was so small that they do not warrant close examination by the Commission’.  In other words, the issue has gone to the public and the public has said no to views, now if we impose ourselves to this, do not forget and now see page 62 of that report, it says, in the middle of that page, ‘second the majority submission preferred that a new Constituent Assembly should debate the Draft constitution rather than the existing NRC, it must emphasise however, that there was no suggestion that the existing NRC Members should not be allowed to stand for election to a new Constituent Assembly.’ We are allowed to stand, in any case, I have taken trouble to give hon. Butagira’s amendment so much sympathy and I have finally rejected it, as even very dangerous with consequences Members of this House can afford, you cannot afford to ignore these dangers and these are the dangers.  It means that each constituency however small shall be represented by two people minimum.  We are the same people who understand the budget of this country, do we have these resources?  The taxpayer may refuse say, this is just to extravagant these people are not serious.  All those allowances for all these fellows?  The second reason we shall be accused of self-preservation, of self-perpetuation, of self-interest, how shall we get rid of that label?  This accusation will be justified because obviously if we go for elections to the Constituent Assembly to not all of us will come back, to all of us will be elected.  But those who would not have been elected will want to stay, by this same reasoning that is very dangerous, (I am not going to accept information because I have pressure of time).  You know for example, yesterday I told about the formidable potential opposition I can get from my constituency, if I go there and Rwanyarare beats me, then I have already come here and say I want to be a Member what is all this? 

(Interjection)- Supposing we say that, NRC Members must belong to the Constitute Assembly without being elected and some prefer to go and be elected as it is a human right, because once we say elections I have legitimate human right and if I go to court I will win I can assure you, you cannot stop me from standing for an office in my country.  There is no way you can legislate about.  This smell of obvious torturing to the people if you continue like that, these are the dangers I have smelt when there is a chance to renew ones’ mandate such a chance should always be taken by any living politician.  Be aware of being accused of not wanting to face two elections in two years, people are saying we are fearing to face the elections in two years, in other words, we are fearing the people.  Look at the dangers of this reasoning, the third, this amendment of Butagira makes an NRM Constitution; do you know that you are a political organ of NRM?  Who will stop you from saying, you see, NRM had already cooked its Constitution, now the political organ is there; when hon. Kategaya spoke he was followed by hon. Kirya, Kaijuka, who followed?  Then they are the ones who now speak, they took all the time.  The political organ of NRM sat and hoodwinked the other elected people.  

This so-called consensus of politics who can predict or guess each others views and who are asserting their supremacy is what will be accused of us, because we already have a position.  I cannot support Butagira’s Motion.  NRM’s main objective in NRC has been to build long lasting institutions during this interim period that can stand the test of time.  We have a duty and a mandate to build these institutions but not to build ourselves in these institutions.  The Constitution - we can speak for them, let us go there, we will be allowed to come and build that institution.  Odoki said in his report, ‘when we went to the people they dais that we should go back to them to renew our mandate’, the Press is full of letters saying that we go to the people and renew our mandate.  Hon. Sibo doubted the figures, he said that they are not adequate, consultation on the question was no specific, I agree, but even the few people who volunteered information said that we should be elected.  Now, supposing you had asked them, even the overwhelming ones would have said so, even those ones asked said we should go back.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga, try to wind up please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Now, let us go to the people.  My last point, Mr. Chairman, is on the referendum.  There is need for a referendum, whether before, whether after, whether when there is need for a referendum.  Let us first establish that one about whether NRM should continue, there is need for a referendum, whatever time it is, and there is need for it.  Some people are saying it is not the time, it is the work of the Constituent Assembly to decide that and in the past, people had been told that they are to vote along party lines and the people as usual obliged.  Then came Amin and the Army, people were told, you do not vote and people obliged.  The people as usual are always obliging when they are told by their leaders what to do.  I think it is high time the people expressed what they want.  In 1962 when we had independence, the politics of the consensus, of the umbrella were there.  UPC, hon. Kirya is present, worked with Kabaka Yekka and formed an umbrella, not so?  In 1971 when Amin threw out Obote who had refused the umbrella, what did he do?  He got UPC Ministers, DP Ministers, what, what, leaders of DP, some of them Chief Justice, although later he killed them, but he was trying initially to have an umbrella.  In 1979, there was Moshi spirit, everybody came from wherever they were and they formed an umbrella.  In 1985, when Lutwa took over, having said that Obote had refused an umbrella, he got DP to join him, he got UPC, Muwanga, to be a Prime Minister, what have you, again an umbrella.  After a short time, there was a conference in -(Interruption)

MR. MUKIIBI:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the speaker holding the Floor in order to compare a genuine umbrella to false umbrellas?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order, proceed please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  In 1985, there were peace talks in Nairobi, what was the purpose?  The umbrella - when NRM finally captured power, it said what it had promised people in 1981, that we shall give you a broad based Government.  The people have always accepted, but the people have never been asked whether they like all these umbrellas that have been imposed on them.  Whether you like it or not now, in future a referendum on how the people want to be governed is definitely necessary, the question is when?  Some people are saying it is too late, it is now unfair to hold a referendum.  If it is unfair after seven years of NRM, will it be fair when it is eight years, ten years or seventeen years, when do you want the referendum?  We cannot reverse time to bring fairness, a referendum is necessary.  Odoki talks about this referendum, he says, it should be in 1999 and Ogwal says, that Odoki is a lunatic that is what she said.  She said that this Odoki and his Commission they are lunatics, yet the investors in this country, the Ugandans, the students who are looking at us, the population, they want a clear definite line of how are we proceeding from now on.  

So, the question as to whether under an umbrella or whether people do not want umbrella and they want party politics or they want Army or whatever they want, should be asked to the people.  Why are we hiding from the people?  Why are we leaders in Uganda always hiding from the people?  The question of hiding, now the veil must be lifted and the face must be seen.  Let us have this question decided before the Constituent Assembly so that the Constituent Assembly is not blackmailed by one question and people come here to debate nothing but they come and ask, have they discussed the question of political parties?  No, oh! let me go and do my business.  Let them come here and discuss the rest of the Constitution, let the people settle that question first.  Mr. Chairman, there is one last point which I think is very important -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, it is time please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  And that is that the President should not really -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is time please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs. V. SSekitoleko):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, since this is a Government Bill, certainly I stand to support it.  I have had several chances of having an input in this Bill at different levels, but I am sure you have noted that since discussions of this Bill started, I have been attentively sitting here listening to all the comments being said.  I thought I should make a few comments just all that I clarify and not only that, I am also a Member of Parliament, I am sure some people may wish to know exactly what the people of Butembe say.  When I went to meet my constituents, one thing I learnt at the very first meeting was that the reception any group of people give to this Bill depends a lot on how you introduce it.  Because I had very many meetings so much so that by the time I had the last meeting, I knew where I had made mistakes and I knew where I had to go back and actually clarify.  One thing I noticed, Sir, is that if you arrived with this Bill and told these people to debate it without explaining it, then you will all sorts of thing being said and even being put in the Bill which are not there.  But if you took the trouble like I took the trouble to explain about things like the political parties and whatever, you saw that these people really appreciated, in some cases they were not happy but, at least, they appreciated and understood what you were saying. Consequently, Sir, considering that quite a number of us, actually, represent these constituencies and we were given a lot of time to go and consult, I was really thoroughly taken aback when I heard one of my political elder utter what I thought was really something which I could not - if I had not heard I would have thought that somebody else put in his mouth.  This was the comment, Sir, which was made by hon. Okurut when he said that ‘Asante ya funda ni teke’ that some people rode on others, now when they got across the river they were being dumped.  I really took off a whole day to wonder who is riding who, where were they riding to, who is dumping who?  Because is it we who joined in 1986 who rode on NRM original, is it NRM original which is riding on us, to where and where are they dumping us?  Most of us were elected, all that is being said is that we go back to these wonderful people who we are saying like us to continue - I mean, I am a woman, when my husband was my boy friend, he kept telling me that he loves me and until today he says the same thing, if he does not I complain.  

So, all we are saying is that, since this Constituent is laughed at so much, all that we are supposed to do is go back get this reassurance, and armed with this confidence, come back, and debate this constitution which we shall say, you sent us, we have accomplished the job, here you are.  And they will say, well done!  You know what it is, when you send somebody, when you are not really sure whether he or she will perform, when and if he fails, already, you are biased.  You say, I would have known, why did I make this mistake?  Now, if these people want us to go back and be re-assured, what is wrong with it?  I would like to suggest some, that just like the previous speaker was saying, we reassure these people that we are not afraid of them.  I have been told that Constituencies have started to be very hostile to some of their representatives.  I have also known all along that in quite a number of constituencies where the seats were really hotly contested, this difference and struggle has continued until today.  For me, when I am told such a thing in my Constituency, I feel happy because I really do not want to lead a dead constituency.  There is no constituency that is cold.  We should know that if there is fire in your constituency, even next day it is not any easier and I think, that is good for Uganda.  

Secondly, let us stop imagining that from any constituency where some of us come, we are the wisest and the best, that all the rest do not know.  I really wish to request Members, when we are contributing, to stop imputing that these people do not know.  For example, one hon. Member was contributing yesterday, that is hon. Kalule Sengo, and he went on to say that, the cadres, the government officials are going round telling people that political parties are bad.  Honestly, these cadre courses are not attended by babies, except for babies, nobody does not know political parties.  I want to tell you what happened in my Constituency throughout.  Right from the beginning, I really had a small problem because some of the people who were attending the meetings, I did not know them.  I will tell you why.  The majority were always women.  Women normally do not attend these meetings, they will always have this excuse or the other.  But this time, even if somebody was dead on the village, the women this time did not attend to the dead.  They said, first thing first, they came for this meeting.  Now, one time, I was deliberately - I wanted to go through other things before getting to political parties.  Then the RC.II Secretary stood up and said, Madam, stop wasting our time.  We are here for only one thing, political parties.  Let us discuss those and go home.  So, what did they say about political parties?  If Butembe people had their way, these political parties - they would have suggested that the political parties be banned.  Fortunately, I told them, you are part of Uganda, therefore, you cannot do that.  Secondly, I said, I really took time to explain what is happening and why we thought parties should be represented.  I subscribed to that view that parties should be subscribed because, every loser always finds provision as to why he has lost.  You really have to be a perpetual loser in order to be a good leader.  So, all losers always manufacture reasons as to why they have been beaten.  Now, should these parties be left out, they will for ever be telling everybody that this was NRM, we were left out and so on and so forth, since they do not have a choice.  In the Constituency that I represent, if and when you go there and you say that you are very strong, we have got quite a number of football fields.  We normally put you in the football field and we sort it out.  So, the people of Butembe feel, we should put the people in the field, put them there, they put their views, and if they are defeated, we thought they would for ever keep quiet.  Having said that, Sir, the people of Butembe also had a comment on women.  The people of Butembe said that they are surprised that some constituencies do not have women contesters.  They are of the view that if they - which is a mixed grill, because there is the United States of Uganda, all put in one place.  Now, they say, for them they can send a woman to Parliament, even other constituencies can send a woman for as long as she can perform.  

So, they requested me to call upon my sisters to put yourselves forward.  These men are not going to come to your children and elect you from there.  So, they told me because they want everybody to participate, I request you all the women, especially, you women who have been enjoying the honey moon in this Parliament, we have been warmed up, we should start, well this was a honey moon, we were still warmed up.  So, now we are ready. (Applause)  To be honest with you, if in 1989 when I went to be elected, if I had not been warmed up in this House, I would not have had as smooth a sailing as I had.  I am sure you all know that I had only one competitor and I beat him very badly.  If I can do it, then any woman anywhere can do it.  I add to that, where by mentioning of women, when it comes to campaigning, because I am ready to give my services to all the constituencies where the women will be standing.

Lastly, I wish to comment on an idea that has been brought forward by some people that if we are going for elections, even the Front Bench should go.  I really do not think there is a question about that.  This is a Government paper.  We shall submit to whatever will fit in, such as everybody including or starting with us for that matter.  So, there is no question about that.  Then, they go on to say that NRC should be dissolved.  When you are a leader that NRC should be dissolved during that time when the Constituent Assembly is going on.  Now, when you are a leader, you are supposed to look at the nation as a nation at all times, just in case you have the power because this august House, according to the rules of procedure, does not have the power to dissolve itself.  But just in case you had the power and dissolved yourselves, who would then be the legislature at that time, just in case something happens?  Because after you have dissolved yourself, there is no way you can resolve to come back.  

So, I would like to stop saying things which are like - we do not read these rules.  Even these people who are watching us, who sent us here, will make them shudder when they know that you do not know what the rules are.  So, what do I suggest?  That those who may be contributing after me, if they are thinking along the same lines, you just first read Rule 9, which is the one concerning the dissolution of this House, then you contribute intelligently.  Lastly, I wish to thank everybody who has contributed especially, those who have contributed in a positive way.  As far as I am concerned, everybody who brought forward an idea, which is developmental, is positive.  I do not care whether you support the Bill or you oppose the Bill because some of the things that you had not put in are really good.  There is no assumption whatsoever by Government, that we know everything.  We know that quite a number of you are very, very knowledgeable people, so I am very happy for everybody’s interest.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

PROF. WANGUSA (Bubulo county, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think this is truly what is described as ‘Okulila omukavuyo’.  I am glad for the opportunity, Sir, to contribute to this Bill, in absence of hon. Wasswa Nkalubo, that is ‘Okulila Omukavuyo’, Sir.  Sir, in my contribution, I am going to stick to the importance of this House and the supremacy of the people.  But before I do that, Sir, let me begin by commending Government, adding my voice to the voices of those who have commended Government for availing the few documents that the Prime Minister did promise.  Let me say in that connection that I have conveniently forgotten the hon. Member who said that it is quite risky to avail those two documents.  Because Members might begin debating the Constitution instead of debating this Bill.  I have conveniently forgotten who it was.  But very conveniently, I do not want to remember Sir.  But that is also true that really some people think this House, if not perhaps mature enough.  Nobody, so far, has been derailed off this Bill to debate the Draft Constitution and this shows, Sir, that this is a House of great integrity. (Applause)  

I am happy to be associated with this House.  Twelve years, is a long time and as Baganda say, ‘bukade magezi’, I think in the twelve years, these people have become wiser than before.  As far as I am the old folk defending the integrity of this House, where there is no Government side and there is no opposition, and yet Sir, in my twelve years’ observation, there are Members who always tend to support whatever comes along and there are Members who tend to invariably not to support whatever comes along.  I would like to argue that this is very good.  As in logic, we need a thesis, then an antitheses and then you get a synthesis.  

I am sure that before we end this Bill, we are about to arrive at a very happy synthesis, as a very, very highly respectable House.  To tell by the generous time you have given to this Bill - you have allocated to this Bill, it is indeed, as hon. Lukumu put it, it is the mother of all Bills.  I do take it that in fact, the image of this House will immediately improve or immediately decline upon the passing of this Bill.  So, really we must pass this Bill with the highest conviction of hear and with the highest sense of integrity, knowing that we are not just serving ourselves, but future generations.  I think that the public should see this House as a House that has been growing.  After four years, I think politicians should graduate.  We should graduate into statesmen and after a couple of years, we should graduate into elder statesmen.  I do trust that when the public comes to judge us, upon the merits of this Bill, they will know that we really legislated for them as selflessly as we could - that we legislated for the future and not for the immediate present.  

I would like to speak about supremacy, then about composition of the proposed Constituent Assembly, and about the manner of voting, and lastly, on the referendum.

Sir, we have been assured in a rather confusing terms that in all this exercise, we think that the Constitution is supreme.  The hon. Minister for State for Constitutional Affairs comparing our country to the United Kingdom.  He said that in the UK. Parliament is supreme because they do not have a written Constitution and by comparison in Uganda, the Constitution is supreme.  In the course of debate, other Members have gone to suggest that, actually, it is the people who are supreme, and I would like to go with the latest, which is that, people are supreme.  But, these are words we can band about, really to serve our convenience depending on what regime one is in, you can choose to make the people supreme, you can choose to make this House supreme.  I think we should agree that the law that we want the Constituent Assembly to pass, is the supreme law of the land.  But it is not more supreme, we are not comparing the law with the people.  The people are sovereign, and the people are supreme most.  And, you know very well that there have been regimes in this country when the people were down trodden, and it is a mark of praise, a matter of pride and praise for NRM that the image of the people as an entity is now upper most in respect of Government.  Now, there have been regimes, Sir, when not the people were supreme, but actually, the gun and thank God that this is not one of those regimes. 

As hon. Karuhanga has just remarked, we have spent most of our time really on composition, on discussing the composition of the proposed Constituent Assembly.  And really, if this was not a contentious matter, I take it that in your wisdom, you might really have concluded this debate long time ago, but because composition was so unclear.  Now, my own proposal is that, and it is based on the Interim Report.  The Interim Report, Sir, contend or as a method of procedure, the Constituent Assembly had, Sir what in research might be called an instrument.  The questionnaire which the Constitution Commission had was an instrument of research.  Now, Sir, if you are carrying out an inquiry and you are going to be helped in that inquiry of collecting information and facts, and your own instrument of inquiry is imperfect, then your findings are going to be imperfect to the same degree.  The Interim Report says, that it actually missed out on one important question.  And we have been debating mostly composition, commission of the Assembly really arising out of that oversight.  In the relevant paragraph of the report, I think it is paragraph 35, Sir.  It goes like this, ‘there is limited discussion of the NRC option in most memoranda.  It was not an option mentioned in the guiding questions’.  And, with all due respect, I really do think that the Constitution Commission has performed a commendable job.  But really, that oversight of leaving out this very important question is a matter of regret and my proposal, Sir, is that instead of talking about referendum on a, b, c, and the work of the Constitution Commission should not be closed.  I think as a point of procedure of correct research protocol, the Constitution Commission should go back to the people and put to them this question.  Do you want the NRC to be part of the Constituent assembly or not? (Applause)  

Really, that will - whether they will phrase that as a referendum or as just a question that was forgotten, I really do think this is very important because the tussle we are having here, really arises out of that.  I am sure that this hon. House, if they had it in black and white, that the people had said, no, we do not want the NRC to be part of the Constituent Assembly, I am sure because of the respect we have for our people, I am sure that would not be a matter of respect we have for our people.  I am sure that would not be a matter for debate. (Applause)  Thank you, I will continue now.  

So, that is my contribution on that one.  Now, I take what the people have said is really supreme and here, I am appealing for us not to play with words when we are talking about ourselves and talking about the people.  Either they are supreme or they are not.  Either we are going to go by what they say in their memoranda or we have to go by what they said in the memoranda, if we are going to respect them.  If they did not say it, then as representatives, we must find a way of containing what they did not say.  Now, hon. John Kawanga for whom I have a lot of personal respect in this House and outside the House, he actually stood here and said, that the people must have really meant to say that NRC must not be part of the extended Assembly.  And that is they did not say it, then, we must say it for them. (Laughter)  I hope I am not quoting him out of context and he is not here unfortunately.  That was the most staggering thing really for me personally in four years, that is the most atrocious, outrageous, staggering thing I have ever heard. (Laughter)  That if the people have not said it, then we must say it for them.  

I am going to come to a section, where the people said something and the Interim Report turns round and says, ah, you have said that as the people, but you are not supreme, we are putting it this way for you.  And I think, that is a matter of inconsistency and it is unfortunate.  As I said, that is the most staggering thing I have ever heard here, it can only be matched by an allegation among the staggering things here by an allegation twice repeated by hon. Paulino Marwas, I hope he is not here.  I hope he is here. (Laughter)  He has stood up twice and told this august House that he has done research, I do not know whether he used research methodology - his methodology research was proper.  But he has done his research and come to the conclusion that hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, drafted the Constitution and handed it to the Constitution Commission.  The hon. Minister will be replying to that at an appropriate time, but I would like to say, for my part before he does, that I do not think that is true.  I do not think that the hon. Minister could have single-handedly written a Draft Constitution.  This can be proved from textural analysis.  If you analyse the text, the text of the Interim Report alone and then you analyse the text of the Minister’s own submission to us, the two are so different.  It is as if in fact the Minister had not read the interim report. (Laughter)  So, you cannot be so unkind as to assign him even a bigger job than the writing of an Interim Report.  

The people of Bubulo County whom I represent on the matter of composition, said, that they want a new Constituent Assembly.  And you see, when I was talking to them, the option of the NRC being part of the Constituent Assembly was not there.  I had not even seen the Interim Report.  So, for them, they were happy with a new Constituent Assembly. But even as their representative, in my interpretation of new, you know, I had not yet met expressions like, ‘it must be directly elected’, or ‘it must be completely separate’. We can argue on the side of hon. Francis Butagira that actually if you take the present NRC and add a certain quantity to it, to obtain a completely different quantity, that is new! (Laughter) 

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  Since my hon. Colleague is so particular in having his words used correctly, may I mention to him that there is actually no old Constituent Assembly?

PROF. WANGUSA:  I thank the hon., Member for that guidance, Mr. Chairman; I did not mean that must have been the slip of the tongue then.  I did not mean that there was an old Constituent Assembly but a new body.  Now, the NRC is an old body, Mr. Chairman, let me use simple algebra.  Let this NRC be represented by: 
a). Let the new component which will be added to this NRC be represented by,
b). and let the entity be represented by,  
c).

Mr. Chairman, (c) is equal to (a) + (b) -(Laughter)- and, (c) is no longer (a) and in Mathematics, you use the equal sign.  You say (c) is equal to (a), and you put a stroke across because to say it is not equal.  So, (c) is not equal to (a).  (c) is a new entity.

It is not NRC and I would argue in extension of that. I would say that, that new entity is a new entity and if that is the key word that people are really struggling for, then that is how you can get a new entity.  My only problem being that, we should not just - no, the algebra is okay, but what do the people think?  If the people had been told that, they might still be not in favour o supporting that new entity, if they had been told the truth.  Now, either we administer that question which was inadvertently left out, or since it has been suggested that whereas this House is qualified to debate the constitution but for some reason which cannot be directly stated in this House, somehow we have lost faith before the public.  We have no cause as leaders statesmen now to go ahead, we NRC you know turn ourselves into a Constituent Assembly and some factor to ourselves and debate the Constitution, if it is at the risk of our image, the image before the people.  I am suggesting in the sad breath that we have no right to undermine the stature, the integrity of this House, either we are the legislature of this country while we are here we must operate as legislature or it we are going to stop legislating for the country, in that matter of the highest law of the land, then, we had better seek a fresh mandate.  I am not talking about dissolution.  If we are saying there is something the matter, if there is something the matter with us, then rather talk about referendum (a) and (b).  Why, do we not go to the people and put a referendum question to them and say, do you want this NRC to continue in power?  The people might say, yes.  If the people said no, then, I do not see why we cannot - the country cannot hold fresh elections for this House.  I see no danger to the rest of Government, the people who are saying that if this House went for fresh elections, the NRA Government would come to an end.  I do not know whether that exists in our books, in which of our regulations, in which of the resolutions have we passed, is that written?  I mean a couple of years ago, was it a couple of years when we extended this House?  I am thinking of a late occasion not 89, but when there were more Members elected to this House.  I mean it does not mean that an exercise of expanding this House, of seeking fresh mandate, it necessarily means that the NRM Government is going to resign.  I think that is unfortunate and I think I would like to persuade Members that, I for one would be happy if we went for a fresh mandate as NRC.  Some of us who have returned and I will be happy if I was not returned and if that was in pursuit of higher democracy and a fresh House would then not loose its rights.  Abdicate is the word I need to use, Sir.  Then that new House need not abdicate its rights as the legislature of the country.  

Now, it has been argued very eloquently, that, all that we are asking the Constituent Assembly to do is to be our task force.  It is amazing to me, that we can have a task force, to which we give some of these minor Bills here -(Laughter)- and we ourselves debate this highest of laws.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

PROF. WANGUSA:  I will wind up, shortly, Sir, two things, Sir, one, -(Interjection)

MR. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that he should not mislead the House.  That the current law does not provide NRC to discuss the Draft Constitution.  It provides, for the NRC and the Army Council but when the hon. Member starts discussing that it is this NRC which should transform itself into a Constituent Assembly and discusses the Draft Constitution is misleading.

PROF. WANGUSA:  I thank the hon. Member for his guidance, but I think he slightly misunderstood me.  I am not pleading for turning this House into a Constituent Assembly, Sir.  Sir, last but one, I am all for strengthening our democratic Constitutions.  Sir, I would like to repeat the legacy of the late Dan Mudoola.  The legacy of Dan Mudoola to this country - is that when we have set up institutions - Parliament, Police, Army, Civil Service, schools, universities, we must support those Institutions.  If we undermine those institutions really then we are undermining democracy.  One institution we must support is this NRC, this Parliament.  We must not set up a Parliament, which you then undercast by saying there is something the matter with you.  If there is something the matter with you, go back to the people. (Applause) 

On the referendum, I think referendum now is really pre-empting the issue as it shall come before the Constituent Assembly.  You know right now because we know that we of the Movement have been having the good opportunity to go around the country saying look, we exist and those other organisations, party organisations have not had that chance.  Mr. Chairman, in all fairness -(Interruption)

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  Through you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the rest of the Members, I have listened to many Members standing up and saying that some organisations, the party has been a muzzle, and they are not speaking.  I do not understand what they really mean because to me, I know that even before independence parties were speaking and even after independence have been speaking.  We are saying NRM has spoken for only seven years but for how many years have parties been speaking? (Applause)  

And, I would also like to inform Members that the population of Uganda has been manipulated for a long time.  Whenever we hear of a general election, that is when people say we want parties, we want parties.  So, I am sure parties have spoken for enough and if it is a referendum, let us go and have it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)  

PROF. WANGUSA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that contribution and I would like to assure her that I am not at all pleading for a particular party but for principle.  In the famished game of monopoly, this kind of thing is called just unfair advantage.  The Movement will be having unfair advantage over the minor organisations.  And, the other status, the status of the Movement in the future is that when people look back, they will say wonderful!  There was a Movement which really had every right to be the only Movement forever but there it was, allowing other organisations to thrive and indeed being superseded, allowing itself even to be superseded by organisations that itself nurtured.  That will be a mark of greatness.  

I would like to end by quoting the scriptures for the attention of some brethren.  It is a mark of greatness when people come to me and say, ‘If you are John the Baptist,’ they will say, ‘John you know, the other chap you baptised the other day is now having more followers than yourself.  What is happening?’  

Now, if someone came to us as John Baptist the Movement and said somebody you baptised recently is having more followers than you, it will be a mark of greatness.  If like the Baptist we said, yes, we have done our job.  They must increase and we must decrease. (Laughter)  

And very, very lastly, Sir, on the manner of voting, on page 42/43 of the Interim Report that is paragraph 109, a majority of the few submissions that commented on the issue - I am repeating Sir, support the indirect system of voting on the basis that it is well understood and will prevent manipulation.  Next paragraph, Sir.  Despite the fact that the majority of views analyzed on the method of voting, supported the indirect method.  That is the will of the people.  The Commission says no, not the will of the people.  The Commission recommends the use of universal adult suffrage as being most consistent and so on.  Next paragraph Sir, as with the argument of indirect voting versus adult suffrage, a majority that commented on the issue supports the present lining up.  Lining up system of voting as opposed to introducing the secret ballot to elect Members of the Constituency.  Next and last paragraph, Sir, The Commission recommends that the voting for elected Members of the Constituent Assembly be by secret ballot’.  The Commission, Mr. Chairman, is it supreme or the people?  Long live the people!

HON. MEMBERS:  (Hear, hear!)

MR. TEDDY WAMUSI (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a representative historically, I am grateful to you Sir, for giving the opportunity to add my voice on this Bill. This Bill before us is very important and I personally say that we should have an elected Constitutional Assembly to debate the Draft Constitution.  I have my reasons.  One has already been mentioned by Members that we have a task force to devote all the time discussing the Draft Constitution so that Members are not disrupted by other important work.  For instance, this House has to continue with legislation.  When we come to June, the budget will be around and it will not have much time to concentrate on the Draft Constitution.  So, I support elected constituent Assembly.  The second reason to me is more important and that is the NRM Government is determined eventually to hand over power to an elected Government which has been elected very fairly without rigging, without intrigue.  Therefore, it is necessary now, to put some mechanism in place, to see how we can hold a fair and free election and I am taking this election of a Constituent Assembly as a runner up for NRM Government to see whether in Uganda today we can have elections free and fair.  

So, when we go to the election of a Constituent Assembly, it will give opportunity to government to see whether fair elections are working or not.  And if during that exercise some observations are not, where things have gone wrong, it gives government time to make corrective measures so that by the time we come to the general elections in the new Constitution, everything can run smoothly.  That is one of the reasons why I support this election of a Constituent Assembly.  My worry now and I would like to address the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, is the time factor.  This point was mentioned by my Colleague from the other mountain hon. Kiyonga, sometime back, but I would like to emphasise it.  Today as we are discussing this Bill, we have got only about 21 months left before the end of 1994 and when this House extended the period of NRM Government to five years in 1989, we undertook that by that time we shall have put everything in place.  But when I look at the proposals in this Bill whereby the Constituent Assembly is going to take about four months and assuming, that we are going to pass this Bill anytime now and hoping that the consent will be forthcoming straight away, I think we should address or the Minister should address the time factor because I would not like to see us at the end of 1994 entering 1995 without having a general election.  

So, I feel a mechanism should be put in place as we go to the Constituent Assembly so that the voters register which is going to be used for this exercise can just merely be updated for the next general election and maybe if possible, we could even have demarcated constituencies now which would continue during the next general election after the constitution has been promulgated.  If we do not do that, as I have already said, the chances of getting an elected Constituent Assembly to study what is in the Draft Constitution might be probably August or September this year and you give them four to seven months to continue discussing, that will be in March next year.  And then you have again to prepare demarcating the constituencies, prepare voters register afresh, have them scrutinized and go for general elections and then there is a question of referendum.  All these factors, within the 21 months, unless the Minister can work out a programme that is fast enough, we might find ourselves going beyond the 1994 we are earmarking for the general election.  I would also like to comment on the question of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  The idea in the Bill that the President should appoint a Chairman and the House elect the vice-Chairman is not happy to me.  I would like to say, a Chairman of such an important body like Constituent Assembly be held up the names of the delegates.  If the Chairman is elected by the delegates as proposed, then chances are that when sitting in that, he will be looking back to see who elected him and he may avail that group which elected him more opportunity to discuss on the Draft Constitution than those who did not elect him.  

So, I strongly feel that the President should be the one to appoint both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman.  If need be, then let those names of both Chairman and Vice-Chairman come to this House because the NRC is going to be independent of the Constituent Assembly.  So, if you want our input, it should be this House probably to confirm the appointments rather than the Constituent Assembly itself.  

Next, I would like to speak on the referendum.  I think it is essential that let the people of Uganda decide what form of Government we are going to have early enough.  Because, if you see what has been happening in Uganda now, in Kabale, in fort Portal, Kabalore, Bundibugyo, Kitgum, Gulu recently, Arua, Nebbi.  Already, politicking has started and if we are not careful when we go to election of the Constituent Assembly Members, we might see that blood shed comes back as was the case in 1980.  So, to avoid that, I would strongly recommend to hon. Members that, let us have a referendum before elections are done so that we can avoid people either kidnapping others or fighting one another.  Once everybody knows we are going to have a Movement type of Government, there would be no point of attacking Government, then let it be so but I think we should opportunity really to decide on what form of Government before we actually go for elections to avoid any blood shed.  

The other point which has been mentioned, I would deliberate on that but just I would like to emphasise the point that the Constituent Assembly should have only one language and that is English, we do not have to go in for various vernacular interpreters and I think Clause 5 of the Bill should be amended so that anybody who is 18 years and above is free to elect and to stand for elections.  We should not differentiate ourselves that you can elect when you are 18 but you cannot stand until you are 21.  If I am allowed to elect, then, I should be given opportunity to stand so that we can also have our youth represented in the constituent Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR. KIGOZI. D. (Nominated Member):  I was almost getting bored, Mr. Chairman, with the persistence of this theme of whether NRC Members should constitute the backbone of the Constituent Assembly and whenever I would move out, I would come back to find it on the Floor but knowing that we must have a full consensus, I hoped and wished that may be I would be the last person to contribute towards it. (Laughter) For years in this House, we have been quoting the people that they have sent us to say this and that, the people we represent have told us this and that, and we have said it in public here in the House.  Now, I think the acid taste, the time of the acid taste has come.  I think we have come to the equalising factor, so that we go to the field and taste the wishes of the people as we have been telling them through this House.  Those of us who are popularly elected as we have been saying, those of us who are usefully nominated and those of us who are historically significant, I think the time has come, we all go to the scotching field and taste matters out.  If we were popularly elected, there is no reason to presume that we are no longer.  We should go and re-affirm our popularity with the people.  If we were usefully elected, well people of Uganda are not fools, they are not blind, they will know how much we have been useful and we shall be I hope elected.  Those that are historically significant, people are aware and Ugandans are very good historians.  They know the contribution of the Historical Members and I am sure they will put it into consideration and elect us.  So, those that are popularly elected, we should go to the field to taste it there, usefully nominated, we should go there, historically significant, let us go.  I do not think we should fear and at least give the impression to the population that we fear facing them.  I think it will also restore our credibility because as the saying goes, ‘among ten white cows, there is always a black one’ because some of the impressions the people have about us, they may think we have been side-lined by something they talk to us in the public, oh, now you people you have got pick-ups and we understand you receive some good cheques and so on, so that to make sure that we do not give the impression that we have been derailed.  Let us be firm and let us not - we as NRC Members, appear to perpetuate ourselves any longer.  I was sitting in a conversational group and I was pleading how little I was being paid.  I told them, I started in 86 as a whole Minister having a salary of 900/=, that was the  90,000/=, old money.  Then my salary was increased to 12,000/= as most of the time I was six years in the office and I think I ended up at 30,000/=.  So, I told them you people we are not there for money, we are trying to do something.  They said, whom are you telling lies, we know what cheques you get because at that time I was not getting the salary of an MP - whom are you telling lies, we know some fat cheques you are getting.  They think we are getting a lot of money.  You know, I calculated and found that maybe by sitting here a month or so, I would be getting the salary of a Minister of some year, one year or two years.  So, the impression is not all that rosy outside and I would like to persuade my Colleagues that we should really cast aside this idea of not facing the public to be elected.  Let us go there and be elected, we shall remove a lot of suspicion from the public and if there would be any people who are fearing that we will now have been called hons. and this and that, how is it when you are no longer?  You are looking at a living example where some of us have to be sidelined for some time.  We are still resilient, we can contribute and we can face the world.  So, let us go there, in the centre and fact it down there.  

On the political parties, I think I will hold on to my contribution that issue, lest I would pre-empt the contribution by the Constituent Assembly which I think will derive a lot of its time on this particular matter and that is why it is the very Bill we are now putting in practice and also I think I will be doing ad hoc job in case there is - as I believe there should be - in case there is a referendum on the issue of political parties because I believe it requires consulted effort by those two -either the Constituent Assembly itself or a referendum.  

My last point is about Nominated Members.  I was saddened during the discussions when talking about Presidential Nominees to the Constituent Assembly.  The way and the spirit in which some speakers sort of belittled a President.  The tone did not sound very encouraging to some of us - like saying well, let us give him some two or three people.  You could get a tone of -sort of grumbling and begrudging the President or a President nominating people to such very, very important Assembly.  Such feelings which tend to bubble accidentally make some of us worry, especially when they are talked by people we would imagine they could have been in the first running for these top posts, when we hear things happening in Angola where people go they vote, they choose this, they lose and then there is sort of fighting endlessly, so many people die.  It makes some of us tremble a little bit while we belittle a President, we get the impression as if the present President being in the same running as we were, be it politically or by whatever means, the use of arms and what not, as if he got us there faster than we did and now we are grumbling, no he cheated, no took steroids and what not.  It does not augur very well for the future.  I do not think we should begrudge the President to nominate a number of people.  Things evolve and if the current President became what he is, let us not belittle him by slow legislation and let us not down grade or devalue one post of a President.  After all, if we get there, should we want to be a President when the Office carries the glory of Senior Gombolola Clerk or Cashier, I do not think so.  Now, I think a number of 15 people or even 20 were suggested.  15 people out of 170, 200, 300 as we are now proposing, will 15 people out vote the whole lot of 300 because the President nominated them?  I do not think so. 

In countries which are at the forefront of democracy or like United Nations, a President is given such wide ranging powers.  Overnight the entire administration is no more.  All these famous Kissingers, Baker - following morning, they are fishing somewhere in a quiet place.  Now, if you want to minimise a Presidency, I do not think it augurs well.  After all, in this particular case, if people are trying to personalise it, because we hear these things within this House and in the precincts of this House.  But so far in his choices, can you accuse him that he has nominated people on, say, personal basis or the people have been utterly useless?  Eminent people like Tom Apila, Francis Wanyina were here, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, hon. Sibo and so on - men of integrity, men who would not bring any controversies unnecessarily and of all those people, you cannot say that so and so we were together in the village, we ate mangoes together, on the same school or went to the same Church necessarily.  You could accuse hon. Kazoora being closer.  But I do not think all these other people are his personal people.  

So, we should not personalise these things.  After all, I happen to know that when the President nominates people, it after advice, through Cabinet, through committees of this House, maybe through religious leaders.  We used to spend with our beloved Cardinal, through Judges.  Has that person been convicted of a crime?  So, please let us not personalise and fear that when the President nominates - not too many, but very small group of people that this is bad.  Because we do not want a President in future or now who goes and cannot measure up effectively with Clintons, Majors and so on.  If it comes, I am sure it is very good.  In Kenya here these religious people really overturn political events.  In Zaire here, I understand some Archbishop is the leader to be elected, Sheikh so and so, Bishop Kawuma, Bishop Odong, would it be better that we give the President a chance to choose some people who cannot go with their regalia to campaign?  Since the time is not so much, I just wanted to put only these few and my other ideas will come in the Constituent Assembly when I am elected or the referendum. (Laughter)  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. KATO WAMBI (Manjiya County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to oppose the Bill.  It is unfortunate the NPC has gone away.  But I wanted to ask a few questions, whether the NRM Government has got the financial ability I am talking about, is that we have had retrenched civil servants.  These were people whom we convinced here that the government is doing all services to make sure that they will be paid.  These fellows are languishing on streets and I think for a Government that is very dangerous.  We have got army men who were demobilised.  Every day you are reading in the newspapers.  Today’s newspaper, if I am to quote, in Lira and Kumi these fellows wanted to stage a strike.  The Government is unable to pay them.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, some times when we read newspapers, we should not take what the newspapers report as gospel truth.  As hon. Members, we should investigate further.  Some of them are letters to the Editor and other things.  On the question of the demobilised soldiers, it would be unfair and not true to say that Government is unable to pay the demobilised soldiers.  Because their programme is very clear.  They are paid in phases and the first phase of those who were demobilised was completed.  The second phase which normally comes either after one month or one month and a half is going on.  It has been completed with the first group of a trial run that was done.  In a number of districts those who followed in November and December have been paid and others who were demobilised later are also receiving their second disbursement.  So some times when some of these demobilised soldiers come and tell lies or are pressurising for their pay, it is not correct that money is not coming or the Government does not have the money.  The money for their disbursement is clear and it is only a matter of time and the right time, not whenever they want it.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, only last night I was talking to a high ranking official connected with the management of Government funds and he said that if we were to carry out these elections, the government budget would be very difficult to manage.

MR. KATO WAMBI:  I am very grateful for both informations.  Mr. Chairman, you will find out that what we were saying, even if I am reading them in papers, I live among some of these sons who have been demobilised and these are the stories they are telling me and some of them are becoming a social menace.  And when a Maj. Gen. of high esteem whom I regard stands up and say this, when they were only paid 150,000/=.  The ability I am talking about this Government is, we have got 48 hospitals in Uganda - Government owned.  These hospitals are given rolling imprest of merely 50,000/=.  Mr. Chairman, between you and me, can we live on 50,000/= a month?  These are institutions which look after our lives.  The Deputy Minister of Health is here, he can support me.  I am talking about sincerity and consistency.  The supremacy of this House is merely lip service.  I want to give you examples.  We sat here, Mr. Chairman.  You were side-tracked.  The President sat in that Chair.  We discussed the Expropriated Act.  We even gave a committee to go and sit down, scrutinise the report of this discussion and then bring it back to this House.  Up to now as I talk only dubious and bogus owners are claiming these houses.  I can substantiate it.  

In Mbale, for example, Elgon Senior Secondary School was a school built by a man called Boss.  He was a headmaster of Mbale Senior Secondary School.  This gentleman did not have a child with his wife.  They went to India and died without a child.  When we started saying that we wanted to have a University, the Islamic University in Mbale, it was put in Nkoma.  Now Nkoma Senior Secondary School was shifted to Elgon Senior Secondary School.  Someone bogus in the names of Kumabhai M. Patel comes here to the Minister of Custodian Board and signs in a letter of repossession.  This is not Patel’s son.  Patel died without a child.  

Another issue in Mbale.  A man called Hamedali Ahmed Haji - this is a Nubian, he was staying in one of the houses in Mbale, Plot No. 8, Walk Hill Road, Mbale.  This man came here and went to the Minister of Finance.  They have signed him a certificate of purchase of property.  This is my first time to hear about certificate of purchase.  I know that when lease expires, normally you go to Municipal Council and you are issued with a Land Tile.  Here is a man who is getting a certificate of purchase.  Some of these things are irritating us, and we are wondering whether we are sincere in what we are saying.  

Therefore, we demand - we Members of this House - that the report of the Expropriated Act be brought here for discussion.  I do not see why the Government is fearing if it is doing good intentions.  Let them bring it here, we finalise and they go ahead and do what they want. (Applause)  Sincerely, we had Leadership Code in this House.  We thought we ourselves before we could go for any elections, we would have declared what we have.  Up to now as we talk, we do not know where the Leadership Code is.  Why are we keeping it?  The sincerity I am talking about is, one time there was a Bill that was brought here about cost sharing.  This House in its wisdom threw out the Cost Sharing Bill.  Now, from some place we are hearing things being implemented in hospitals.  People have got to pay 5,000/= for major surgery.  Now one wonders what is happening.  If after some time we have refused a Resolution or a Bill, it can still be brought back and convince us instead of starting to implement things which this House has never passed.  There is centralisation, and it is already taking ground now.  As far as we are concerned, we have no Bill here.  As a matter of fact, I would have imagined that this centralisation would have been part of the Constitution.  Now, people are starting to implement the centralisation.  I have even seen, Mr. chairman, a Resolution here.  

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to use this opportunity to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor once again on the issue of the centralisation that this has been an on-going exercise ever since 1986/87.  I have stood before this House a number of times and explained the process of the decentralisation. I have come this House and asked money to set up a Secretariat of Decentralisation and this House, including the Member holding the Floor, voted for that money.  I would like to state again, that decentralisation, having agreed upon in principle by this Parliament by virtue of the fact that you authorised money for me to go ahead to set up this Secretariat, consist of two aspects:
    1. The administrative aspect that does not need to come to this House.
    2. The legal aspect that has definitely to come to this House. 

I give notice that the due Bill is within the Attorney General’s Chambers being drafted to come here so that we effect the legal aspect.  The Administrative one, which is a matter for Government, has at every stage been okayed by the Government of Uganda to be carried on administratively, and that is so far what has happened.  

Let me also take this opportunity, because I did not want to interfere with the Floor of logic of the hon. Member, I think we should not be misinformed or be made to be unrealistic.  Certainly the government has no money.  Certainly, in 1987 the government had little money.  In 1988 it had no money and in the budget that was passed by the NRC of the day there was no money under the Code ‘Insurgency’, but money had to be found when insurgency came up.  Why?  Because of the security in the country.  Now the unity, security and stability of the country tomorrow, in my view, Mr. Chairman, if I could inform him, is equal to whatever can happen tomorrow in the constituency of the hon. Member holding the Floor.  If some problem that touches on security that is not voted for anywhere arose, I think it will be a question of an emergency.  

So, I end by informing the Member that if the necessity is to look for money to ensure stability and security of the children of tomorrow and the grand children in form of establishing a proper, lasting Constitution agreed upon on us all in harmony, then there is nothing expensive and there is no question of no money.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  What is most baffling to some of us who know finance very sincerely -(Laughter)- is that Government has been saying they have been collecting more revenue under the Uganda Revenue Authority.  Now, where is this money going and could the Government possibly inform us - some of the rumours is that we are financing some other people’s wars - just to clarify to Ugandans 

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not information.  

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wanendeya that, it is very dangerous even it was only pretence to allude to matters that can cause a lot of security problems for the country generally.  Mr. Chairman, it is very serious for hon. Wanendeya to allege that the increase in Government revenue collection which has resulted as a matter of the measures were have approved here, like Revenue Authority being put in place like fighting smuggling, has not been used for the people of Uganda but to fight other people’s wars.  It tantamounts to exciting people to riot.  

So, I would beg hon. Members, if they are really going to be respected as Members of Parliament, they have all the right to research and find out the expenditure of this country. But in the excitement of trying to be very wise, they endanger the security of not themselves, but the whole country.  The Minister for Finance is open to all Members if they want to know daily expenditure and daily income and on what purpose money is being spent.  So, hon. Members should not make serious allegations that can cause security problems for this country.  Thank you very much.

MR. KATO WAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am very happy that I have been given information by the Minister of Local Government and he said that we have been approving some money here to finance the official decentralisation administratively.  It is possible that this one was an oversight on our part and at the sametime, when he implements it, a number of times I have been approached by the DAs in our district, they want us to go and explain how Government intends to work.  On my own part, I refused.  I said, I cannot go and discussing something -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, I have been waiting patiently to hear the views of the Member on this Constituent Assembly Bill.  But the time is running out and so far he has not started talking about the Bill.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the Member to be irrelevant and speak about matters that are not relevant to the Bill?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member should turn to the Bill straightaway.

MR. KATO WAMBI:  Mr. Chairman, I am not going to turn to the Bill.  I told you I am proposing the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member should take his seat.

MR. KATO WAMBI:  Okay.  

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I turn to the Bill, I wish just to make one observation.  That observation regards most of us as parents.  The observation that I would like to make is that of late we have Senior One chaps who have just joined two weeks back and they are but to come back within another two weeks.  But they were made to pay school fees for a full term.  As poor farmers, I would suggest the Minister to look at it. (Applause)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Nkalubo Wasswa holding the Floor and the rest of the hon. Members that the observation he has made has been brought to our notice and we will ensure that in future it is not repeated. (Laughter)  The short and long of it is that in the past Senior One students have been going for familiarisation about a few weeks after the term has begun.  This time to a few logistical problems, the selection exercise took place several weeks later than usual and on the logistics of charging school fees had been put in place.  I have discussed this matter with a few headmasters and they have put their own case.  I have received similar complaints from the Church Leaders and many parents.  The point they made was that the subventions from the State and from the parents are usually not enough to make the students go through the term, if some of the Members have been observing the comments by His Excellency the President about the feeding of the children.  So they say that although they charge this amount in the first term, it helps them to cover up the charges in the second and third terms that would have made a raising of school fees.  But with my Colleague, the Deputy Minister of Education who is present, we have now set up an internal discussion in the Ministry.  I have intentions of establishing a public inquiry made up of eminent persons and professionals to go around the country.  One, to find out the money we raised and how it is utilized.  Two, whether we could not do without certain projects them in the narrate of the expensive school fees.  Three, what should be done to minimize the cost of education without undermining quality and made education available to as many as possible.  It is of great concern to us and at an appropriate moment rather than dealing with these questions of people going for just weeks in first term, we want to address the whole matter of the cost of education within the existing system and within the economic means of our country and our population but I am concerned as much as he is and we are looking into the matter.  Thank you very much.  

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA:  I am very grateful to the Minister that he is aware of the plight of aspirants.  Mr. Chairman, when NRM sat 1988 regard the resolution when it was passing resolution, when it was passing the act or the statute setting up the Constitutional Commission and among the issues, this Statute we wanted to address was that whereas the history of Uganda is characterised by political and Constitutional instability and whereas since Independence Uganda has had series of Constitution and Constitutional instruments, many of which have failed to take account of the or satisfy the national aspiration of them and whereas in the past the people Uganda have been afforded very little or no opportunity to freely participate in the promulgation of their missional Constitution.  That is what is important but in the past the Ugandans themselves were not being afforded a chance and it was on that basis that the historicals before they expanded NRC decided that a Constitutional Commission be set up to come with recommendation, so that Ugandans could be given a chance to decide on their destiny.  Now, it is today, we have that obligation.  I am appealing to CMs who joined later that we accepted to ride on the back of the historicals who had decided and had committed us we should adhere to their on decision.  Unless now we have to abandon them, but this is a decision and that is an obligation which should not be a subject of discussion.

I want just to make another observation.  When we were about to debate, when this Bill was tabled, ready for the Second Time, hon. Ssebaana Kizito brought a Motion where he requested the Minister to give us the Draft Recommendation by the Constitutional Commission.  Everybody jumped up and said it was not necessary for us to have it.  Hon. Members, if we look at Section 80 of the Recommendation of the Constitutional commission, you can see what they recommended.  I can read between halfway of the paragraph.  The Constitutional commission recommended that to adequately take account of views and concerns of principle emphasized by people, the Commission recommends that the government prepares a new Bill on establishment and composition of a Constituent Assembly along the lines discussed in the recommendation made by this report.  It was only yesterday when a senior member of the government informed this House that the Minister did not follow this recommendation.  It was very unfortunate.  It was hon. Tumwesigye who said that, this Bill we are discussing is independent of the recommendation, that the draft Bill did not follow the recommendation and it was rejected.

MR. NJUBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the Member and advise him to quote correctly.  This is the second time hon. Tumwesigye has been misquoted.  All he was trying to convey to the House is that the Commission having made its proposals and to have put to Government, Government bought some of them and left some of them.  They are now the proposals of Government that is coming to this House, and Government has got to defend them.  That is all.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you for that information but well, maybe it was the English that was difficult but the issue was so clear.  Mr. Chairman, Members of the House will recall that it was the 1967 Constitution which introduced the word - changed the Government we had and we made Uganda a Republic.  It is true that it is over this issue for those who went to the London Conference that some of the areas had accepted the 1962 Constitution, and it will be unfair now without consulting those people to say that when we go into the new Constituent Assembly, we are going to debate a Constitution for the Republic of Uganda.  It would be better to leave that issue to those who will attend.  This is true but for some of us who come from areas where we have elderly rulers think that it will be unfair for them to go to a Constituent Assembly where that issue has been already decided by the Government and it is one of the submissions they had made and they are requesting that the Minister should accept that when we go to debate, we are going to debate a Constitution for Uganda not the Republic until it has been decided.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The names sound so close, the Member almost spoke on my behalf.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to add just a little tell piece to what the hon. Wasswa is saying.  On one hand when I was talking about this Bill, somebody asked me to explain what a Republic was and I did.  There was such a heated argument that I had literary to call off the meeting when it was almost getting to the actual form of violence.  Mr. Chairman, it is a serious matter.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I want to give is this, whether we like it or not this country right now is governed under the 1967 Constitution as amended subsequently and that Constitution says that Uganda is a Republic and when the Commission was established when the NRC here established this Act, it was acting as legislature of the Republic of Uganda and whatever has been done so far is being done in the name of the Republic of Uganda.  Now the issue as to whether Uganda will be a Republic of Uganda.  Now the issue as to whether Uganda will be a Republic or not is an issue of that, it is subject to the discussion by the Constituent Assembly but this document is submitted as a document of the Republic of Uganda.  Therefore, I think this is not a questionable matter to be debated here, Mr. Chairman.  The issue will be settled thereafter; we are still the Republic of Uganda.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for that information.  I have been looking at the Bill Section 22 about the Commissioner.  We are seeing that the Commissioner has a lot of work and I would suggest that we except to have elections next year, we have the Electoral Commission separate and then the Commissioner for the management of the Constituent Assembly because it is so important that the Electoral Commission would run the elections can decide on the areas, the constituencies but then can keep prepared for the next year other than having a Commissioner who will be answerable.  He has to service the Constituent Assembly, he has to look - to run referendum if any, by-elections if any.  Now, we should separate the two and it is time that we have a Standing Commission - electoral Commission and I would suggest if the Minister has agreeable, that we separate the two.

In Section 27 of the Bill, we find that this will be a full time job on time full basis.  We have agreed that the Government has to run.  The Government has to run, the Ministers have to be there.  They have to run the Government.  I think, it is in that spirit that the Ministers should not stand to go to the Constituent Assembly because they do not have time.  I know it is their right but they cannot be in the Constituent Assembly on full time basis and it was for that reason that the Minister has brought the Amendment for the people who had quite to be there, the Attorney General and himself.  But you cannot have - you have seen what is happening and has been happening, when it is a Cabinet day, the Ministers are never here.  What will happen in the Constituent Assembly?  I would suggest that they stand down and they get other people in the House.

I would request when we open this Session, the President said that there should be the right of recall.  I thank the Minister because of the delicate nature of work we have to transact.  There should be a clause where a Constituency - if he is not satisfied with the performance of the member should be recalled.  There should be a clause where the Members if the constituency is not actually satisfied with the performance of the member or if he has - since he is a delegate -(Interruption)- I need your protection, Mr. Chairman.  When you have a delegate you do not wait until the time expires.  If you are my delegate any time, I feel you have betrayed me, I should be able to recall you.  And then as opposed to the representative, I think it is high time -(Interjection)- somebody was asking whether what method would be used.  I think when you read through this report by the Constitutional Commission, most members - most Ugandans were actually wondering and were worried that some people may hijack the Constitution.  It is so important that they can - such hijackers can be got rid of before they can hijack if the train get rough and I think there should be that provision -(Interjection)- no, I mean individually.  Those individuals who can - who turn to be rebels.

When we came in all those good members who were elected did not contribute anything and they have turned to be very good members, good debaters committed to NRM.  Now, I think it is in good same spirit that these members are coming for a cause.  Only four months, they should be given a chance to come in without contributing.  They should be able to come in because when you - actually if you took, you make calculations the maximum we are likely to get, if we get about 500 per constituency is about Shs. 140 million compared to the total cost which may be about estimated about Shs. 15 billion.  We should let every Ugandan come in if it is the wish of the people.  I will give an example, right now the Minister of Relief has been literary distributing food in Masaka, now a man who is on relief he has to be upstairs but he does not have the means.  Now can we lose such material because we want 100,000/=?  Well, some people are saying that we should contribute.  We are contributing to the nation.  The nation should be able to meet that cost.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. NTIMBA JOHN: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the House that those delegates who will be elected to come here for four months or more, will actually be saving a lot of their variable time.  So, requiring them to contribute Shs. 100,000/= is really asking for too much.  What they are going to be contributing in terms of time will be a lot of money.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Okay, Sir.  Mr. Chairman, under the Rules Section 13, the hon. Minister has said that there should not be campaigns but he has indicated that the candidates should be able to distribute posters, should be able to use radios and TVs.  It is very unfortunate, maybe, that one was made when we think that we all from Kampala or around a radius of 15 miles but we have areas where radio at this time whether you switch on it will not come, if you are around Masaka you get Tanzania, you get Rwanda, you cannot get Kampala.  Now what will be the purpose?  It is only intended for those who are around, maybe, Mpigi District.  I would imagine that this one is not workable.  And then the moment you accept that people can give out posters, that is another way of allowing them to campaign because if I am giving out the poster, I have to explain what poster I am giving and then once you accept that, that one is direct campaigning.

Lastly, it has been the fear of all Ugandans that few people who may congregate here may hijack our Constitution.  It is my submission that if it is agreeable, let every Ugandan be involved as we have been clambering that we go for a referendum, it was suggested by the Constitutional Commission that this Constitution be drafted after being debated, the Members should be consulted before it is finally officially published so that the Constitution is ours, it is not for the Constituent Assembly.  The members of the public as much as possible should be given a chance to decide on their future not a few.  After all, we have said somebody, I have seen amendments, those who cannot speak English should not come but this Constitution is not for English, it is for Ugandans and the majority of Ugandans do not speak English but they know what they want.  Let us involve them that they decide - if a referendum may be, for the whole Constitution should be held.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. for the closed Session.

(The Council rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 19th March, 1993).

