Tuesday, 17 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I want to take this opportunity to thank some committees of Parliament which have made some progress during the week I gave you to clear some work which has been pending with you for quite some time. I thank them very much! 

But at the same time I want to state the same position that I already stated that in the first week of this month, 17 Bills were with the committees; some were of 2006. I pointed out that next month we are likely to spend most of our time dealing with the Budget, because the Budget process as far as Parliament is concerned starts next month and the committees are to sit with their ministries’ technical staff to discuss this Budget. Therefore, we shall not have time to concentrate on other matters. And as you know, normally by mid May, Parliament will have to be prorogued to prepare for the opening of the next session in June. 

Therefore, I am appealing to the committees to try as much as they can to clear these Bills – 17 Bills is really a big number, taking into account that the main work of Parliament is to make laws. So if you do not clear these Bills, then we would not have done our work. However, I thank you for clearing the other business. 

2.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an issue which is causing a bit of agitation in the public. This concern follows the recent media reports that there has been a hike of tuition fees, specifically at Makerere University. I am aware that the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act empowers councils to revisit tuition fees and the minister to approve. I also read that His Excellency the President had endorsed the fees hike. 

Mr Speaker, the concern in the public domain is that hiking the fees to provide for laboratories and technology compounds the cost of tuition especially for private students. And I am wondering why government cannot take on the question of capital development. If it is a library, why isn’t government providing budget support to Makerere University so that this library is extended without necessarily imposing an additional burden to the private students?  

Moreover, we are all aware that when it comes to government sponsorship to public universities, it is the well-to-do children who can afford good schools that are sponsored by government; it is the poor ones who cannot go to good schools who remain as private students. So by putting additional fees in form of library, science and technology and other capital development related issues, government is making the burden heavier for the privately-sponsored students. 

My concern today is that I would like government first of all to clarify its position to the nation and to tell us whether it is not possible for government to address these issues in the upcoming budget so that this burden is lifted from the private students. 

And thirdly, and I think most importantly, I would like to put government on notice that I intend to propose to government that they review the sponsorship for government sponsored students in public universities so that this money that is available to sponsor a few students is spread across the line so that every student, whether private or whether you got triple A, you get 70 percent of tuition and then you meet the 30 percent. I intend to bring that proposal to the House –(Interruptions)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give to you and the whole House is that the problem you are articulating is even much wider than that. When these public institutions collect money and they spend it at source, they are supposed to report to Parliament through the Ministry of Finance, according to the Budget Act. But none of those institutions has reported to the minister. Sometime back the Prime Minister even ordered the minister responsible to make sure that reports on the money appropriated through aid are brought to Parliament because they are supposed to be coming quarterly, but they never come. So there is gross mismanagement at source; not only do they hike the school fees, but they also misuse the money they collect from the students on behalf of the government. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Banyenzaki, for that information. It is useful information. But what I want to emphasise is that as universities are left to continue to raise money for capital development, which is tuitions like libraries, the burden is shifted to the private and at the same time very poor students. So I would like to ask government to intervene and take on capital development for institutions like Makerere University so that the private students are not taxed beyond their ability to afford education at university level.

Secondly, I would like to know from government whether there is a harmonized policy to do with tuition fees or any levy in terms of money in public universities because today it is Makerere, tomorrow morning you will hear it is Kyambogo; another day it may be Gulu University, Mbarara and others. So, is there a harmonised provision by the Ministry of Education that helps us to understand how fees are levied to private students and also generally by public universities? Thank you.

2.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Alaso, for highlighting this issue. It is very important because one of the biggest transformation agents of our society is education and it should be accessible to everybody. Government is aware of it and in our management, the one responsible for education is fully equipped with the situation and we will be able to come and inform Parliament accordingly. I think we give her this week. We have been with her and I think she wants to put certain things together by - maybe within two weeks she will be able to come and give you feedback.

THE SPEAKER: So, we expect it next week?

MR KIVEJINJA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next week. Thank you.

2.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I apologize for coming late but I think we had a problem today. We normally hear the bell to warn us but I sat in my office waiting for the bell to ring to let me know that it is roughly time for Parliament; it never rung until we saw you entering the House. 

About three weeks ago I raised the matter of statements that the President of this country made in regard to the elections that were due and also the issue of ministerial appointments being given on the basis of how votes were cast. The Minister for Information and National Guidance stood up and promised that she would consult and submit a report within two weeks. In fact, you directed that they should report within two weeks. I know we did not sit last week but that gave them even more time to consult. Would we know from the Rt hon. Prime Minister what has happened with the report that we were expecting from the honourable minister?

2.52
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think if we can revise our mathematics, it is exactly one month since there was change in government and that is four weeks, of which one week was recess and she was asked to come here within two weeks. So, I am sure she will be able to make it in two working weeks of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We have not had any recess. I was surprised this morning when a very prominent Member of this Parliament gave an impression that when committees are sitting and carrying out parliamentary work, then that is recess. We have not had any recess, we have been working. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe because English is a foreign language, but the Plenary –(Laughter)- at least did not sit for one week and I think we are also taking that into account. But definitely she will come here; she cannot disobey the order of the Chair. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, can we really be clear. Are you suggesting that next week the statement will come?

MR KIVEJINJA: I undertake that it will be brought.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

2.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a statement on an incident which occurred in Koboko town on the 6th of March 2006, so that Parliament is brought on board on what is happening in the country. 

On the 6th of March, at around 3.30 p.m. there was a shooting incident in Koboko town on the main street adjacent to Stanbic Bank at the boda boda stage post. One person by the name of Mr Joseph Denaya aged 24, from Nyangilia parish, Midia sub-county was killed instantly. The second person, Mr Cosmas Data, also from Midia sub-county sustained serious injuries and later died in Arua Hospital from the gun shots. Two other persons were hit by stray bullets, one of whom, Mr David Data commonly known as “Mambo”, 24, sustained a compound fracture on the left elbow and another bullet ripped through his stomach. Because of the complications of Data’s case, he has been referred to Mulago for suspected spinal injury and to treat the compound fracture.

Government deeply and sincerely regrets the killings of the two youths. Government wishes to convey its sincere condolences to the bereaved families. A combined team of the CID and military intelligence is investigating the case and it is almost completed. Government has determined that the case will be tried under court martial and the court martial will sit in Koboko for the bereaved families and the public to witness the trial.

In the meantime, the three persons involved in the shooting incident namely Cpl. Erisma Maseruka, Cpl Wilson Tumwebaze and Private Gerald Muhumuza are all under custody in Koboko Military Barracks awaiting trial.

Last Wednesday, on 11 March 2009, Cabinet discussed this matter and it was decided to send a high level government team to Koboko to convey government’s condolence to the bereaved families and the people of Koboko and the country for the tragic loss of the young men. The team under my leadership and four other ministers was scheduled to travel to Koboko on Saturday 14 March 2009. Regrettably, the helicopter which had been arranged to take the team was at the last minute deployed for other urgent operations. Consequently, that trip had to be postponed while another date is being considered. This will be decided as soon as possible.  

I would like to state that the shooting incident that took place in Koboko town was unfortunate and government condemns the action. Government awaits the outcome of the investigations. In the Cabinet meeting of last Wednesday 11 March 2009, government asked Uganda Revenue Authority to look at and review all its operations relating to smuggling along our border crossing points and also to look into the operations of the anti-smuggling units in those regions so that they operate within the law.  

Uganda Revenue Authority has also been urged to enhance its public relations outreach and to educate the population especially in the rural border regions on the necessity to meet their tax obligations. 

Once again, government deeply regrets the loss of our true compatriots from Koboko and convey its sincere condolence to the two families. We also wish a speed recovery for Mr David Data who is now at Mulago Hospital. I am informed that the other injured person Mr Hassa Kyiwakati was discharged from Arua Hospital. I believe the court martial will determine the outcome of the case and all issues related to it. It is the wish of government that this case is expeditiously dealt with and concluded satisfactorily.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.58
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I am also thankful for the minister’s statement regarding this tragic issue. My concern is about the important component that government always forgets to put into consideration; that is the issue of compensation. I would like to hear from the minister a commitment that government is going to compensate the bereaved families.

2.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs for the statement he has made. I would like to thank him for the steps they have taken so far.  

This incident happened when I was there in Koboko. We were holding a meeting with the headmasters, directors of schools and parents, teachers’ association chairpersons. The purpose was to discuss why we performed poorly. And at around 4.00 p.m. when we had just closed the meeting, we all of a sudden heard heavy gun shots which continued up to 6.00 p.m. I even wanted to come out, but people prevented me because a stray bullet could have hit me. But I communicated through the phone and they told us that Uganda Revenue Authority enforcement officers had killed one person and two others were seriously injured. 

Indeed, when I came out and went to the site, it was as the minister has described; in the middle of the town, on the highway of Arua–Kaya Road. What actually amazed us is the way these enforcing officers behaved. How could they kill people with impunity in the broad daylight, in front of everybody and run away?  

I would like to refute the information in The New Vision of 7th that these boys were at the border and were caught with about five jerrycans of fuel of 20 litres. That is wrong! These young boda boda men were just seated at their shelter in front of Stanbic Bank. They normally wait for their customers there. They put fuel in their small jerrycans of one or two litres, which they use.  But all of a sudden, this Corporal Maseruka came out of his vehicle and sprayed bullets on these young boda boda men.  

At first I understand he shot in the air. The purpose was to scatter them so that he would shoot at the back, but they were strong hearted because they knew that they could not be shot in the middle of the town. But all the same, he shot one in the legs; the other was shot in the chest; the other one on the arm. The one shot in the chest died instantly, while the other one was taken to Arua and he died after four hours.

I would like to find out from the minister whether the law enforcing officers are allowed to shoot people instantly if they are caught with fuel? Mr Speaker, that is not the first time. Last year, in Luaba at Kuluba, they shot another young man who was just carrying some cassava and a few kilogrammes of sugar to a funeral. These law enforcing officers followed him up to the funeral and with people around and the grave, he turned around and they shot him in the leg. That man was arrested, but he is now at large. We do not know who set him free. I understand he is working.  

Then on 6th of October last year, an army man shot two people on a boda boda at around 10.00p.m. One was a father and the other his son. Both were married with children; they died - it was really miserable! This army man is called Egunyu. I do not know his other name. He was arrested, tried through the court martial, but up to now we do not know where he is. Nothing has been done so far. We do not know what is happening and I think the Minister of Defence should be able to tell me where this Egunyu went; what they have done to him and what happened after the court martial.  

Mr Speaker, people of Koboko suffered from 1979 up to 1989 when they returned from exile. And we stayed briefly. In 1994 to 1996 there was insurgency. It was after 2001 that the people of Koboko gave up on war. All our ex-combatants are now settled and doing their own businesses. To be provoked again and again, what do you expect them to do? In fact on that day they wished they had not given back their guns. I think they would have been more chaos if they had the guns. And that is why some of them picked stones and threw them at the Mamba without fear because they were very angry. 

I am asking government to tell the army not to provoke the people of Koboko. We cannot be killed like chicken just like that in broad day light. What must we do? Should we go back to the bush so that we defend ourselves? This is a very serious issue and I would like government to take serious action against Corporal Maseruka who shot these young and innocent men aged 24 and 25. The people of Koboko are angry. They are very angry with the government because the soldiers are the arm of government. 

They have come up with suggestions: 

1.	Maseruka must be tried expeditiously in public in Koboko and proper action taken if he is found guilty. 

2.	We would like the minister to come to Koboko and inform the people of Koboko as to why this is happening and what he plans to do for the bereaved families. 

3.	They expect compensation and care for those in hospital. Mr Speaker, David Data is still in critical situation. He cannot ease himself; the urine is pulled out. If the catheter is not there, he does not survive. So, his situation is still worrying. I would like URA to take responsibility to see that they cater for Data in hospital.
 
I would like to stop here. The people of Koboko are very angry and would like the minister to come and explain.

And lastly, we do not want to be killed like chicken. We are very angry. If they continue doing this, they will do anything because they all know how to use a gun. The only things they do not have are the guns. Thank you very much.

3.08
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs for having brought this statement to Parliament. 

In the first place I would like to very strongly condemn what happened to the innocent sons of Koboko in West Nile on 6th March. I think there is one thing that government needs to address its mind to. When you see able bodied young men sitting from morning to sunset with half a litre of petrol or diesel at their sites, and all that is what they really survive on, that is nothing but an indicator that there is a bigger problem. It is an indicator that there is unemployment among these people. Secondly, that poverty is biting very hard. And in looking at all that it is also very important for us to appreciate the type or nature of trade and business along the common borders. Whether you start from Oraba; whether you start from Nimule; whether you go down to Busia; whether you go down to Kapchorwa; whether you go down to Suam; whether you go down to Bundibugyo, there is always a trade of some sort along the common borders. On our side, in West Nile, what even compounds the matter is the fact that when you go next door to the DRC in a market known as Ariwara, it is a duty free market where things are sold very cheaply. And you find a person trekking over 20 miles just to come with a kilo of sugar or a five liter jerrycan of petrol or diesel. But I think the most important thing that we need to instill into our overzealous tax collectors is that there must be a human face in tax collection. 

Right from the historical background of the church, to be a tax collector was not an easy job. You are an enemy of everybody around you. That is the reason why Zacchaeus was hated. You remember the story where Zacchaeus even when he attempted to climb a sycamore tree in order to catch a glimpse of Jesus Christ, people said, “No, do not go to him, he is a tax collector. He keeps robbing us of our resources”. Equally so, Uganda Revenue Authority needs to have a human face. Is the life of a human being worth a five litre jerrycan of diesel? Should somebody be so trigger happy so as to go to that extent of taking a life just because the person is caught with a litre or two of petrol? I think we need to do much more. The onus is on government to prevail on its overzealous staff. We all need taxes that we know but there must be a deliberate way of addressing the issue of letting the citizenry appreciate the importance of tax collection. I think Uganda Revenue Authority needs to address its mind on that. It is not enough for you to just use your military might to coerce people into paying taxes but if you explain to the public the usefulness of paying taxes and they see the use of the taxes in terms of service delivery, nobody will resist paying taxes. 

Uganda Revenue Authority has tainted its image in a number of border posts. When they arrest people with what they call smuggled goods and they ask the people to come and pay taxes, if you have been caught with a bag of sugar, by the time you come back, the bag will not be there even when you are ready to pay the taxes. Where do all these merchandise go yet they have been impounded by the revenue authority? I think there is a lot of dirt in Uganda Revenue Authority that the right arm of government needs to address its mind into and take a purposeful intervention. 

People out there are very angry. I left Arua yesterday. I had the opportunity to go and see Mr Data. I am not a medical doctor but unless something drastic is done about Mr Data, his chances of survival and being able to stand and walk again are very slim. 

Mr Minister, even when you go there, you may have to be protected because with the sentiments I heard, I do not think you will be safe even when you go there as the Minister of Internal Affairs. People are annoyed at seeing young men of productive age being killed in broad daylight. My appeal to government is that let us not just give lip service; let us see justice being done; let people be convinced that government is not behind this heinous killing of these young men. Yeah, you see when you lose a relative, there is always a lot of words that come out when you are mourning, so when you go there, go with that kind of expectation. People will even come and say, “Are you not behind this?” “What have you done?” So, my appeal to you Third Deputy Prime Minister, through the Speaker, is that let justice be seen to be done. 

Secondly, let the trigger happy men and officers who are involved in revenue collection be withdrawn. Before they started militarising the institution of the Uganda Revenue Authority, revenue was being collected. But these are all different ways of giving jobs to people but at the end of the day you can now see the backlash. The backlash is now there. There is first of all lack of cohesion and good working relationships between the professional tax collectors of Uganda Revenue Authority and these armed men. There is friction between them. Whereas the tax collectors would wish to do things professionally, these are people who are not technocrats in the field of tax collection. They believe in the might of the barrel of the gun. So, Mr Minister, when you sit in your Cabinet meetings address your minds to these issues. The people of West Nile strongly condemn what has happened to their sons and we hope this will not repeat itself. 

As hon. Baba Diri said, that part of this country is very volatile; you know that when it comes to the issue of the gun, they can fear rain but not bullets. You know, and your President even said it that the people of West Nile only fear rain but not bullets. And we would not like to go into those dark ages where everybody says, “Can I get access to an AK-47?” 

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, concerned that citizens of Uganda have died and knowing the explanation and the circumstances under which they were killed, and knowing the history of the UPDF on defending people and disciplining those who commit mistakes, is it in order for the honourable members to incite people about using guns as if what was done was deliberate, when the government has said that a court martial is going to be established and justice will be done? Is it in order to incite people about using guns?

THE SPEAKER: I think we have to appreciate the circumstances under which this debate is being held. And if you followed hon. Margaret Baba Diri’s comments, she is telling you the feelings of the locals, where this crime was committed. I think we should appreciate the circumstances. (Applause) Please, wind up because we have another statement.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I wind up, I think I did make it very clear, when you find people mourning their dead, please do not stand in their way. We are saying this because we know what the sentiments are up there and that is why I took the trouble of advising the Third Deputy Prime Minister that when he goes there, he should be a little cautious because people are annoyed. And at a latter stage I will tell the General that General, history is very clear, you shot the first bullet at Kabamba because you were concerned that something needed to happen and we do not like to go into those details. (Laughter) I thank you.

MR SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Ben Wacha then hon. Okumu because we have got another statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. We will have hon. Baba Diri, since you are the area – not now but let us have Wacha first.

3.19
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for this statement. I start by sending my profound condolences to the people of Koboko and to the parents of these unfortunate young men. And I also state that I really appreciate the move and the mood of hon. Baba Diri and hon. Wadri. 

Mine will be very brief. I have seen this statement but I am perturbed. If you look at the last page, the third paragraph, it states in part, “Government has asked URA to look at and review all its operations relating to smuggling along our border crossing points and also to look into the operations of the anti-smuggling units in those regions so that they operate within the law.” 

I am perturbed because it looks as if - from this statement - URA is an organ outside the body. I would have thought that if something of this nature had happened and government is seriously disturbed about it, it would have directed URA to change its way of operation. Why are you pleading with URA as if it is a body with equal status to government? What is so profoundly important in the manner of operations of URA which cannot be redirected by the Minister of Internal Affairs? The Minister of Internal Affairs is responsible for protection of the people inside the confines of Uganda and whoever goes against the protection of the borders of Uganda must be acted upon. The arrest of these three people is okay but are you, according to Baba Diri, actually curing what is happening? Has it not become a way of life within URA? 

And secondly, you say URA should look into operations of anti-smuggling units. These units’ operators are armed. Where do they get these arms from? Under which organ of government is the anti-smuggling unit? Why are you pleading with URA to discipline them if they have some other disciplining organ which can act on them? I find this sort of statement insulting. I thank you. 

3.22
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Last week on Wednesday, we were in Koboko and we were also in Oraba. We interacted with the revenue officials at the border; the police also gave us their briefing but the situation in Koboko was rather tense. 

When I listened to this statement and having been where this incident took place, I asked myself whether the minister was making the statement as the Minister of Internal Affairs or as the Minister of Defence or making it on behalf of URA. But if he is making it as the Minister of Internal Affairs, then I thought that these arrests were made and he would have said that the matters will be handled in the courts of law - the courts of law outside the military court martial - but of course in his conclusion he stated strongly as Minister of Defence that these people will be court marshaled. So, I was a little disturbed. 

Mr Speaker, the biggest challenge we have is the security Uganda Revenue Authority uses. I asked one of the commissioners we traveled with why they were using the military and why there is no specialised unit of the police to handle anti smuggling? To my understanding these military people are not specially trained for that work. They are just picked from any military unit and deployed. They do not have any specialised training and that is how they respond to situations. If we had well trained police officers, their response would be different. I think this is something government should look into and stop using the military in every aspect of our work. But also government institutions and government bodies should have specialised units of the police to offer security. 

Last Monday while we were traveling, we passed via Uganda Wildlife Authority, Murchison Falls, and they took us on a tour of the national park. We went to the oil site in Amuru where again soldiers were deployed and some security group, I think Saracen, were also deployed. And one wonders how you choose these security bodies to handle these sensitive matters. 

My appeal to government is that we must have a specialised unit of the police to guard government institutions instead of just leaving it to Saracen guards who are paid highly and are even very arrogant when approached; even if you are with the police they block you from accessing areas you should actually access. I think this position needs to be revisited because the Minister of Internal Affairs would have been talking with a lot of authority on the Floor of Parliament if the police were the ones responsible but I think his hands are also tied given the situation. 

Lastly, there is a big problem with the borders of Congo and Sudan. Whereas in Kenya and Tanzania, there has been some normalcy – and this has aided the elimination of smuggling, in Congo and Sudan it is the opposite. So I think government should take deliberate efforts to normalise the trading between the two countries otherwise smuggling will not be stopped. It will be a normal way of life and collection of revenue will also be affected. 

I want, therefore, to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs that in his last statement on the Floor, he said that regrettably the helicopter, which had been arranged to take the team was at the last minute deployed on other urgent operations. Mr Minister, the road from here to Arua is tarmacked. If you really feel for the people of Koboko, if you are really concerned about what happened, can you not sit in a car for five hours and drive to Arua? Must you wait for helicopters? (Laughter) If these helicopters are deployed permanently for other operations, what will you do? I do not think ministers are entitled to helicopters; you are not. Helicopters are for the operations of the police and military. You are even abusing it. My appeal is that you get into your Land cruiser and drive to West Nile even today; even overnight; you drive there and demonstrate your concern. I thank you.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that although I am on the Front Bench, I also happen to be the Member of Parliament for Koboko constituency. I would like to thank the Third Deputy Prime Minister for the statement he has made and giving assurance to the people of Koboko that government will be represented but most importantly for condemning that action. 

Immediately this incident happened I went to Koboko. Unlike hon. Baba Diri, I was here in Kampala and I visited the families that lost their dear ones as well as those who were injured in hospital and I came with seven messages that they asked me to convey, which I had the opportunity to convey to Cabinet and I would like to take this opportunity to convey them to the House. 

Just as the Rt. Third Deputy Prime Minister stated, the first request was for government to send a high level representative to explain to them the circumstances of the shooting. I am glad the Third Deputy Prime Minister has given this assurance that they will go. It is a pity that it was not possible to go last Saturday because of the urgency and that is why the helicopter was arranged. But I am sure that the Third Deputy Prime Minister is making efforts to go there immediately.

The second request that they would like government to consider is the excessive use of force in tax administration. They would like to request that we in government consider that tax administration is conducted within the ambit of the law. 

The third request was that they be assisted with the expenses for the funerals. Up to now many people are still going to the homes of the two bereaved families and they have no means of feeding and keeping the people around them. 

The fourth request is to meet the expenses of those who are in hospital. Hon. Wadri said that he came from Arua yesterday but this person has been transferred to Mulago; he was there over the weekend. So I do not know whether he saw him in Arua but this person is in Mulago where he is receiving medical attention. The expenses of medicine and other costs of upkeep are too much for the families who are looking after them. 

They have requested compensation for those who died and they have requested that the case be handled in Koboko. I am glad that the assurance of a court marshal has been given, but the most important thing that they want to see is a very speedy trial in their presence.

As a district bordering two of Africa’s largest countries that is the Congo and Sudan where most of Uganda’s business is now conducted, they requested for a special dispensation because trading between people within the borders of the two countries is an inevitable matter. 

They are willing to pay all the taxes that are required if only arrangements could be made even for those who carry small kilograms of sugar or litres of fuel - they are willing to pay taxes as long as facilities are put at the border crossing points. This has been tried elsewhere and it is working and they want that consideration to be made so that they are not chased around as if they are doing something terribly wrong.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to thank everybody for the sentiments that they have expressed. Mr Prime Minister, it is true that the people are very angry but I want to assure you that as they have requested you to go there, you will be safe. They want to listen to you and I urge you to go there as soon as possible. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That ends the debate. Hon. Members, I have seen a copy of the statement to be made and I realise that there is a Bill dealing with this particular subject. We intend to hear this statement and debate it yet it is the same debate that we are going to repeat. Why don’t we handle your observations and use this material to deal with the Bill? 

There is another pressing matter that is human sacrifice. It is not trafficking. Don’t you think that this is something that the Ugandan population would have expected you to make a statement on because everyday in the newspapers we are seeing this? I don’t know; it is up to you.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you for the guidance but I think that it was in the earlier request on the Floor that a statement from the Police should be made on this issue by the Minister of Internal Affairs. So, I prepared it. I was ready to give it although I knew that a substantial debate on this issue was coming. I did not want to disobey the order and that is why I –

THE SPEAKER: No, I was just suggesting that since there is a Bill and the substance of the Bill is to deal with this subject, why should we waste two occasions on this same subject when we shall have a general debate on that Bill, which will deal with this? You have even given us some figures, which will help us. Should we really do this?

MR KIVEJINJA: I go by your suggestion and I think that they can use it to gather more information when the substantive subject comes for debate. I beg to concur.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want some clarification. I thought that the Bill we have strictly concerns trafficking in persons. Is that the Bill that we are referring to in this case? Because the statement we had requested for is actually the one to do with ritual murders and kidnapping and this is the statement he has presented. It is not part of what should be in the other Bill, I think.

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know but I think that people are interested in what is happening these days, concerning sacrifices. Some people are claiming that some rape cases have become avenues for sacrifices. We need to know what the government is thinking about this and what is being done because it is being repeated everyday throughout the country. Hon. Winnie Masiko was also told that another Bill was coming and she withdrew because we are expecting that other one.

3.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we should ask the minister to go and revise this statement because it covers two areas, one of which, as you rightly pointed out, can be dealt with in the debate on the Bill on trafficking human beings. However, the element of human sacrifices as the Speaker said is so vital and there was an intervention on the part of government that they would bring a statement. 

The title is not about human sacrifice and that is the problem. If you went and deleted trafficking from the information that you want to give us, you could then present on the human sacrifice and we discuss the statement.

THE SPEAKER: What are you suggesting? Maybe you can go and liaise with the committee handling the other matter and see whether these two subjects cannot be handled together and then come back to us. Should you be satisfied that you need to make this one, maybe next week we can then hear you. Let us use this time to deal with other subjects.

3.39
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago hon. Kibanzanga informed us that he had already given your official notice about a Private Member’s motion regarding this very subject seconded by hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Mudduawulira. What is the fate of this motion?

THE SPEAKER: I think he must have addressed it to the Clerk and it will be put on the Order Paper, if it was submitted. Also, if you think that it caters for this. That is why I am saying that instead of duplicating our debates let us find a way of combining the efforts rather than getting this statement now.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That being the case, may we then pray that you direct the Clerk’s office to consolidate all this into one motion so that they are all debated on one day and we dispose of the subject?

THE SPEAKER: Well, of course when we deal with hon. Kibanzanga’s motion, the minister is free, in his contribution, to use the material which is here. But we shall look into that.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising for your guidance because when I read the Order Paper and I saw two ministerial statements from Internal Affairs and I thought that the matter I wanted to raise was going to be embedded therein. However, when I looked at the physical reports, it was not there and I thought that we were acting in a manner that was a bit unsystematic in the ministry which I shadow. I would not like to come next week and members rise here to ask a responsible government what happened in the last two weeks. The other week there was a plane crash and this Parliament has never received a substantive explanation from the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs concerning the people who were aboard that aircraft. We have heard that the numbers range from seven to eleven –

THE SPEAKER: Air crash? Is that not Civil Aviation?

MR KYANJO: Well, it is Works, Defence and Internal Affairs. Mr Speaker, I can substantiate –

THE SPEAKER: No, normally when there is an air crash, the ministry responsible is Works. It may turn out that Defence is involved but initially the statement has to be made by the parent ministry covering civil aviation. Have you finished what you want to say?

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week I appeared before the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. My colleague raised that question and I answered it. So unless we are saying that this statement must come before this Parliament - but definitely the number of people – even the names have been now circulated to the press. I do not know how best it can be done unless we are saying this information must specifically be brought to this Parliament. That is a different matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable member. What I am suggesting is, let the minister liaise with the committee handling the other business and hon. Kibanzanga’s and then come out with a position so that we utilise this period to handle other business, which is on Order Paper. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wanted to add, without bothering to go back to what my colleague the Minister of Internal Affairs has said, that we had a tragedy last Friday around town. A building collapsed and human beings were killed within that building but the Ministry of Works has not come to this House. These are representatives of the people, some of who come from different constituencies and die here in the city. It is the duty of a responsible government to come and explain rather than circulating names in the press as my colleague is saying.

THE SPEAKER: I believe that you are alerting the responsible minister that you want a statement on collapsing buildings. That is either the Ministry of Urban Development or Minister in charge of Infrastructure. This is to alert them, okay.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are obviously other matters that concern this country substantially and we would love to hear government inform the country on them. This is in regard to Operation Lightning Thunder that went on in Congo. We read in the papers that our troops are being withdrawn. 

I am also aware of the fact that there was reference to the presence of President Chissano in this country and, therefore, people want to know if the troops are withdrawn and it is cultivation season in the North, should people just assume that everything is fine; should they assume that the withdrawal is a sign of defeat? What should they think? This matter is so important that we would really ask government to come out with a formal statement so that we discuss this matter on the Floor.

3.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament that a pertinent statement is being worked on and it is going to be tabled and presented before this House this week. I thank you. 

3.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate because a helicopter is a big thing and it was carrying some people when it landed in the water. I come from a place called Sironko where there was a disaster, which blew a school and killed a child; others were badly injured and are in hospital. We have a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but we can assure you that up to now as we speak, and this took place on Thursday, he has not reached the area. We want to find out: do we only talk about disasters concerning planes and cars and not disasters concerning schools? Or is it that people from Sironko are not part of Uganda? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I would advise is that if a disaster occurs in your area, you should take the responsibility of reporting it to the appropriate authorities so that action is taken. Maybe they know, maybe they do not, but I think it is your responsibility to report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have reported and to assure you that we have reported, they have said they will go and visit maybe on Saturday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You can imagine.

MS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I rise not to oppose but to clarify the matter that my Member of Parliament has just raised. It is true that we had a disaster in Sironko as well as in Kumi and Ngora area and the minister has been informed. I think he is there today to assess the damage and thereafter government will come to the rescue of the people of Sironko and I think those of Ngora. 

It is also not true for the honourable Member of Parliament to allege that there is a delay because it happened on Thursday. Information came out on Friday and the minister has been organising to go there. In between, I also went to visit as a government official. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, on the Order Paper as I see - that is normally how the Order paper should be made - item No.4, that is Second Reading of a Bill, but I note that item No. 7 is business we started on. A report was presented and we had some debate but we did not conclude this because the Minister of Local Government was in a meeting or conference. I, therefore, think it will be in order to complete the work which we started on item No. 7 before we come to item No. 4 so that that is cleared out of the way.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the minister is undertaking some consultations. He looked at the Order Paper and he knew the item that was following was the Mortgage Bill. He would be around; he is just carrying out some consultations -

THE SPEAKER: Because when we start the Mortgage Bill; that is a long debate. There is a general debate, there is committee stage and – but this is a matter which we dealt with and maybe 60 or even 70 percent was covered. Normally when business is not completed, we start with it the following day and finish it. The Order Paper is arranged this way so -

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, let us make every effort to get him right now. (Mr Migereko thereupon withdrew from the chamber) (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, just to underscore the importance of the point you have raised, this morning the Deputy Clerk, Mr Paul Wabwire, took the trouble of sending emails to all Members of Parliament. The Order Paper he sent is exactly what you are talking about. The issue of the Mortgage Bill was not there. It is supposed to be item No. 7 which appears on the Order Paper that we are actually expecting to be on the floor of the House. That was the message and the Order Paper, which was sent through the emails to all of us.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Order Paper, according to the rules and the way business is arranged, is arranged this way. But because there is another provision which says the business which was not completed the previous day should be dealt with and completed first, that is why I thought the business which was not completed yesterday or the day should be finished here as item No. 7. That is why I think we should clear item No. 7 before we follow the normal arrangement.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we came based on the last Order Paper, with the Mortgage Bill on the Order Paper, you indicated that there was some delay that necessitated us not starting the debate on that day and that is how we went back with our Mortgage Bill. Is that probably now over so that –

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Apparently, it is because when we came we were ready to start with the Bill but the owner, namely the minister and the committee had some problem. They were not ready to start then. That is why it was removed from the Order Paper that time.

Having done so and having started on the Public Accounts Committee report, we could have finished it then had it not been that the Minister of Local Government was hosting other ministers in a conference. We would have finished. Now that he is here, why don’t we finish it, instead of starting a completely new subject, the second reading of a Bill?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Auditor-General’s report is a cycle of completing the accountability from the budget, implementation, the audit which was done and it comes to report to us, who had appropriated.

I am getting perturbed. For example, on 8 April 2008, the Public Accounts Committee presented its report for the Auditor-General’s report for the year ending June 2002. It is coming to one full year; we have not disposed of this. This is a de-motivator. I want to register my disappointment and displeasure that we cannot handle work which is already in Parliament. I would request that as we are waiting for the Minister of Local Government, either we adopt this report, which is item No. 9, or we delete it completely. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, we cannot do that. (Laughter) So, let us proceed with hon. Katuntu. Is it you who presented the other report?

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Yes, Mr Speaker, it was me and it is awaiting the reply by the minister and I am ready. 

MR NANDALA: We should adopt it.

THE SPEAKER: No. maybe the minister is in the corridors. (Laughter) Let us give him the benefit of doubt; he was here.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To be fair to the minister I propose that we suspend the proceedings for a few minutes until the minister comes.

THE SPEAKER: Proceedings suspended for 10 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.57 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.12 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2001

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been waiting for the minister’s response and I am happy to note that the minister is in the House. So we can get his response and have a debate on the report.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I apologise for having been away when this matter came up. I had looked at the Order Paper and thought it would come a little bit later but I apologise. I had thought that members would make their comments and arising from their comments and the report –

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we have a general debate after you tabled it?

MR KATUNTU: This report was tabled last calendar year. What I did was to present the executive summary last time to open up the general debate and I thought the minister would come in, listen to further debate, or the matter can be opened up for debate and then the minister can conclude it.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us have the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the way I see it, there is no debate. I think we are waiting for the minister and if he has nothing to say, we adopt the report.

MR MWESIGE: Well, I thank the committee for the job well done and I thank the Auditor-General for this report. I would like to say that the revelations and findings of the Auditor-General as confirmed by the committee are unfortunate. The findings of abuse of office, embezzlement of public funds in local governments are findings that government regrets and we will do our best to work with the Office of the Inspector-General of Government, the Police and other agencies to make sure that the recommendations of the committee are pursued and investigated further where it is necessary and where the investigations have been concluded, those who are found to have committed these offences will definitely be prosecuted in the courts of law.

I would like to appeal to colleagues, the Members of Parliament, to monitor the use of government funds in constituencies which they represent. I encourage them to interact more with the local governments that are found in their constituencies and not to always wait for the Auditor-General to make his findings. Some of these abuses can even be prevented if they are unearthed in early stages. Once again, I would like to thank the committee and –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Katuntu for presenting that report and the minister for giving way. As you may be aware, I am the former chairman; I just want to seek one clarification from the minister. 

The Public Finance and Accountability Act gives the power to the Ministry of Finance, that is, the Permanent Secretary; and the Local Government Act as amended gives the power to the Ministry of Local Government to appoint accounting officers. And the directive from His Excellency the President is very clear that any officer who is found to have misappropriated public funds should be dealt with accordingly. 

If you look at that report the committee went ahead to name the accounting officers who have misappropriated funds. I would like to know from the minister whether he thinks it is prudent based on the fact that the report will be concluded today, to ensure that government does not appoint those officials to continue being in office as accounting officers while other investigations and whatever else he wishes to do are done? 

I had a meeting, for your information honourable minister, with the Permanent Secretary of Finance and he says he would be happy if Parliament and your ministry asked him to put those officers out of office immediately because in that report we know of some accounting officers who have embezzled Shs 500 million, Shs 300 million and some of them have been promoted. I just want to seek your clarification whether in the next appointment you will allow them to be in office and they continue defrauding government? Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: What hon. Ekanya is saying is the logical thing to do. If somebody has been found by the Auditor-General and confirmed by the committee of this Parliament to have embezzled public funds, it goes without saying that he cannot continue to occupy the office which is in charge of managing and administering public funds. Just allow us to go back, get to this report and start specific action on the specific recommendations of the committee. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been seeing these reports and I noticed it is for 2001; I am wondering why it takes so long for the Auditor-General’s report to be discussed by this Parliament. This is my first time in the Parliament but is it the custom for the report of the Auditor-General to take eight years to be discussed? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, it used to be worse in the past. I remember when we came in the Sixth Parliament there were about seven years of backlog. I think the current Committee on Local Governments Accounts is trying to clear a backlog and that is why we are now in 2009 but dealing with 2001 backlog. You find that in most cases these people who are called accounting officers who should be punished or should not be allowed to continue are no longer in the services of these local governments and some have retired. It is a problem but I think the committees are finding a way of clearing so that one-day we shall only have one year behind us. But today, we are clearing backlog. It is a fact but I think with the Auditor-General supported here and there, they are attempting to clear this.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Would it be possible for Parliament to consider giving special time for this committee to deal with these reports so that at least the backlog is covered reasonably?

THE SPEAKER: No. There was a time when we asked whether we should forget the old ones so that we start with those reports falling within our time and you said, “No, you do not skip anything”. But the committee is trying.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you. I need to clarify here. Originally, to inform Prof. Anokbonggo, we had only one committee of Parliament dealing with accountability. That was the Committee on Public Accounts and it was dealing with accounts of central government plus local governments ranging from districts, municipalities, town council and sub-counties. Really they were overwhelmed. Parliament in its own wisdom formed another committee and that is the Local Government Public Accounts Committee, which is the author of this report we are debating today. And as you can see, this is for the year ending 2001. But we have already laid on Table the committee reports for years ending 2002, 2003, 2004 and 2005. The only backlog we have now is for 2006 and 2007, which is being considered by the committee and in the next one or two months, we will be done. So, there is no need to worry, Prof. Anokbonggo.

THE SPEAKER: Well, yes, hon. Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, although hon. Katuntu, the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Governments Accounts has said it all, I would like to say that the report for 2006/2007 cannot be considered as backlog because it is in its normal time. Anyway my request to Parliament is that since these reports are now available, we should set time to clear them as we handle the budget; they are part of the budget process.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now I put the question to the motion for the consideration and adoption of the Report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, before you put the question, I have one or two issues to raise to the House in respect of what the Minister has said; I will be brief.

One, I think honourable colleagues can realise that the monies coming from the centre to the local governments is much compared to the services delivered. So as representatives of the people, we should really take serious steps to monitor these monies. When you look at what you would call a value-for-money audit, you wonder how much services have been rendered either in terms of goods delivered. There is a lot to do in terms of accountability.

I would like to inform the House that, as a committee, we have decided that most of our proceedings be held outside Kampala. We have divided up the country into small sub regions of four or five districts. So, we would like to request you to join us when we come to your sub regions. This will help us to enforce auditing and accountability at the local level. When the President talks about forming sub-county Barazars, I think he is also frustrated with the auditing; that is why he wants a public audit. 

If we, as Parliament, conduct our sessions of the Local Government Accounts at that level, I am sure we will be doing much more than having those accounting officers summoned before us in Kampala. This will be more helpful because one of the problems is that when accounting officers come to Kampala and you ask for documents from them, they say they have forgotten them. Imagine a man who has come from Kaboong or Kisoro District – for him to go back to bring you those documents will take him another two or three months; he might bring them when Parliament is already in recess. 

So we thought that if we go say to Toro sub-region and get accounting officers from all the districts of Toro we will be able to get any document(s) that maybe missing, it can be retrieved in the next one hour and so hours. We also think that this will enhance our work as a committee.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, when you look at what has been going on in these committees, you will realise that we sometimes need to remedial measures. For example, missing funds could be easily recovered at that time other than just writing a report, which might make it very difficult for us to recover those funds. 

So I think we should find a way of either having a Parliamentary Committee take up some interim powers – if it is absolutely necessary and in consultation with the Speaker’s office – to give directions especially to accounting officers; it is up to the House to debate it. Otherwise, by the time the report comes to Parliament for debate and adoption it will be two years yet the implicated officers may no longer be in their offices; they could also be dead –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. One of the problems that committees of Parliament face in executing their work relates to budgetary constraints that at times have prevented committees from conducting their oversight functions; we have a small basket as a country from which we draw. I would like to find out from the hon. Member how he is planning to overcome such problems given the fact that as a committee you will be required to secure accommodation when you go outside your duty station?

Secondly, don’t you think this type of arrangement is likely to interfere with the operations of the plenary; won’t your conducting business in the field undermine the proceedings of the plenary? Did you consider such issues? I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I thank hon. Dombo for the clarifications he is seeking. I would like to say that yes, we looked at the issue of funds, but with the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, together with Ministry of Finance, Planning Economic Development, we realised that we have some budget laying with a project called FINMAP; they are ready to meet these costs; I think that will not be a problem.

On the issue of interference, I would to say that it is all about programming ourselves. We could choose to be going out on Fridays to spend Saturdays and Mondays upcountry, come back for two weeks and get back to another sub-region. I do not think that is a very big problem – we only need to balance both interests of the plenary and the committee work. My only problem relates to fact that I would like our committee to be more effective than what it has been. And I think with the support of this House, I cannot see us failing to achieve that.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is to the Ministry of –

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem is with what you earlier on suggested about committees of Parliament - my view is that we give them executive powers so that that becomes constitutionally legal – can you implement what you want to do without resorting to Parliament? I think that is something that we can discuss; otherwise, it has its complications. That you become independent of the structure that sets you up becomes a problem.

4.32
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think I will have to hold a dialogue with my chairperson because the current laws are adequate. Committees of Parliament do not need more powers because the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Local Government Act together with the Finance Accounting Regulations are very clear. They even apply to us here – if you are advanced money for example, for a trip and you do not account for it, you are not supposed to get more. The appointing authority is even supposed to sanction you by recovering that money from you. 

The live example is in this House – MPs who have not accounted for CDF have not received more money in respect of that. Those who were in the Parliament and left without accounting for it have had to pay it back to the Clerk to Parliament. Former ministers who were given money and did not account for it: you know hon. Pulkol and hon. Nsaba Buturo had to refund the money. So, when accounting officers appear in front of you –

THE SPEAKER: Why have you mentioned the names?  (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to emphasise to hon. Abdu Katuntu that the current law is quite adequate. When an accounting officer appears before you, he or she should explain why they have not recovered money from so and so and you just give a report to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Finance and they are suspended. By the way, I have been working with the Ministry of Local Government and several have been suspended and removed from office. 

THE SPEAKER: If there are measures that can be implemented under independent laws, there is no problem. The problem is: can a committee of Parliament carry out its recommendations without having subjected the recommendations to the appointing authority namely, Parliament?  I think that is the issue which we shall have to discuss.  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. I think I was being conscious of the law and the powers of the committee under our Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. Sometimes the committee might be tempted to exceed its mandate and that is why I thought that I should bring it to the attention of the House for discussion. We could see whether there is need for committees to have a little bit more powers. 

To the minister responsible, you need to read all these reports from 2001 to 2006 and see how much money is reported therein to have been misappropriated or embezzled. We are not talking about 20, 30 or 100 billion but it is indeed hundreds and hundreds of billions of shillings. If this money was properly utilised, I am sure our people would have received more services. 

There is also the policy of decentralisation. It is my view, from reading these reports that the Ministry of Local Government needs to sit down and take stock of their achievements and failures concerning decentralisation. We should do that so that where we have had weaknesses, we improve and thus we get our people served better. Lastly, I beg this Parliament to adopt this report. 

4.36
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give some information regarding the recommendations of the report that we have received in relation to what hon. Katuntu is saying.  

I think once the recommendations have been made by Parliament, we provided in the National Audit Act that government prepares a Treasury Memorandum which will be presented again to Parliament within two months. This memorandum will be audited by the Auditor-General again. So, I think we put enough safeguards regarding what happens to our recommendations. I just hope that the Minister of Local Government will be able to prepare this and then we look at it in the next two months. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion to consider and adopt the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2001.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)       

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Speaker, I remember sometime back you said that after No.7, we shall come back and deal with the mortgage. In the same vein, I would plead with you that we handle the Auditor-General’s report for 2002, which has been on the Order Paper since April 2008. 

THE SPEAKER: Is this where we have an ad hoc committee report? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the one of the ad hoc committee is about the public land which includes Butabika among others. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is part of the motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, but the next one is the one which deals with the report of 2002, which is No.9.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Therefore we start with hon. Nyombi’s report; isn’t that what you are saying?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Speaker. I am saying that we deal with No.9.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. What he is saying is that this issue has been on for quite sometime so why don’t we deal with it today and then maybe we start the Mortgage Bill tomorrow after we have it. Isn’t that what you are saying? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Yes, Sir. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the understanding we had been given was that we would be dealing with the Mortgage Bill and our state of readiness right now is in regard to the Mortgage Bill. The entire team concerning the Mortgage Bill - all the ministers - are here. So, I would like to beg that we deal with the Mortgage Bill.

THE SPEAKER: So, after the Mortgage Bill we deal with this one?

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that a sure deal? 

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, Sir. It is on schedule.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the Order Paper is for today’s business and the state of readiness of the government Front Bench should be on the business of today. We are normally short of time and we do not complete the Order Paper, but the Order Paper is very clear - there are nine items and item No.9 is a matter pending, which is being moved forward. It is a matter that is on the Order Paper for today. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you say that we deal with the Mortgage Bill?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: As much as they are ready, we were also ready for the Mortgage Bill the other time but the matter was deferred and we only found it on the Order Paper. I would rather that we deal with the Mortgage Bill tomorrow and we deal with the reports of the committees today.

THE SPEAKER: The only problem I see with the other one is that hon. Nyombi is not here. Maybe hon. Katuntu who is part of the team and is here can give us the report.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I am part of the team. Mr Speaker, you remember in the Business Committee this matter was raised and I informed you of the status report. I said that the committee had never met to consider that business. Thereafter, the hon. Nyombi, who is the committee chairperson, circulated a draft report. I was of the view that before the chairperson writes a draft report we should meet as a committee. (Laughter) He sent a draft report to our pigeon holes without the committee meeting and I talked to him -

THE SPEAKER: I have seen a copy where committee members signed.

MR KATUNTU: I am giving you the facts. That is what happened. He circulated a draft report and I asked him -(Interjections)- no, I did not endorse that because before the committee meets, we cannot have our chairperson write a report for us. Subsequently, he called for a meeting but I got the letter from my pigeon hole at 4.30 p.m when the meeting was supposed to have taken place at 3.00 p.m. I have not got any other communication to that effect. Maybe he called some other meeting and I did not attend.

THE SPEAKER: But I have seen a copy signed by hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Tashobya on my desk. Now this tends to complicate the matter. You are saying that the report is not ready as far as you are concerned so we therefore cannot start. 

MR KATUNTU: What I am saying is that I was disagreeable with the draft report and the manner in which it was made. The committee had not sat but there was a draft report. Perhaps my colleagues who signed the report looked at it and they were agreeable with the contents and maybe that is how their signatures were appended. That is what I can assume. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, given the explanation by hon. Katuntu, it becomes important that the presentation of that report is made by the chair himself so that he clarifies all these matters. He should present it himself other than us moving onto a report where there are background controversies in the committee that would bog us down.

THE SPEAKER: We cannot therefore handle the subject which we were proposing to handle? Are you ready with the Mortgage Bill? Yes, honourable minister. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Nandala raised the issue whether we should move to No. 9 and we have spent close to 30 minutes just trying to see whether we should change the Order Paper. The Order Paper is meant for purposes of order, Mr Speaker. When you put an item on the Order Paper in a particular order -

THE SPEAKER: Let me make something clear; first of all, we had the case of the Public Accounts Committee report but we found out that we could not proceed because the person who is supposed to play the biggest part, namely, the chairman of the ad hoc committee, is not here to tell us the way forward. This means that we cannot handle that subject now and maybe we shall handle it tomorrow.

What we should do is to bring up the motion for the second reading of the Mortgage Bill and we start on that. We shall handle the report tomorrow. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on 10 February, the Public Accounts Committee report was on the Order Paper but the Mortgage Bill was not. This meant that we should have dealt with it on 10 February. What we are talking about today is the Nyombi report on public land. This other one is the Auditor-General’s report of 2002. These are two different reports. It is in that light that I am seeking your indulgence that we deal with these reports. 

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that report connected to hon. Nyombi’s ad hoc committee?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Sir. It is not connected. This one is different.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, if it is different, it has never been introduced. Let it be introduced after dealing with a subject which is properly on the Order Paper - The Mortgage Bill’s second reading. (Hon. Alaso rose_) But really, we are spending a lot of our time doing nothing. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issues that were raised by hon. Abdu Katuntu are very important. They raise credibility questions on the business of the House and I thought they should not be just left to pass. I would like to seek the indulgence of the chair to carry out a verification exercise on the authenticity of this report. Otherwise, it casts a very shoddy and marred image on the business of this Parliament. If it is true that the chairperson can sit somewhere and concoct a report -

THE SPEAKER: There is no doubt, hon. Alaso, that what has been put on record by hon. Katuntu will have to be answered. However, it can only be answered by hon. Nyombi, the chairperson of the committee, when he is present. He will be made to know what has been necessitated here and he will answer before he introduces the report. What we are dealing with now is the motion on the second reading of the Mortgage Bill. Hon. Minister.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

4.49
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is my prayer that you continue transacting business with us. (Laughter)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Definitely, we shall need to have the Public Accounts Committee’s very objective input to the Mortgage Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: You know it is not good. Ok, honourable Minister.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Mortgage Bill, 2007 be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will recall that I presented this Mortgage Bill for the first reading on 5 April 2007. Since then, I have had continuous and consultative dialogues with the sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure. These dialogues have been healthy and constructive.

The principle object of the Bill is to consolidate the law relating to mortgages and also to revamp the mortgage industry and to make the mortgage law consistent with the current constitutional order and the Land Act.

Mr Speaker, the provisions as provided in this Bill have been arrived at after balancing the interests of the mortgager and the mortgagee and the overall government policy of poverty eradication and prosperity for all. 

The current Mortgage Act, Chapter 227 of the Laws of Uganda 2000, was enacted as a decree in 1974. Before the enactment of a substantive Mortgage Act, the operative law was the Registration of Titles Act, which had provisions governing mortgage. Mortgage is defined as any charge or lien over land or any estate or interest in land for securing the payment of any existing or future or contingent debt or other money or monies worth or the performance of an obligation and includes a second or subsequent mortgage, a third party mortgage and a sub mortgage. 

Mortgagee means a person in whose favour a mortgage is created or subsists and includes any person deriving the title under the original mortgage. A mortgager means a person who has mortgaged land or an interest in land and includes any person from time to time deriving title under the original mortgager or entitled to redeem the mortgage according to his or her estate, interest or right in the mortgage property.

The importance of secured transactions per se and a conducive legal framework for all, especially in a developing country like Uganda, is well summarised in the introduction to the European Banks Model Law on Secured Transactions. A legal framework for securing transactions is a key requirement in creating an investor friendly climate. An investor who knows that he or she has legally recognised rights to turn to his or her debtors’ property in case of non payment may assess the investment risk quite differently. It may influence his or her decision whether to invest or not. It may also change the terms on which he or she is prepared to invest typically by lowering the interest rate on a loan. 

There is a direct relationship between the legal framework and the attitude of the investor. If there is a law on secured transactions which is seen to give practical protection and remedy in the case of non payment of a debt, the security can be a major part of the investment decision both for local and international investors. This statement clearly shows that confidence in a legal framework that ensures repayment is paramount in secured transactions as it influences the terms and conditions of the transaction including the interest rate and grace period. 

The purpose of this Bill is to harmonise the mortgage law to comply with the current constitutional order and Land Act, the highlights of which are:

1.	To regulate informal mortgages. These are mortgages on unregistered land and those of money lenders.

2.	The consent of spouses regarding mortgaging a matrimonial home -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at a loss as to what is going on. I do not know whether the Minister of Lands is justifying a motion or presenting the report of the committee. In this particular instance, I am lost procedurally. Could you help me so that I understand what is going on?

THE SPEAKER: The procedure is that we have three or four stages in handling a Bill. The first one is the First Reading. This is just to say the name of the Bill and present a certificate of financial implications without any explanations. The Bill is then committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

The second stage is the Second Reading. At this point, the minister moves a motion that the Bill be read the second time. When he does so, he states the purpose of the Bill - why it is necessary. He justifies it and may quote the law. This is exactly what he is doing as the owner of the Bill. The committee will then come up and either back him or not by reading its own report. This is his explanation of the purpose of the Bill. He is reading his notes.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, the report of the committee is here and I have not even touched it. Definitely, the Leader of the Opposition, after being here for nearly ten years, should be better informed of the procedure. I have fortunately been here for over twenty years so I can assist you on the procedure of how things should move. I know that you are very anxious to pass the Bill and I thank you. Let me be very brief. 

The purpose of this Bill is to harmonise the mortgage law to comply with the current constitutional order and Land Act, and I have six of these: the informal mortgages, the consent of spouses for matrimonial homes, the mortgager and mortgagee are also duty bound to the duty of full disclosure. The Bill allows flexibility for both –

THE SPEAKER: I think you have said that already.

MR OMARA ATUBO: The Bill also seeks to regulate abuse of the processes. Mr Speaker, one of the fundamental aims of the mortgage law is to stimulate the building industry and estate development by providing sufficient security in the banking sector as well as availability of funds. Currently, as you are aware, Uganda is rated as an undeveloped country with the majority of people living in poor shelters especially in rural areas. The level of urbanisation is at 15 percent but is growing at a rate of 6.7 percent. The building industry and estate development are best funded by banks, and in order for banks to do so, there is need for a good mortgage law, which puts into account the interest of the lender and borrower and courts come in only as a last resort. 

There needs to be a balancing act between the borrower and the lender without being seen to be protecting either side. We should bear in mind that many banks lend using depositor’s money and must be paid back. The recovery process must not be too long or too difficult as lending should stimulate the building industry. Therefore, what the law intends to do is give power to banks to carry out lending but with care. Once they decide to lend, then care must be taken to make sure that it is used for the purpose for which it was intended, and the law ensures that he or she pays back the money and only goes to court as a last resort. As you are aware, the court process is long and tedious. It can have a negative effect on building an estate industry and instability can be caused in the banking sector.

We are also encouraging the banks with a good mortgage law to go into the rural areas and provide funds for building to teachers, civil servants, extension workers and farmers. In cities and municipalities we are talking of borrowers of big sums of money like National Housing and Construction Corporation, Akright, JOMAYI and so on.

We are happy to report that even with the existing law, a lot has been done and we believe that with the enactment of the new and better Mortgage Bill, there will be even more lending for housing over a longer period of time. The Housing Finance Bank specialises in the housing industry and therefore a good mortgage law is a key factor. From the sale of pool houses alone, we have used Shs 40 billion to capitalise the housing sector.

In conclusion, the purpose of the law on mortgages is to regulate the formation, management and discharge of securities. A good mortgage law like the one we are proposing contributes to the development of fixed assets and orderly and beautiful built areas in the country. This would have positive effects of improved general living conditions. 

I would like to thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the bankers association, the Governor Bank of Uganda, and the women associations for their input and improvement on the original Bill, which will be captured in the report of the committee. With these remarks, Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR OMARA ATUBO: That is the justification, and Mt Elgon will not be mortgaged. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I rose on a procedural matter, I did not rise out of mischief. I was listening to the minister make his presentation and I thought that his presentation contained very elaborate things that could help many of us. At the same time, I knew that his presentation would not be required under our rules to be circulated. Since the minister wants us to help him put into law a very good Mortgage Act, would it not be okay if the minister availed his notes? They are very formal. Could he avail them to Parliament to produce copies so that some of us who are not technical in this also benefit from these very insightful comments?

THE SPEAKER: well, I think a question of details from a minister at a second reading depends on individual ministers. One may say, “There are seven clauses” and he may stop there. However, I think he is entitled to explain the policy behind the Bill as far as he is concerned. Eventually, you may find that the committee may have no report and they may say, “We entirely agree with what he has said”, and then we proceed to the committee stage. He is entitled to be detailed.

MR OMARA ATUBO: This is a public statement. It is captured in the Hansard. Why should I refuse to give it to you? Hon. Leader of the Opposition, on the government side we are not misers, we shall give it to you. I will distribute it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, knowing that I could not go to the Hansard to peruse the notes and help in whatever contribution you make, I would actually request you - this was a very honest and fair request. It does not have to make me look less capable of anything because if I feared, I would not rise. However, I think what you have is very useful to this House and I can assure you that it will enrich people in their debates. People sometimes go off so wide simply because the subject matter is unfamiliar.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I have the pleasure of giving hon. Latigo a copy right away.

THE SPEAKER: You are not obliged to give it to him but if you wish, please. Clerk, please pass it on.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I will make copies for other members tomorrow. Thank you very much. You know, hon. Latigo is my neighbour in Pader. Whenever he is going to Pader, he goes through Otuke. I do not want to put any roadblock for him because maybe he may have problems going into Pader. 

THE SPEAKER: I suggest now if the committee has a report, present it and then we shall start the debate so that over night you go and consider the report and tomorrow you come with clear points for your contributions.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr James Byandala): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, allow me to present the committee’s report on the Mortgage Bill.

Introduction

The Mortgage Bill, 2007 was read for the first time on 5 April 2007. The sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure examined the Bill in accordance with Rules No. 116 and 133 (a) of the Rules of Procedure.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and its technical team and other stakeholders like: 

i)  	The Uganda Law Reform Commission. 
ii) 	The Uganda Bankers Association. 
iii) 	The Association of Uganda Women Lawyers. 
iv) 	Nsibambi & Nsibambi Advocates, Legal and Corporate Consultants. 
v) 	A.F. Mpanga Advocates, Trademark & Patent Agents and Legal Consultants. 
vi) 	The Mortgage Association of Uganda  
vii)	The International Finance Corporation of the World Bank.

The committee also made reference to:

i) 	The Land Act, 1998. 
ii) 	The Registration of Titles Act, Cap. 230 
iii) 	The Mortgage Act, 1974. 
iv) 	The Financial Institutions, Cap. 54. 

The Object of the Bill

As contained in the memorandum, the object of the Bill is to consolidate the law relating to mortgages and to repeal the Mortgage Act, Cap. 229 and ascertain provisions relating to mortgages in the Registration of Titles Act, Cap.230. 

Mr Speaker, you must have realised that it has taken nearly a year since the first reading of this Bill. We had unfruitful discussions with bankers as I have mentioned above, and all these were a result of the interest these groups had in the Mortgage Bill. 

You will also realise before I go on that the Bill focuses on spousal consent, which was contentious; the powers of the court and land value sell. 

Committee Observations

General  

1.	Mortgage is a subject/concept that is alien to most Ugandans. The majority of Ugandans are not fully knowledgeable of the transactions conducted in this respect. Only few, mainly those in the financial and banking sector, are fully knowledgeable of mortgage.  

2.	Mortgage applications are often done without close scrutiny to the contents of the documents issued for the purpose. Most applicants are desperate for financial assistance and will hurriedly sign whenever they are told to do.  Banks at such times are noted to play a passive role in giving professional advice in respect to the mortgage. In fact, most banks when it gets to lunch time or closing offices in the afternoon, that is when they give you a chance to come and sign the mortgage papers.  

3.	Funds secured under mortgage do not belong to the banks but to the depositors, and those borrowed from international finance and credit institutions like the African Development Bank, the East African Bank and others who set terms and conditions of repayment.

4.	A majority of institutions dealing in mortgage financing are uncomfortable and sensitive to provisions relating to court intervention. Fears have been expressed that such provisions shall only benefit mortgagers, open flood gates of litigation and consequently coil and painfully stifle the young growing mortgage industry in the country. 

5.	The argument of the bankers is that apart from the powers of the courts, those institutions are also uncomfortable with the clauses relating to the spousal consent, as I have said, and then the undervalue sale.  

6.	There is a general public perception that the concept “mortgage” only deals with land. However, mortgages stretch to cover other properties such as houses and cars.  

Specific Observations 

Clause 2: Interpretation of the Matrimonial Home

1) The Bill does not sufficiently define the expression “matrimonial home”. It does not cater for other land other than that defined in the Bill.  Specifically, the Bill does not provide for land where the family derives its sustenance; that which is not agricultural, pastoral or one allocated by the spouse for their exclusive use.  

The Bill is further lauded for recognising and honouring the sanctity of a matrimonial home as a highly regarded and respected entity in the different and diverse cultural arrangements in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, people are used to family land as stipulated in the Land Act but we also observed that the matrimonial concept is easier to deal with than the family land. It also departs from the Land Act’s concept of family land. So, there may be need in future to repeal the Land Act in this aspect so that “matrimonial home” places emphasis on informed and genuine consent.

Clause 4: Duty to Disclose Information

2) The penalty (a fine of not less than 48 currency points but not exceeding 120 currency points, or imprisonment of not less than 24 months but not exceeding 60 months or both) on conviction of refusal, neglect or failure to disclose information relevant to a mortgage is not deterrent enough in our opinion. Given the various forms of marriages existing in Uganda, it will prove rather difficult for the mortgagee to establish the rightful spouse or spouses of the mortgager. Cases of impersonation are feared, mostly if a mortgager claims to be customarily married.

Clause 5: Mortgage of Matrimonial Home  

3) The committee observed that the concept of “matrimonial home” defined as the place where husband and wife/wives and children reside is preferred to the current concept of family land as stipulated in the Land Act, Cap. 227.  

As currently defined, family land includes land on which the family resides or which the family freely agrees to treat as family land, or land considered as family land under the norms and customs of the family.  In the absence of a register of agreements on family land and comprehensive marriage registers, it is very difficult for a third party to determine whether or not to obtain spousal consent on a particular property.

Clause 6: Consent to Mortgage of Matrimonial Home

The Bill recognises and protects the sanctity of a matrimonial home. Whereas this may be the case, the committee expresses fears that the law of an independent person as defined in the Bill may be abused by anybody, including the mortgager and the mortgagee, to the detriment of the spouse or spouses.  

Given the various forms of marriages existing in Uganda, it would prove rather difficult for the mortgagee to establish or prove a mortgager’s marital status and his or her rightful spouse.  Cases of fraud and impersonation are feared especially if a couple claims to be customarily married.  

Clause 12: Variation of a Mortgage
The Bill empowers and supports the mortgagee to vary the interest rate on the mortgage arrangement, provided a notice of variation is served to the mortgager. The committee is of the considered opinion that once this is left as it is, borrowers will be at the mercy of the mortgagee as and when interest rates are revised or not.  

Further, the committee notes that the Bill does not provide for the mortgagers’ options to negotiate for reasonable and affordable interest rates, the conditions and terms therein.

Clause 14: Right to Discharge  

The committee observes that sub-clause (2) is very restrictive to the mortgager and may undermine long-term financing. The committee is proposing its deletion. 

Clause 18: Implied Covenants by the Mortgager

The committee notes that any land dealings in respect of time periods should be done with the consent of the mortgagee. 

Clause 19: Notice on Default  

The committee notes that a menu of options should be available with the mortgager to rectify any divorce and to redeem mortgaged property.  

Clause 27: Duty or Mortgagee Exercising Power of Sale

In setting a threshold for the prices at which a mortgage property may be sold, the Bill introduces the concept of average price. The committee observes that the provision does not take into account lack of potential market of mortgaged property, absence of properties with comparable prices, fluctuations of exchange rates, supply conditions, or the fact that distress sales naturally attract lower prices. The clause in its present form will severely constrain the ability of banks to find an acceptable price for mortgaged property.  

Here we shall be proposing to maintain common law duty on the mortgagee to obtain best market prices. 

Clause 34: General Power of Court to Grant Relief

The Bill grants courts wide, unlimited and discretionary powers to grant relief to the mortgager in default. It was observed that a menu of options is available to the mortgager to perform all conditions and obligations secured by the mortgage; freedom of contract is available to all parties. It would then be unfair for courts to grant relief to the mortgager.  

Mr Speaker, clauses 34 and 44 talk about very controversial issues. We are of the opinion that the role of courts is to enforce contracts but not to write them. This will remove the uncertainty from the contract. Giving courts those powers also increases risk and thus would raise the interest rates.

Customary Mortgage

It is ideal that mortgage transactions are conducted where registered land or property is a subject or presented as collateral security.  Whereas this is the requirement, customary land which is unregistered is at present a subject of commercial transactions. A number of banking institutions have been reported to deal in mortgage financing in respect to customary land.  A case in point is the Centenary Rural Development Bank and other micro-finance institutions that operate in the rural countryside where land is basically customary.  

The committee expresses concern that the families occupying customary land may not be protected once such land becomes a subject of mortgage transactions.

Recommendations

1. Clause 5(1): Mortgage of Matrimonial Home  

The concept of the matrimonial home defined as a place where husband and wife/wives and their children ordinarily reside is preferred to the current concept of family land as stipulated in the Land Act (Cap.227).  

The committee recommends that the proposed test of residence in the family land should be retained because it simplifies the mortgage process and this is readily apparent upon inspection of the property.

2. Clause 27: Duty of Mortgagee Exercising Power of Sale 

The committee recommends that the common law duty on the mortgagee to obtain best market prices should be maintained. The remedy for undervalue sales lies against the mortgagee. The emphasis should be put on ensuring transparency on the sale method and that the mortgagee takes reasonable steps to obtain the best price. 

3. General Powers of the Court to Grant Relief  

The committee recommends that the clause be amended because it allows court to vary or change the terms of the mortgage when the borrower has already taken the money. This could be disadvantageous to banks as lenders.

4. Extinction of Certain Rights 

The committee recommends that the Registrar should continue to have authority to cancel mortgages that have been extinguished by operation of the Limitation Act. The Bill as it is does not provide for this and therefore should be amended to cater for such instances.

In conclusion, subject to the proposed amendments, I beg that the House adopts this report. 

However, before I sit down, I know last week reports were given out but there were some sections which need amendment. So I advise members to get today’s copy; it is the current one, which we shall use when we are amending any clause in this Bill. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank the chairman and members of the committee for the report. Hon. Members, the Bill has now been presented. I think it is fair for you to go overnight and read through so that tomorrow you come ready to make contributions to the Bill. Maybe tomorrow we can even go through the committee stage and then tackle other matters.  

Again, I want to say we have a lot we need to clear before May. We prorogue Parliament for the next session in May and the next month you have the budget process. So if we can clear as much as we can before the budget process, which will take up most of your time, it would be better for us.  Thank you very much, hon. Members, for your time and for your contributions to the debate today. 

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 March 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)
