Tuesday, 16th March, 1999

Parliament met at 2.30p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, tomorrow, Wednesday 17th March, there will be a Seminar organised for you by the USAID group. It is on legislative drafting of Bills and it will take place at Hotel Africana starting at 9 o'clock. Those interested in the details of handling Bills, particularly the drafting aspect of it, should take this opportunity to go and sharpen your brains.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY  AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES COMMITTEE (Mr. James Mwandha): Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table of the House the Report of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the National Social Security Fund.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE (Mr. Kanyike Anthony): Mr. Speaker, before I present the Report, I would like to lay on the Table Minutes of our last Meeting which will indicate that our Report was unanimously arrived at by all Members of the Committee.  

Apart from being the voice of Buikwe West, I also want to state here that I am the voice of the silent majority, 95 per cent of people in this Country, who depend on agriculture and who would like to see agriculture put on a proper footing in this Country.  

This is the Report of the Select Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:

This Report is presented on behalf of the Select Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, henceforth called the Select Committee on MAAIF, or simply, the Select Committee, or the Committee.  

Parliament set up the Select Committee in accordance with the 1995 Constitution, and in compliance with our Rules of Procedure, Sections 144 and 145.  It is from these that the Committee derives its mandate.  
The Motion:
Parliament passed a Motion which says:"That the Select Committee of Parliament, including Members of the sessional Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be constituted:
(i) To probe into the matters of the construction of dams and valley tanks under the Livestock Services Project.
(ii) To investigate the utilisation of project funds under the Ministry".

Composition of the Select Committee:
In compliance with the Rules and Procedure, Mr. Speaker, you nominated, and parliament approved, 15 Members of the select Committee. On 15th November, 1998, three additional Members were co-opted on the Committee, after seeking the approval of the Speaker. These Members were added because of their skills in law and financial auditing.  We have appended the full list of 18 Members of the Select Committee at the end of this Report.

Mr. Ignatius Kasirye and Mrs. Deborah Okoropot were assigned by the Clerk to facilitate the Secretariat of the Committee.

Terms of reference:
The House mandated the Select Committee to draw its terms of reference, as it saw fit, to achieve its mandate. Without limiting the generality of the Motion, the Committee decided on the following terms of reference:
(i) To investigate all aspects connected with the Livestock Services Project, but paying particular attention to the water component of the project. That is the construction of dams and valley tanks.
(ii)  To investigate any other project or activity in the Ministry where misuse of funds or inappropriate action including, but not limited to, mismanagement and, or, corruption is suspected.
(iii) On the basis of the Committee findings in (i) and (ii) above, make recommendations for Parliamentary approval.

Ground for setting up the Select Committee.
Mr. Speaker, before we go into the 'meat' of the report, permit us to give the brief background that led to the setting up of the select Committee in the first place.  Hon. Members will recall the heat generated by the debate of the MAAIF budget and policy statement.  Members threatened to throw out the budget statement and decentralise the Ministry.  There were many calls by Members, most of them not Members of the Sessional Committee on MAAIF, for the Ministry to be scrapped since it was not present on the ground.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, you will recall the vivid words of one Member whom we shall quote: "Mr. speaker, will the people of Kashari County miss anything if the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is scrapped?  They will not, since they have never seen it in Kashari anyway.  I am amazed and disappointed that the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, is asking us to approve the Ministry budget."  

Further comments from MPs.
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the setting up of our Select Commit was necessitated by two major factors and we shall discuss them in turn.

First, the general outcry by the population throughout the Country and from Members of this House, that, in spite of food insecurity and rampant poverty, MAAIF did not have a workable rural development plan.  The Ministry was not seen on the ground in rural areas, despite colossal sums spent on the agricultural sector by government, donors and the private sector.

The second factor,  was lack of transparency, poor distribution of national projects under the Ministry, financial mismanagement and diversions, together with general lack of supervision of donor funded projects.

There were glaring cases in the MAAIF policy statement, which particularly irritated Members of this august House during the Budget debate.  The Minister's Policy Statement on Page 45 stated this: "Significant among the achievements during the Financial Year 97/98 was the construction of 19 large strategic water reservoirs in six drought prone districts of the cattle corridor.  The distribution is as follows: Ntungamo  1, Mbarara  8, Sembabule 2, Nakasongola 2, Mubende - 3, and Kiboga  3".  

The Minister, in her policy statement, further claimed that work was underway on all sites and that five of these sites had been substantially completed.  She added that the completion date for the last dam was September, 1998.  The Minister claimed that 80 per cent of the total cost of Shs.3.07 billion was from the World Bank, while the balance was from the Government of Uganda.

Petitions from MPs.
While considering the MAAIF Budget and Policy Statement, the Sessional Committee on MAAIF received petitions from Members of Parliament representing districts along the cattle corridor. They said that there was no value for money on the water reservoirs allegedly completed or nearly completed.

Persistent complaints were received from MPs from Mubende, Sembabule, Kiboga, Mbarara, Kumi, Soroti, Katakwi, Moroto and Kotido, about serious  shortage of water for livestock.  These MPs stated that claims of successful water supply in the Financial Year 1997/98 were untrue and an insult to their intelligence.

The Sessional Committee on MAAIF constantly received particular complaints. The MP for Lwemiyaga in Sembabule of Buganda explained to the Committee that Rwamakara dam, claimed by MAAIF to have been constructed in 1997/98, was an old colonial dam built in 1984.  The farmers wanted the dam rehabilitated by removing dirt, silt and dirty water, at the time mixed with cow dung and suspected to be causing disease to the livestock. This MP lamented that MAAIF constructors had just cut into the dam wall without removing any silt, cow dung, or rotten plant material in the empty dam reservoir.  They had laid pipes, built water troughs, increased the old dam wall by a mere 2 metres, fenced the dam, claimed 99 million shillings and walked away.

The same complaint, about draining old dams without de-silting them, was received from Nyabushozi MP. He said that 117 million shillings was spent on Kishangura dam. The Mubende MP said 178 million shillings was spent on Dyangoma dam.  All these 3 dams, Rwamakara, Kishangura and Dyangoma, did not have any water, were not de-silted, and yet nearly 400 million shillings was spent on them.

From Mbarara District leaders, the Committee received complaints regarding the uncompleted dams of Bijura, Rwenjubu, and Kanyanyeru. These were started during the LSP dam construction project, which remained pilot from 1994 up to 1998.

With regard to Nyakahita dam in Nyabushozi County, the Select Committee received complaints that in spite of Shs.149 million spent on this site, there was nothing that could look like a dam any where around this area.  The Committee will later show that 187 million shillings was spent.  The Committee also learnt that after complaints from Mbarara RDC, the Prime Minister visited Nyakahita and expressed his dismay on what he saw.

From the rest of the Country, where cattle rearing is a major economic activity, like the districts of Moroto, Kotido, Pallisa, Lira, Apac, Gulu and the entire West Nile region, there was no coverage or only token coverage by this project. Members wondered  as to why this was so.

Complaints about Extension and 2 billion shillings for capacity building in seed at all Sub-counties.
Mr. Speaker, in its report to Parliament, the sessional Committee on MAAIF, reported complaints received from Members of Parliament regarding the poor distribution, implementation and supervision of the Livestock Services Project.  The Committee negatively reported that several other projects, for example, the Agriculture Extension Programme (AEP1) and the Special Provision for Seed Capacity Building at Sub-county level, which is in the Ministry as Project AG08C, had not made an impact in any district of Uganda.

The other matter where Members of Parliament had disagreement with MAAIF was on the utilisation of 2 billion shillings for planting and stocking materials (page 4 of MAAIF budget and policy statement).  The Select Committee on MAAIF was concerned that this large sum of money was about 23 per cent of the Ministry's total 1998/99 Budget of nearly 9 billion shillings, and obtained as a special project.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the special project budget of 2 billion shillings is 40 per cent of the 1998/99 MAAIF development budget of 5.082 billion shillings and 55 per cent of the recurrent budget of 3.661 billion shillings.

As this Report will show later, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,our Select Committee, during its probe, stumbled on evidence showing that not only was this money obtained in an unconventional manner, it was also used in an illegal manner.  Mr. Speaker, we have evidence that his money was diverted and put to uses for which it was not intended.

It was against this background that Parliament, in its wisdom, decided to set up the Select Committee.

Acknowledgement:
Mr. Speaker, the Select Committee on MAAIF congratulates and salutes this august House.(Applause).  The Committee is grateful for the support it has received from Members of Parliament, individually, and the whole House in general, during the probe.  The Committee wishes to thank the general public, local councils and district leaderships for their support.

The Committee appreciates the role of the civil society and the press, which covered our probe and raised awareness in the population, triggering some excitement in some government quarters. This lead to some interesting exposure as to how certain individuals handle public affairs entrusted to them.  We would add that the press' interpretation of events during our probe was entirely their own, and not an expression of the Committee's opinion  or views.  The press was doing its job.

How the committee carried out its work.
The Committee embarked on its assigned task by holding a series of meetings, agreeing on methodology and drawing a work plan with a time-line.  

In the early planning meetings, we examined and internalised the terms of reference.  We then mobilised the human resources for our Select Committee: a Clerk Assistant(Mr. Kasirye), a Secretary, lead counsel from the Attorney General's Office, Recording Assistants and an Audio Secretary. To avoid escalating costs, our request for a civil engineer and an auditor were shelved, but our Committee was expanded from 15 to 18 by including MPs with legal, accounting, and auditing backgrounds.  
Our select Committee realised at the beginning that it would need the skills of an engineer or an engineering firm specialising in water. We approached the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment which promised us a water engineer.  We also got in touch with the Association of Uganda Engineers, which also pledged their professional services.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs provided us with CID officers whenever we needed them - we needed them at times.  Material resources such as office equipment, stationery, telephone, recording equipment, video and still camera were mobilized. One Member of our Committee lent us a computer for free.  

Financial resources were provided, courtesy of the office of the Clerk to Parliament, based on a realistic budget.  Many Members of the Committee made it clear that the Committee was investigating corruption, financial management and waste and therefore should not engage in these acts themselves.  So, we borrowed rather than hired equipment, and wrote our report from a Parliamentary Committee Room rather than a hired hotel room.  

Determining Projects to Investigate.  
Our Committee terms of reference were to investigate LSP Project (Life Stock Service Project), particularly the water component.  We were also asked to investigate other projects. We knew that MAAIF had many projects, but we did not expect 57. Afterall, the  Ministry budget and policy statement had talked of 'rationalising' from 59 to 18!  We received a list of projects and a write-up of each. This nearly filled all our office shelves and floor space, since some projects had up to 20 large volumes.  

To get the gist of what the myriad of projects was all about, we invited the Permanent Secretary and some project leaders to give us an over-view of each project. From this brief, we made a short list of 12 projects to investigate. These were: the Live Stock Services Project, Japanese Grant(the Kenndy Round Two), Olweny Rice Scheme, the Beef Projects, the 2 billion seed project for capacity building at sub-country Level, Ranch Restructuring, SWARP, Agricultural Extension(AEP 1), Cotton Sub-Sector Development Project, Donor Funds in Bank of Uganda, Dairy Projects, Selected Fish Projects.  

Focusing on a few projects. 
After reading through these large volumes of project documents, it became apparent that even these 12 projects were too many to handle in the given time.  This realisation become more vivid when we embarked on LSP, which had five components scattered, theoretically, in the 45 districts of Uganda. At the meeting held on the 3rd December 1998, we agreed to focus on LSP, especially on the water component and the 2 billion Seed Project, and then write a preliminary report for Parliament, which would then decide on the way forward.  

Procedural issues  
After getting the background information about projects, we read reports on each project. We then liaised with the following relevant government bodies for more information: MAAIF, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Solicitor General, the Auditor General, the Inspector General Of Government (IGG),and the Inspector General of Police.  Where possible, we got reports of earlier investigations, such as from the IGG and the CID.  We had hoped to talk to donors officially but we did this informally and quietly, since we were investigating MAAIF and not the donors.  

The method of work we used involved collection of literature, visits to offices and the field, surprise visits to some areas like Namalere and Entebbe, public hearings in Kampala and the districts, interviews, written submissions, memorandm, and interviews in camera, if this was demanded. We then agreed on the reporting process, data gathering, processing and storage, report format, drafting procedure and reporting to Parliament.  We agreed to open our hearings to the press, to avoid speculation and rumour mongering.  We adopted a bottom-up approach, whereby project leaders would be interviewed first, then their immediate supervisors, and then the Permanent Secretary, Ministers of State and finally the Minister herself.  

Field visits and interaction with beneficiaries.
We had intended to visit all projects and make a rapid appraisal then focus on a select few, but this approach proved expensive and we abandoned it. Instead, we divided the country into six zones: central, west,east,north, north-east and north-west. 

We visited projects in central and western in the first leg, then east and north-east in the second leg, north and north-west in the third leg of our visit.  We interacted with political, civic, business and community development leaders in these districts: Mpigi, Mukono, Kampala, Mubende, Luwero, Nakasongola, Kiboga, Sembabule, Masaka, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Soroti, Kumi, Katakwi, Moroto, Kotido, Lira, Apac, Gulu, Kitgum, Ajumani and Moyo.  

We selected districts based on agro-ecological zones, farming systems and location of projects.  For districts in the north, north-west and north-east, we wanted to determine the extent of apparent neglect by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the views of leaders in these districts.  This neglect became apparent to us when we examined documents showing the distribution of projects countrywide.  To make data gathering systematic, we designed a questionnaire for our field visits, and had tables containing background information, for example, dam costs, bills of quantities, geo-maps, and others. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we have a film which shows exactly what is on the ground, as far as the dams are concerned. Mr Speaker, with your permission, we shall invite hon. Members to view this film at an opportune time.  

Interaction with His Excellency the President  
The report drafting sub-committee had a brief interview with His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and he gave his views and opinions on the matters that were before the Committee for investigation.  The committee had, earlier through the press, invited all interested parties that wished to testify before it to make contact.  The President spoke to the sub-committee in his capacity as a farmer, but he also confirmed to the sub-committee that, as President, he had been briefed on the LSP in 1993 and was very surprised to find that the project had no water component.  

He further confirmed that the water component was added to the project at his urging and that his idea was to have a water facility per parish to minimise cattle movement as a measure to reduce the spread of disease.  The President got to know of the construction of large dams only when debate about them started in Parliament.  He shared with the sub-committee how he had a  number of large dams on his farm, constructed at a cost of about 20 million shillings.  In his view, expenditure beyond 40 million shillings per dam was uncalled for.  The list of witnesses to our Select committee is appended and this will show that we interviewed a number of people.  

Engineering and financial audits.
Our Committee planned engineering and financial audit even before the Minister demanded these audits publicly and during our interview with her.  The Financial audit was carried out by the Auditor General, using the professional Firm; DAMA Consultants. They visited all dam sites and gave their report, which is appended to this report.  We had a backup audit provided by the capable Members of our own audit sub-committee. These three Members have extensive experience in financial auditing. Both audits did not cost the select committee or the Ugandan tax payer any extra money.  

The Association of Professional Engineers had pledged to do an engineering audit; this pledge is appended to this report and it will be laid on the Table.  

Our committee was of the view, right from the start, that MAAIF should visit dam sites to reconcile physical accountability with book accountability and should conduct audit to establish value for money before payment for the work done.  Afterall, it is up to the owners of the house under construction to demand an audit and not the visitor to the house or a passer-by.  

The Committee had these questions in mind: Was there value for money in LSP Projects, particularly valley dams and tanks?  Our original intent was a qualitative audit. Is there value for money?  Answer, yes or no. Then we would recommend to the relevant authority to establish the exact value of work done.  Mr. Speaker, an intelligent lay person can establish that a house  estimated at 50 million and is about one third to a half complete, is not value for money when some 45 million shillings has already been spent.  He may not know whether the incomplete house is worth 20, 25 or 35 million, but by looking at it, he will definitely know that it is not worth the contract value of 50 million. The Committee and this House both consist of intelligent persons.

Problems encountered by the Committee.
Mr. Speaker, the Committee received some co-operation, but also encountered many road-blocks which were interpreted as attempts by some individuals and groups to hinder the Committee from executing its constitutional responsibility.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, the Committee wishes to particularly thank the present Permanent Secretary in MAAIF, Mr. David Obong, who was at our disposal all the time and asked his staff for maximum co-operation with our Committee.  Many officers of the Ministry did indeed co-operate with the Committee by supplying wanted materials and data.  However, staff in the financial section, notably the project controller, Mr. Obira, and Mr. Yawe, were particularly uncooperative. The staff in the LSP were co-operative at the beginning, but became difficult as we began asking probing questions. We found Engineer Kakeeto of Namalere very unco-operative. Hon. Dr. Kibirige Sebunya was extremely unco-operative -(Laughter)- and did not seem to take the Select Committee seriously. We took exception to his unbecoming behaviour as Minister of State. We had to send him away to come another day.  He never came back, up to the time of presenting this report. He has not produced the information he told us he was to produce; this calls for disciplinary action.  

The Director of animal resources and his big entourage of about 8 staff went ahead of us a week in advance and even tailed us during our trips to dam sites, even when one or two officers could have sufficed.  The Minister complained that we should have gone to her office for a brief about the projects.  We explained that we had in fact received this brief from the Permanent Secretary and project leaders, and that we would talk to her after visiting the projects upcountry and comparing what was on the paper with what was visibly on the ground.  This did not seem to go well with her and some other officials who resorted to calling some Committee Members names,and hauling insults at them.  

Our Select Committee tried to explain that the Select Committee was a probe Committee, different from a Sessional Committee which normally calls for the Minister at the beginning of each Budget year to brief it on the Ministry's activity throughout the year.  The Ministry did not seem to accept that the probe Committee would ask probing questions to extract answers from wrong doers, and that this was not an act of malice, but the nature of investigation.  

Working through Sub-Committees. 
As we progressed with our work, it became apparent that the task would not be completed in the allotted time.  To overcome this, we set up ad hoc, sub-Committees as needed; budget, drafting, audit, project appraisal, and a sub-Committee to draft a profile of key players in the Ministry.  There was a permanent multi-task sub-Committee, which did the day to day tasks such as trip details, formulating questionnaires etc.  There was a Permanent Secretariat consisting of a Chairperson, Select Committee Secretary, one office Secretary and a Clerk Assistant. This took care of day to day Committee administration.  This report is a result of the effort of these sub-Committees and I am glad to present this report on behalf of these illustrious, Patriotic sons and daughters of Uganda -(Applause).

Policy issues in the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries. 
Mr. Speaker, before examining the MAAIF Projects in detail, we looked for the Ministry and agricultural sector policy document. Such a document does not exist, indicating lack of an agricultural sector policy.  

Projects and Donors.
Mr. Speaker, ever since 1990, most of the operations in MAAIF have been projects mainly funded by donors through loans and Grants.  The Ministry does not seem to have a programme for the co-ordination and harmonization of loans and donated funds in projects. Many of the projects stand alone without linkage to other projects. In the majority of cases, the projects have had limited inputs from the beneficiaries and other stakeholders, while in other instances they have not taken into consideration national objectives, or needs, both long term and short term.  Most have not addressed the historical and political requirements of the country.  

Under the Ministry, there have been a total of 57 projects which have been funded by International bilateral and multi-lateral funding agencies including United Nations, the World Bank, USAID, DANIDA, the European Union, and many others.  Over the past six years, annual funding for agriculture through these international agencies, plus local funding, has averaged 50 million US dollars,  while for the fiscal year 1997/98, it was 54 million US dollars. This information was obtained from the Ministry of Economic Planning.  

Inputs by beneficiaries.
Mr. Speaker, the Select Committee has found that the poor design of these projects, lack of inputs by beneficiaries and stake holders, and the general lack of guidance to donors, have been the primary cause of failure in realising objectives and addressing national priorities.  

Project management, the expenditure of funds borrowed and the actual supervision of the projects in general, have been dictated by the very people who have either loaned or donated the funds.  International donors and lenders have not necessarily taken into consideration the historical and political perspectives of our country. Our investigations showed that projects have been concentrated in certain parts of the country, leaving other areas with very few or no projects at all.  Mr. Speaker, our informed opinion is that this has happened because of lack of political and technical direction and capacity on the part of Ministry officials.  

Project Distribution countrywide.
Mr. Speaker, the Committee has found that although a few districts have as many as five projects, there were districts which had only one or two projects, while others had none at all.  These districts were even excluded from those projects that were said to be countrywide.  There impact could not be tressed in certain districts, and this has created an imbalance in agricultural development and therefore an imbalance in economic development of Uganda.  

The most disturbing feature is that the impact of almost all these projects ceases to exist as soon as the project period expires.  Many projects, which start as pilot projects, end up being abandoned at pilot stage after colossal sums of money have been spent.  Out of 57 projects that have been in the Ministry, 18  have now expired after huge sums of money were spent, but one cannot find acceptable value on the ground for the money spent. 

MAAIF and its stake holders.
Mr. Speaker, the project implementers have taken the grassroot beneficiaries and stakeholders for granted.  There has been very little consultation and involvement of the local population where these projects have been carried out.  This has resulted into serious lack of transparency and accountability. The beneficiaries cannot act as watch dogs and whistle blowers, since they do not know what is happening and what is being done.  There is no clear provision in the Ministry of Agriculture, or even the district level, for education and training of farmers extension services.  This is not there.

The Committee found out that for most of the projects and the budgetary provisions are headquarter centred, which in essence negates the policy of decentralisation. Functions are decentralised without adequate funding.

Hon. Members, I now want to turn to the Livestock project, one of the projects that we investigated. The details are all here, but I am going to read only the necessary parts.

The Livestock Services Project, or LSP, has a long history, closely enter-twined with Uganda's recent history, since 1986 when the project was conceived to September 1998 when it was supposed to end.  In 1986, Government adopted the 1986 report of the Livestock Task Force of the Agricultural Policy Committee (APC) which recommended five priority areas of rehabilitation, namely, animal health, milk production, milk marketing, tsetse fly control, and privatisation of veterinary services.

In early 1989, Government then embarked on the preparation of the LSP, which was the vehicle through which the Livestock sector was supposed to be rehabilitated.  The project document was appraised in December 1989, when milk marketing was dropped.  The credit was negotiated in May 1990 and the Development Credit Agreement (DCA) signed in November 1990, becoming effective a year later in November 1991.  The project was reviewed at mid-term in February 1994. Supposed to end on 30th June 1996, the closing date was extended to June 30th 1997, and again to June 30th, 1998.  All other components closed on 30th June 1998, while the water component was extended to 30th September 1998. This brief history is captured in the box you see.

The objectives of the project, as revised at the mid-term review, were:
(a) To reverse the decline in livestock numbers through improvements in disease control and other productivity enhancing measures.
(b)  To improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of livestock services; and
(c)  To support Government policy of encouraging development of private veterinary practice for curative services, and the distribution of quality veterinary drugs through private channels.

The World Bank Review Mission.  
During the period between 22nd January and 10th February 1994, a World Bank team appraised the project at mid-term.  The  names of the people on that team and the organisations they represented are indicated.  The team recommended drastic changes in the project, which was having serious problems, and these were reflected in their aide-memoire, which is also summarised below as observations.

Observations of the World Bank mid-term review mission.
1. Implementation of LSP has been impeded by the complexity and weaknesses in the original design as well as by capacity constraints
2. A delay of two years between appraisal and credit effectiveness was caused by numerous conditions, which included revisions of the national credit guarantee scheme and subsidiary loan agreements with commercial banks.
3. During the long waiting period, start up activities could not be initiated because it would appear that the purpose of the pre-project funding was not clearly defined. As a consequence, there were misunderstandings between the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the use of funds.
4. The project became effective in 1991 but implementation was constrained by diffused management arrangements and insufficient financial and procurement capacity.
5.  As a result of these constraints and the design shortcomings, the project was classified as non-core by the Government of Uganda in the 1993 Public Expenditure Review.

Project components after Mid-term review.
The broad objectives of LSP remained the same but were restructured to reflect emerging priorities, availability of donor financing and Government constraints.  

The water component was introduced at this stage, the forage component reduced, and funds for long-term technical assistants abolished.  Funds were broadly allocated to allow flexibility in project implementation.  
The broad project objectives remain the same; first, to reverse the decline in livestock numbers through improvement of disease control and other productivity enhancing measures; and second, to improve the quality and cost effectiveness of livestock services.

Table 4.2 shows details of livestock components and funds allocated to them at mid-term review.  A copy of the aide memoire is also appended to this.

LSP component 1: Disease control.  
LSP component 2: provision of water- Funding was provided for the construction and rehabilitation of about 100 valley dams and tanks.  The mid-term review document recommended: "as in case of dips, community groups are expected to play a major role in planning, implementation and maintenance of these facilities.  Given that a number of tanks are also used for human drinking water, planning and co-ordination with other Ministries and NGOs, would be important. Careful planning to ensure consistency with long-term water development programmes would also be required."  

Funding for this co-ordination was provided.  Hon. Members, you can have a look at Table 4.2.  

We have another LSP component, which is tsetse control and another, which is training and institutional development.  

We go to page 5 of 1; LSP component 5: supporting services.  
This component included forage development through provision of pasture seed and pilot demonstrations.  An additional one million dollars was set aside for vet privatisation; an extra one million dollars for vets and other Ugandans to set up livestock enterprises like small butcheries, hatcheries, pharmacies and others.  This component was not utilised, and most money is still lying idle in the Bank of Uganda.  The few examples of success are some seeds distributed upcountry and still in stores three years later, and of course administrative and transport costs, seminars, and a few pajeros and fuel to run them.  The final output - vets in practice, enterprises established, pasture farmers set up, et cetera, are not on the ground.  

When asked to explain the abysmal failure of this component, Dr. Bamusonighe blamed high interest rates. But our Committee would like to report that the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) had a similar credit scheme for farmers, in the same Bank of Uganda, from the same world Bank, at the same time.  They managed to disburse this money to cotton farmers.  How was the CDO Manager able to do this and the LSP Manager not able to access this money for our livestock farmers and veterinarians?  Dr. Bamusonighe should explain this to the Ugandan farmer and tax payer.

LSP organisation and management.
According to paragraph 13, page 5 of the mid-term review aide memoire, these steps were recommended:
The project (LSP) activities will be implemented through existing organisational arrangements within MAAIF, which will be strengthened and streamlined as necessary.  There will be no need for a Project Management Committee, Project Co-ordinator, or Component Managers.

This recommendation, more than any other, should have been followed up by MAAIF political leaders of that time, and thereafter, to save LSP from its present problems.  Among the diffused management, which constrained project implementation, was the Management Committee headed by the Permanent Secretary.  This was abolished. Next, the post of Project Co-ordinator, held by Dr. Bamusonighe, also Commissioner, was also abolished.  Finally, the posts of Component Managers were abolished.  By abolishing these posts, the World Bank was hoping to end diffused, inefficient management, which leads to waste of tax payers' money.  Little did they know that Ugandans had a few tricks up their sleeves. 

The central post in the diffused management arrangement was that of the Project Co-ordinator, held by Dr. Bamusonighe.  He was the brain behind LSP co-ordination, Secretary to the LSP Management Committee and head of the component management.  He was, in effect, fired, along with Component Managers, except that the World Bank is diplomatic and will use its diplomatic language.  In his interview with the Committee, the then Permanent Secretary, Mr. Wagonda Muguli, confirmed that indeed, the World Bank was diplomatic then and now.  

Fired in February, then promoted in April: The mid-term review report of February 1994, in effect, criticised LSP, headed by Dr. Bamusonighe, Project Coordinator. But interestingly, two months later, in April 1994, during the subsequent restructuring of MAAIF, he is promoted to Director of Animal Resources replacing the incumbent Dr. Kudamba, who was retired.  Wonder of wonders, in addition to the business schedule of the Director Animal Resources, our Dr. Bamusonighe bounces back with an additional responsibility to coordinate LSP; something that he had ably proved incapable of doing.  This marks the turning point in LSP. Any forward looking person at the time could have seen that the fate of LSP was sealed.  This was contrary to what World Bank mid-term review hoped to achieve.

What should have been done to rescue LSP at mid-term?
On page 5 of the mid-term review aide memoire, (paragraph 14), after abolishing the Project Coordinator, in effect firing Dr. Bamusonighe, the review team recommended: "The heads of departments (Commissioners) would be responsible for the implementation of their respective programs under the supervision of the Director of Animal Resources (Dr. Kudamba then), and the overall Co-ordination by the Permanent Secretary (Mr. Wagonda Muguli then).  Financial and procurement functions would be consolidated in the respective departments under the Under-Secretary of Finance.  Agreement would be reached on the nature and scope of decision making at each level-Commissioner, Director, Under-Secretary - in order to expedite and streamline implementation of the programs of the Ministry.  This should be part of a Ministry-wide activity, not restricted to the Directorate of Animal Resources."   

As we have seen before, two months after this report, Dr. Bamusonighe was promoted, the incumbent, Dr. Kudamba and his deputy, Dr. Kabuye, were retired.  So, through the back door, Dr. Bamusonighe remained Project Director of LSP.  This was one of the greatest mistakes ever made, and whoever made it, could not expect miracles with LSP.

The recommendation in paragraph 16 reads as follows: "The Director of Animal Resources (Dr. Kudamba then) would be assisted by a Program Advisor (at the level of Commissioner) who would provide technical support in amalgamating the departmental programs, facilitating monitoring and evaluation, and coordinating inter-ministerial activities, such as the proposed water development program.  The present administrative officer( Mr. Byona then) recruited under LSP would be also assigned to the office of the Director of Animal resources to provide administrative support to the whole of the Directorate of Animal Resources."  

The Select Committee has learnt that the programme adviser who was to carry out the day to day management of LSP was not appointed until some years later in 1997 when the project was almost ending.  In effect, Dr. Bamusonighe remained LSP Co-ordinator without a programme adviser,in addition to his busy schedule as Director of animal resources, overseeing the livestock and fisheries sectors. He moved with the LSP Administrator and Secretary, but these were doing office work.  There was nobody to follow up where dams and tanks were located.  Supervision was bound to suffer.  This is what happened.

Paragraph 17 of the management review aide memoire recommended as follows:"Each Department (commission) would prepare its annual work program indicating clearly all funding sources, with details on funding requirements from IDA (World Bank} within the limits provided under the project budget.  These programs would be consolidated in the Office of the Director of Animal Resources and submitted to IDA for approval by January 31st of each year, to allow sufficient time for budget discussion within Government. These annual work programs would form the basis not only for the financial planning but also for the efficient procurement planning through consolidation of packages for both local and international competitive bidding (ICB) purchases."  

As the financial management report will show, the project, without following the agreed budget, spent most of the money on mobility, staff (transport), studies and other administrative costs,contrary to the agreed budget.  

The pilot project before the contract.  
When the water component was introduced into LSP in 1994 on the recommendation of His Excellency the President, it was originally envisaged that about 100 dams and tanks would be built throughout the cattle corridor, stretching from Ntungamo through Mubende, Apac and Kotido.  The president had a vision that a dam or tank per parish would reduce cattle movement and the spread of disease among cattle herds.  
There was no feasibility study, but the Ministry of Natural Resources gave the Project Co-ordinator of LSP, Dr. Bamusonighe, the preliminary survey of the areas which needed water.  A pilot project was designed to determine the actual cost of dams and tanks.  There are three dams in Mbarara district; Bijura, Rwenjubu and Nyakahita were to be constructed and Kanyaryeru dam to be repaired using equipment from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries' engineering division, based at Namalere near Kawanda.  Mbarara District Council contributed 50/= million to this project and the World Bank refunded 80 per cent of the money used (force account method, in the World Bank vernacular).

The execution of this pilot project proceeded well until the Project Co-ordinator hired Mr. Jide Fatokun as a consulting engineer.  Before his arrival, dams and tanks were constructed at about between 40 to 50 million each.  He arrived when Nyakahita was under construction.  After this, dam costs rose to 150 million, then 300 million per dam or tank.  Nyakahita dam site was used as a pipe through which tax payers money was siphoned.  This evidence is available in the chapter on financial mismanagement and under the chapter on key players in the Livestock project.

As far as pilot projects or studies go, this LSP pilot project was a failure, since none of the dams are under use even today.
There were many causes for the failure of this project, most of which had something to do with management, lack of political and technical supervision, and outright theft of funds.  Equipment was diverted to do work on private farms using government fuel, staff and time. Political leadership started moving when this probe was under way.

The Contract Phase of the Livestock Services Project.
Before the pilot phase was completed, the contract phase of LSP began.  This was a serious mistake on the part of the political leaders in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, since the basic data which the pilot project was supposed to give was never obtained.

We have already seen that the pilot project failed, Mr. Speaker.  Normally, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should have adopted a different strategy.  They did not, instead they went ahead to construct the number of dams they claim to have constructed without knowing the cost of each dam and therefore the total number of dams to be constructed from 2.1 million US dollars IDA funds and 240,000 thousand dollars, Uganda Government contribution.

The Ministry was relying on Mr. Fatokun, who had a blank cheque, to design the projects, select sites, conduct geographical surveys, draw maps, approve them, draw bills of quantities, supervise the contracts and certify all payments. Although he had a generous salary and allowance as a consultant, he charged extra for most of the above tasks.  Mr. Speaker, this is equivalent to a driver who is paid a monthly salary, demanding extra pay for services for parking, parallel parking and three point turns.

The Change from 100 to 15 dams.
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, our Select Committee interviewed Her Excellency the Vice President, and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Hon. Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, Hon. Kezimbira Muyingo, Dr. Bamusonighe and Mr. Fatokun in an attempt to understand why the President's vision of many dams was altered so drastically from 100 to 15 which are not even complete.

Through correspondence between Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, and hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, and through interviews, we made these discoveries:

a) That hon. Kezimbira Miyingo wanted small, cheap dams, costing  five to 20 million shillings, spread along the cattle corridor for water supply and disease control.

b) That Her Excellency, Dr. Kazibwe, and the technocrats, were for large dams, and they had little respect for the opinion of Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo.  Her Excellency, Dr. Kazibwe, referred to correspondence from Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo as, "a loose minute, an indication of a loose meandering mind."  

c) That efforts by Dr. Kezimbira to promote small dams were frustrated by his senior Minister, Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Kazibwe, who authorised the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, and the Director Animal Resources, Dr. Bamusonyighe, to sign the controversial dam contracts.

d) That Her Excellency, Dr. Kazibwe, disregarded the opinion of Dr. Kezimbira because "he was not a hydrological engineer with a certificate from Netherlands"(as Mr. Fatokun had).

Mr. Fatokun, a bogus engineer, was respected more than hon. Dr. Kezimbira. She disregarded the opinion of Dr. Kezimbira "because he is not an engineer or a professional" yet in the same interview, she says that the dam drawings she took to His Excellency, the President, were drawn by her son. Her son is neither an engineer nor an employee of the Ministry of Agriculture.

Engineering division at Namalere and the Pilot Project.
Namalere Agricultural Engineering Division is the arm of government for the development of agriculture through mechanisation.  This entails opening up and cultivation of land for increased agricultural production in the country,  construction of water reservoirs for both agricultural production, animal and human consumption.

Namalere and the Pilot Phase of Livestock Services Project.
It was decided to have a pilot phase in the construction of three new dams and tanks in the District of Mbarara at Bijura ( a tank), Rwenjubu (dam and tank) and Nyakahita ( a dam) and to repair Kanyaryeru dam.  Namalere was requested to provide its heavy equipment and personnel for this work.

These works were carried out at Rwenjubu and Bijura Valley Dams, tentatively at these costs: Rwenjubu - 51,732,400 million shillings and Bijura- 54,254,900 million shillings.

Nyakahita dam, which is 20 percent complete, has cost the country so far:- 
(a)Fuel- 71,580,000 million shilling, 
(b)money sent to Dr. Barigye for allowance and so on - 74,313,240 million shillings, 
(c)Unsettled allowances to Namalere staff - 41,580,000 million shillings. 
All the above totalling to 187,473,240 million shillings.
Unlike the previous two reservoirs, Rwenjubu and Bijura, the arrangement for the administration of funds for the construction and technical work supervision was not directly under Namalere.
The construction team, under the site Engineer, G.W. Kiwanuka, was supervised by the Water Component Consultant/engineer, Mr. Jide Fatokun and was reporting directly to the Director of Animal Resources, Dr. Bamusonighe.

All requirements on site, including fuel, allowances and other materials were channelled by the Director of Animal resources through the District Veterinary Officer, Dr. Barigye.  Although fuel used to be paid in advance to Ankole Shell, the Select Committee was shocked to find that work stopped because of lack of fuel.

Namalere Work in other Districts.
The team remained on the Nyakahita site until 16th March 1997, when they returned to Namalere.  Since then, the construction team has not been facilitated to complete the work at Nyakahita.  Namalere staff told us that they have been involved in the rehabilitation of dams in Karamoja, through the Minister of State for Karamoja, President's Office. The dams they have been involved in are:  Lokithiledi Dam, Lomogol Dam and Longorikipe Dam. However, when we visited Karamoja, the district leadership complained of shoddy work at these dam sites.

Water for production:  Namalere told us they constructed a four million litre valley tank at Buwana, Ngoma sub-county, Luwero District.  We did not visit this dam to verify this claim.

Individual Farmers and constituencies which benefited from Namalere.
In a written submission, appended to this Report, and during interviews, the officer in charge of Namalere, Engineer Kakeeto, informed the Committee that some farmers had dams made or repaired for them by Namalere at a cost of about one to three million shillings per dam.  These individuals, about ten of them, happen to be influential people in government, from mainly two districts, Mbarara and Masaka.  These farmers include, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Kezimbira Miyingo.

Also appended, Mr. Speaker, is a loose minute of 8th December 1998 from hon. Kezimbira Miyingo to Engineer Kakeeto, in charge of Namalere.  In this minute, hon. Kezimbira is enclosing a cheque for work done in 1996/97.  Payment is made after the Select Committee has begun its probe.  During the probe, the Minister denied having used Namalere equipment on his farm.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo also talks of 'my pilot project, which I personally initiated to test out my proposal to TMM ( Top Management Meeting); that we could offer machinery to farmers so that they dig water for themselves and they pay fuel and allowances for operators, and maybe a small fee for maintenance.'  In this loose minute, he instructs Engineer Kakeeto to 'Bill Masaka District Administration for murram work ( road repairs) in Ndaggwe and Lwengo Sub-counties.'

These Sub-counties, Mr. Speaker, are in hon. Kezimbira's Constituency. He gave them Namalere water equipment to repair their feeder roads, while the poor farmers in the cattle corridor did not have water.  This is abuse of office.  In the same loose minute, hon. Kezimbira says, 
"since I had wanted the pilot study to continue to another area, I had hoped that the tractor would move from my Constituency to hon. Israel Kayonde's..."(Laughter). "I have spoken to hon. Kayonde and requested him to write a letter to the Ministry requesting for the machine."

Finally, knowing very well that Parliament was probing financial abuse, hon. Kezimbira says, in this loose minute to Namalere, 
"I have attached here a cheque No. 753655(Barclays Bank) for U. Shs. 300,000, as my personal contribution  to the maintenance fee for the work done for me (de-silting, damming and expanding a fish pond). I have spent U.Shs. 730,000 on repairs and oils.  The other farmers were not requested to pay such a fee because I only persuaded them to participate in the pilot project."

Many farmers in the North, East, West and Central, outside hon. Kezimbira's Constituency, would gladly pay, after being persuaded to participate, to avail water for their farms using Namalere equipment.  By persuading farmers only from Bukoto Mid-West, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo clearly abused his office.

Hire of Namalere equipment by Basangira.
M/s Basangira Building Contractors(1977) Limited hired heavy equipment from Namalere Engineering Division at a cost of 305,329,890/-.  They only paid 151,734,595/- million shillings in cheque and claimed they spent another 34,280,100/- shillings on maintenance and repairs, a total of 186,014,695/- Uganda shillings.  To date, Basangira Building Contractors (1977) Limited, owes the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries  119,315,195/- million Uganda Shillings.

Basangira Building Contractors (1977) Limited has a balance of  157,041,083/- shillings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and yet many dams are not yet complete and they have to pay for the hired equipment.  Many casual labourers at the dam sites were not paid for their labour.

Recommendations. 
These are interim recommendations, there are other recommendations somewhere else, Mr. Speaker.

Engineer Kakeeto, the officer in charge of Namalere, should be disciplined for making Government lose money through the deal with Basangira.

Engineer Kiwanuka, while site engineer at Nyakahita, lent out equipment to farmers to build their dams using government fuel.  The CID has been asked to establish the loss to government through these unauthorised hires.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and fisheries Engineering Division at Namalere is mismanaged, and this leads to loss of tax payers' money.  The Ministry should review the mandate of Namalere with a view to privatising it.

The awarding of contracts for dams and tanks.
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the 1995 Constitution of Uganda  requires that government procurement of goods and services be done under the auspices of the Central Tender Board(CTB).  An elaborate procedure exists on how this is done.  The Chairperson of the Central Tender Board testified before the Committee to the effect that in the case of the Livestock Services Project, dam construction component, the Central Tender Board marginally participated in the initial stages of advertising to opening of tenders.  He also informed the Committee that after the tenders had been opened, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries took over the process against the standard procedure of government.  He concluded, therefore, that the tenders were not properly evaluated and no due diligence was done to determine the competence of the contracting firms.  He said further that, had the Central Tender Board participated till the final stage, the two firms would have never been awarded the contracts.  The Committee established that Mr. Basangira was a primary seven drop-out who had no experience in water or dam construction.  His company did not even have any experience.

Basangira Building Construction Limited.
Mr. Speaker, Basangira Building Construction Limited was not a limited liability company, duly registered under the Companies Act with the Registrar of Companies by the time of the award of the contract on 22nd September, 1997.  It was established that this company was only registered on the 2nd April 1998. Besides being unregistered, it was characterised by the following:
1. The Company lacked technical capacity to accomplish the task.
2. The Company lacked the required equipment to do the work.
3. They did not have the requisite financial bond of 200,000 US dollars.
4. The Company did not have any requisite experience of having accomplished a contract worth 500 million shillings in Uganda.

The Committee further interviewed Mr. John Baptist Basangira, the Managing Director of Basangira Building Contractors Limited.  He admitted that his Company did not have the above requirements and that he relied on securing the necessary equipment from Namalere Mechanised Unit and also relied on the fact that he could subcontract the work to other competent contractors.

As it turned out, Mr. Speaker, the Company sub-contracted all the work on the nine dams.  The Company secured government equipment and machinery from Namalere at subsidised rates and passed on the machinery to the sub-contractors to do the work on all sites.  The Committee found that most of the sub-contractors had no previous experience in dam construction.

Basangira's contract with LSP was to the tune of Shs.1.8 billion out of this a total of Shs.1.6 million has been paid to him.  Although Namalere submitted a bill of only Shs.305 million, Basangira has so far paid Shs.186 million leaving an outstanding balance of Shs.119 million.

Under the contract, there is supposed to be a retention fee of 10 per cent to cater for faults arising within the first year of completion.

According to hon. Kezimbira's report, when he visited the dams in August 1998, only one month before the project period expired, the average completion rate was 50 per cent and work had stopped on all sites.  The Committee visited all the sites during the month of December, 1998 and found no work in progress and confirmed hon. Kezimbira's assessment of about 50 per cent of the work completed.

Going by the available evidence, the Committee came to the conclusion that Basangira Building Contractors (1997) Limited had been overpaid by about Shs.900 million.  This amount represents the financial loss to government and the people of Uganda caused by Ministry officials through this Company alone.

Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd.
Mr. Speaker, the other Company, which was contracted by the LSP, is Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd.  This Company was awarded a contract on 22nd September 1997, having been registered in Uganda on 26th July 1997.  The contract was to construct six dams at a cost of Shs.950 million.  At the time of awarding the contract, this Company was characterised by the following:

1. The Company did not have a physical address or office in Uganda nor did it possess a post-office box number. (Interjections).

2. The Company used an address of a Pharmaceutical Company as its contact address in Uganda when applying for the contracts.

3. The Company had neither workshop nor equipment to enable it accomplish the contract.

4. In the application, they indicated that they were to get equipment from a sister Company called, Afro Building contractors (Kenya) Ltd.

5.  The Company did not possess a single bank account in Uganda and therefore had no bankers in Uganda.

6.  They did not have the requisite Bond of $ 200,000 but only relied on a letter from Gold Trust Bank indicating that if they secured a contract, the bank would consider financing it. 

7. The Company did not have any staff, technical or otherwise, except a one Babu, a national of India, who referred to himself as Managing Director. They also had an office messenger called Ochieng, who was a major shareholder in this Company, Mr. Speaker.

8. The Company had not carried out any construction work in Uganda, and therefore, did not possess the requisite experience of having accomplished work here worth Shs.500 million.

The Committee interviewed Mr. Babu of Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd, who confirmed that the above requirements were lacking. He informed the Committee that he had been shopping for contracts in Uganda for nearly two years.  The Committee established that although Babu held an investor's permit, he had not brought in any money into Uganda as required by law. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Babu fits the description of a 'chapati investor'-(Laughter)-  a phrase recently coined by a Minister of this Government. He informed the Committee that he was expecting to secure supply of equipment from Afro Building contractors (Kenya) Ltd., but the Committee established that no such equipment was ever secured to do the contracts in Uganda. 

The Committee questioned Babu as to whether he had secured the bond from Gold Trust Bank. He informed the Committee that he never secured the Bond but rather used that 10 per cent mobilisation fund paid to him by the LSP to open an account with Gold Trust Bank, and he started off the work.  Mr. Speaker, out of this Company's contract sum of Shs.955 million, as stated earlier, Shs.750 million has already been paid and a balance of Shs.205 million remains unpaid but is subject to 10 per cent retention, some of which has not been paid.  

The Committee discovered that Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd sub-contracted all the works to local companies, some of which have not been paid.

The Committee established that this company contracted Migyera Dam at Shs.164,002,520, but was paid Shs.231,435,000, an overpayment of Shs.69,433,272/= or 42 per cent of the contract value.

Going by hon. Kezimbira's estimates in a report he made in August 1998, this Company has a completion rate of about 60 per cent. As in the Basangira case, work had stopped on all sites. The Committee confirmed this during the visit to the sites in the month of December 1998.

Assessing from the available evidence the Committee found, Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd have been overpaid by shs.300m/= of the contracted sum. They also got a further overpayment of Shs.69.4m/= on Migyera dam alone.  Shs.369,400,000/= represents the financial loss to Government and the people of Uganda through this company alone.  

Mr. speaker, we shall lay on the Table a report from the Anti-corrupt Unit of the Vice President's Office, proving that Basangira and Electrical Contractors Ltd is a fake Company which did fake work on dams under LSP as well.  

The Committee findings on Dams and Tank Sites under construction or repair. 
We did visit all the dams - the 15 dams - and as I requested you  earlier, Mr. Speaker, we shall avail to Parliament a documentary which will show the state of the dams.  I will go through our findings very quickly in this Chapter 5, so that we can move to other Chapters.  

Between 10th and 20th December 1998, the Select Committee visited the districts mentioned in the 1998/99 MAAIF Policy Statement to verify whether they really benefitted from the large strategic water reservoirs/water valley dams.  The districts we visited included Mubende, Mbarara, Sembabule, Ntungamo, Nakasongola and Kiboga.  We visited sites where dams and tanks were under construction or rehabilitation.  These sites were either started during the pilot phase in 1995 and 1996 or the contract phase between 1997 and 1998. We also visited water facilities constructed by individuals, donor agencies such as UNDP, GTZ and the German Technical Agency, and Non-Governmental Organisations such as ACORD.  This will be shown on table 5.1 showing the water facilities that we visited.  

For easy  reference, the table shows the name of the dam, where it is located, its volume and estimated cost, and percentage of completion as given by MAAIF at the 1998/99 budget time and by the Minister in charge of the livestock sector, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, in August 1998.  The table also shows which dams are in use.

These water facilities were under construction by Basangira Building Contractors (nine dams and tanks) and Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (six dams and tanks).  Four dams and tanks were constructed, or supposed to have been constructed, by Namalere Mechanised Unit located in MAAIF.

During our up-country trips, we were accompanied to each site by the district leaders, the contractor and his staff, plus the local population supposed to benefit on completion of each water facility. Dr. Bamusonighe, Mr. Fatokun and their entourage accompanied us throughout our tours.

Committee findings on dams and tanks in Mubende - Kasensero Dam.  This dam was under Basangira but subcontracted to Assist Uganda Limited.  It was supposed to block a small river, thus creating a small lake.
This dam, located in Kasanda South Constituency, according to Mr. Basangira and his Chief Engineer, Mr. Israel Kakungulu, was 450,000 cubic metres. It is supposed to serve a population of 500 people and 1,000 to 1,500 head of cattle.

The troughs were not complete and fencing was not complete.  There were treated poles, but no barbed wire.  The dam wall was already beginning to wash away and had cracks in at least three places. There was water in the dam because it had been raining.  The pipe draining the reservoir to feed water troughs was open and water was pouring out, so within three weeks after the rains,  the dam would be empty.  The dam was not in use.

The dam was supposed to be 7.5 metres at the water inlet, but was about four metres ( they said it was five metres), and 2.5 metres was yet to be added.  The spillway was not constructed yet.  The Committee did not believe the contractor when he said that the dam was 72 per cent complete. Eng. Kakungulu assured our Committee that the dam would be completed by the end of November but we doubted this estimate.  The dam was tendered to Basangira Building Contractors, but when they ran into problems of capacity and the El Nino rains, according to Mr. Basangira;  "We contacted Dr. Bamusonighe and Eng. Fatokun who advised us to contact Assist (U) Limited as subcontractors".

We asked why the El Nino rains affected his Company and not Assist (U) Limited, but Mr. Basangira did not give an answer.

Concerns of the community around Kasensero Dam, Mubende:
The Chairperson LCI, Mr. Alex Kiwanuka, read a memorandum on behalf of the citizens of the village.  The people had these complaints:
1.  Employees on the project had not been paid for up to five months - from June to December 1998.
2.  The local community was not consulted on the issue of this dam before it was constructed.
3.  The dam was not completed and yet it was submerging homes and other areas.  

There are many complaints here which Members can look at during their own free time and see what happened.  

Rwemitongole Dam in Mubende.
This was being constructed by Basangira at shs.204m/=.  This shs.204m/= dam was tendered to Basangira Building Contractors but subcontracted to Moonlight of Kitgum House. Their Chief engineer, Kiiza Robert, briefed us about the dam.

The dam is estimated to hold 309,00 - 350,000 cubic metres of water.  Work started in March 1998. The dam was said to be 85 per cent complete, although there was no water at all.  The dam wall looked so thin at the top (about three metres instead of eight) that most people were even scared of walking across, let alone drive a pick-up truck across. This dam had one of the thinnest dam walls among all dams visited.  Fencing was partly done, only two strands of wire, instead of six, and moreover the poles were not treated.  The cost of fencing at 12 million shillings, apart from anything else, was clearly an exaggeration even to a lay person, since the area fenced was much smaller than that of Kasensero.

The Contractor was to earn shs.204m/=, and the subcontractor who did the job took his Shs.142 million.  One member of the Committee asked why the subcontractor did not do the job and the Ministry saves 62 million shillings (the difference between the contract and sub-contract sums).

When asked about his previous experience, Eng. Kiiza said he had 30 years experience, but not on water dams.  He had experience on construction of embankments. One embankment constructed in Kigali and one constructed while he was a student at the University of Nairobi.

Hon. Members, again, you will see the views of the beneficiary.  

Dyangoma Dam in Mubende.
Mr. Speaker, this dam was constructed during the colonial times in the 1940s but had, since then, silted. The little water was getting dirty and mixed with cow dung and plant material.  Moreover, the dam wall was leaking and needed rehabilitation.  The dam needed draining and de-silting.  The dam was drained; only water delivery pipes and troughs were added, plus some murram on the old dam wall, and fencing at a cost of U.Shs.178.5 million.  They did not de-silt the dam and the beneficiary community was not happy about it.  They wondered why the dam was drained if it was not going to be de-silted. This dam was in the same category as Rwamakara in Sembabule district and Kishangura in Nyabushozi County.

You will find the concerns of the people of Mubende in 5.2.4.  

We now move to 5.3 - the Dams in Sembabule.   Sembabule had two dams under the contract - Rwamakara for rehabilitation and Kyambidde as a new dam.

Rwamakara dam, in Lwemiyaga County, was under Basangira at 99 million shillings.  This dam was built in 1948.  It served Sembabule and Kazo and sometimes Nyabushozi county during the dry period.  It has never dried up in its 50 years.  However, the community noticed that the wall was leaking, the water was getting less because of silting, and it was becoming dirty because of cow dung, urine and vegetable matter that had accumulated over the years.  The people were told by MAAIF that Basangira Building constractors would rehabilitate the dam.  Naturally they got excited,but the excitement turned into tears when they realised that the contractor dug into the dam wall and drained the water so that the people had no water for themselves and their cows. But after this drainage, the contractor increased the dam wall by 2 metres, installed a water delivery system, built 6 troughs, fenced and claimed a cool 99 million shillings.  The spillway was above the water troughs and once it rained, the water would log the drinking area, which was already in the swamp and wet.  The water taps looked weak and some were already broken after being used for only few days.  There was not much water in the dam, and most herds had moved elsewhere in search of water.

The people, plus their leaders, were very angry with Basangira and MAAIF. On top of that, most workers on the dam site had not been paid.  We met the only equipment coming from the site some 6 km from the dam site.

Kyambidde Dam in Mawogola County.
This was being constructed by Basangira, again at 211 million shillings.  This 211 million shilling dam under construction by Basangira was in many ways similar to Rwemitongole, in Mubende.  Its dam wall was very thin; it was about 3 metres, when the bill of quantities said 8 metres. It was empty, the dam reservoir was still full of grass and tree stumps. There was no water delivery system, no spillway, no water and fencing was partially done.

The lady who donated her land for the dam, Naomi Kwikiriza, complained that they were taking more land than agreed.  The RDC and the district political leadership complained that they had asked each taxpayer to pay an extra 1000/= per year, as their local contribution.  When asked what he thought the constructed dam was worth, Councillor Bitakaramire from Rwebitakuri answered, 'work on Kyambidde dam is not even worth 5 million shillings.  Next time, they should involve us in these things, not just in site selection.'

We visited the three dams in Kiboga District, all contracted by Basangira Building Contractors: Kasejjere Dam, Nakakabala Valley Tank, and Wabikunyu Valley Tank.  The Contractor, Consultant and district officials accompanied us.  We met Engineer Onziga who told us that he rotated between the 9 construction sites contracted by Basangira.

The Kasejjere Dam. 
According to rotating Engineer, Onziga, this dam had a volume of 350,000 cubic metres.  The Committee at first was impressed with the dam size, until one of the members of the water Committee, a lady, asked  'If it is such a big, good dam, how come we do not use it, and we go to a nearby stagnant pool?  This dam has a spring, so it should be filled quickly.'  She then showed us cracks in the dam wall, and the contractor had not sealed the water delivery system for fear that the dam might be washed away by the heavy rain water.  They had used the sandy soil from the reservoir area to build a dam wall and yet they told us they used murram.  The engineer did not show us the murram pit when we asked. The members of the water Committee complained that the contractors had not compacted the soil.

There was only one Namalere grader, UA 0927, whose number plate had ben removed and hidden.  The officer in charge of the site was actually forced to reveal the whereabouts of the number plate.The supervisor of the site was Mr. Francis Musoke from the Directorate of Water Resources. He told us that he submits weekly reports to the Director of Animal Resources.  

According to the Auditor General, mistakes were made by Engineer Fatokun and to correct them, the dam wall was reduced from 470 to 405 metres, and the dam height increased from 4.5 to 5.57 metres, increasing the cost by 69.4 million shillings.  The total cost of 244 million shillings was unjustified, especially when they got equipment, staff and equipment repairs from Namalere at concessionary rates. 

Hon. Members, you can go on and look at Wabikunyu and Nakakabala dams, you can also look at the dams in Nakasongola. I would like to propose that since I have given you an example of what we saw there, we move to chapter 6.  Mr. Speaker, chapter 6 is on Finance Management of the Water component.

The Committee critically looked at LSP expenditure and perused through large volumes of LSP books of accounts.  We called  witnesses, and occasionally had to summon them when they refused to co-operate. We called these witnesses many times because, as it turned out, some had something to hide.   

We have a list of the financial papers we looked at; those are found in 6.1. 

Determination of expenditure on the pilot project.
Mr. speaker, the water component was introduced into the Livestock Services project under a pilot programme to construct pilot valley dams and tanks during the 1995/96 Financial year.

The ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries implemented this programme, while the later phase was implemented by contractors. Site selection, geo-technical and topographical surveys e.t.c, were carried out by LSP under the technical guidance of the 'World Bank Consultant', Jide Fatokun, before Namalere moved in to start construction. The Ministry of Agriculture asked Namalere to undertake the construction works of these dams, since  they had the required machinery.

Namalere pointed out to the Ministry that it did not have a full range of the required construction machinery e.g self-propelled H.D Vibrating compactors, high capacity tippers e.t.c.  It was a requirement to hire this equipment to supplement the Namalere equipment, if work was to run smoothly and without interruption and to be completed on schedule.  The World Bank Consultant, in consultation with Namalere, worked out the estimated cost of carrying out this work, which came to 172.0 Million shillings for Nyakahita dam,  and this was to be completed in 4 months.
Under the pilot project, the following dams were to be constructed: 
1. Rwenjubu
2. Bijura in Bukanga country
3. Nyakahita in Nyabushozi county
4. Kanyareru in Nyabushozi county (was to be repaired).  

When the construction of Rwenjubu and Bijura was underway, MAAIF was sending money for fuel and staff allowances to Namalere and Namalere made the payments.  The total cost of constructing Rwenjubu and Bijura was shs. 51,732,400/- and Shs. 54,254,900/= respectively.  

On 19th April 1996, a meeting was held at Nyakahita site, chaired by Dr. F. Mbuza, representing the Director of Animal Resources. At that meeting, officials from Namalere were informed that the Directorate had made some changes in the management of the construction works at Nyakahita.  The new site engineer, Eng. Kiwanuka, was introduced and was to be in full charge of the site.  He was to work under the direct supervision  of the World  Bank consultant, Engineer Fatokun,  and to report directly to the Director of animal Resources, Dr T. Bamusonighe.  This was the turning point that led to extensive haemorrhage of taxpayers' money under LSP.

From that time, the supply of materials and control of finances for works at Nyakahita site became the responsibility of the office of the Director of Animal Resources, represented by the DVO Mbarara, Dr. Barigye.  All  fuel and staff allowances were  provided directly at the site through the DVO,Mbarara.

On 11 occasions, a total of 74 million was sent from Entebbe to the Mbarara DVO, in the personal names of Dr. Barigye,  for staff allowances. On 8 occasions, nearly 72/= million was sent for fuel for Nyakahita dam through Ankole shell, as shown in Tables 6.1 and 6.2.

The Committee considered that the amount spent on Nyakahita, (Shs. 187,473,240/=), including the cost of fuel and unsettled staff allowances, was too much compared to the work done on Nyakahita Dam.  Shs. 74,313,240/- was sent to Dr. Barigye, Shs. 71,580,000/= to Ankole Shell and Shs. 41,580,000/- unsettled allowances to Namalere site.  

We have a number of tables here, but now we would like to turn to why Nyakahita was not completed.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee found that there are many factors which negatively affected the construction of Nyakahita dam to its completion, namely:-

1. Change of management in construction of Nyakahita valley dam: 	The ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries appointed Engineer Kiwanuka, a junior officer, to take charge of Nyakahita.

2. Change of finance control from Namalere Mechanised Unit Headquarters to District Veterinary Officer, Mbarara District.

3. DVO, Mbarara, Dr. Barigye, failed completely to control the staff of Namalere because he had no technical know how.  Secondly, he did not pay them their allowance as he got it from Entebbe.		

4. The writing of cheques in personal names was improper.  There was non payment of night allowances to officers who were working at Nyakahita dam; this was to the tune of Shs. 41,580,000/=.

5.  Advance payments for fuel to shell Ankole was also improper.  Buying fuel in bulk, directly from oil companies, would have been much cheaper.

We also observed that fuel paid for at Ankole shell did not reach  Nyakahita dam site.  The records at Nyakahita show very clearly that not all fuel was delivered.  In our view, Mr. Speaker, fuel intended for Nyakahita dam might have been diverted to other construction work, or somebody was collecting cash instead of fuel.  
Mr. Speaker, it has been observed, by an engineer of Namalere, that Nyakahita construction site has been estimated to be less than 20 percent complete. The dam has however taken Shs. 187,473,240/-, while Rwenjubu and Bijura dams, which are between 70 percent and 80 percent complete, have taken Shs. 51,732,400/- and Shs. 54,254,900/= respectively and this includes fuel and staff allowances.

Because fuel never reached the Nyakahita site, and allowances for staff were not paid, the equipment was kept idle at the site.  Farmers with political connections around Nyakahita utilised the equipment and dug their own dams.

It is shocking to note that while the poor people around Nyakahita were waiting for water for their livestock, MAAIF was busy constructing dams for the politically well connected at highly subsidised prices of 1.5m to 2m per dam.

The CID made investigations on financial abuse at Nyakahita, following instruction from the President.  They reported that equipment and fuel meant to construct Nyakahita was used to construct dams for rich farmers in the neighbourhood of Nyakahita.  This evidence is appended to this report.

Release of funds under general procurement.  
Mr. Speaker, the Committee found that all funds were released on the authority of the Project Manager, who is the Director of Animal Resources, DR. T. Bamusonighe.
Payment vouchers were supported by some loose minutes, while others had no supporting loose minutes.  This is highly irregular and shows neglect of duty by Dr. Bamusonighe and the Financial Controller.

Mysterious accounts. 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee found out that accounts were mysterious in a number of ways.  The Committee had difficulty determining how many bank accounts LSP was operating.  At first, MAAIF officially did not admit that they operated more than one bank account, then later they were forced to admit there was a second account.  After thorough examination, the Committee found a third account, and in the final days of the investigations, a fourth account surfaced.  We can only hope that there are no more accounts.  We interpreted the withholding of information on bank accounts as an attempt to obstruct our investigations and hide the mismanagement of funds under the LSP.

The Committee found bank accounts of the LSP as detailed below;
Hon. Members can look at them.  
1.Uganda Commercial Bank - City branch - A/c No. 30753.
The signatories to that account were:
1.  Director of animal Resources, Dr. Bamusonighe
2. Financial controller - the late Kato Kakola; up to 30th March 1996 and Obira, from 1st April 1996 to date.
3.  Permanent Secretaries, Mr. Wagonda Muguli and Mr. Opoka Opoka.
4.  Principle Accountants, Mr. Kaddu and Mr. Mayengo.

2. Stanbic Bank(Uganda) Limited - A/c No.024/00/533688/01. The signatories to this account were the same as the ones above.

3.  Uganda Commercial Bank - Entebbe Branch A/C No. 86902

4. Stanbic Bank (Uganda) Limited.
Account No. 024/00/533688/01 and
Account No. 024/00/533688/05, as foreign accounts in dollars.

The Committee found a very complex flow of funds between LSP Accounts:
(a) Funds were transferred from Bank of Uganda for Government contribution to Uganda commercial Bank, city Branch.
(b)  Funds were also transferred from Stanbic Bank (U) Limited to Uganda Commercial Bank.
(c)  Funds were transferred from New York to Stanbic Bank (Uganda) Limited.

The transfers were very difficult to follow within the short time we had to look at those accounts, because some transfers made from Stanbic Bank could be credited on UCB account after 15 days.

The Committee found out that funds were released without going through the tendering process. Some items were highly priced, for example, the bicycles under LSP were priced at 70,000/- shillings per bicycle, while a bicycle on the open market could be obtained at Shs. 45,000/=.  Another good example is the supply of 3 units of HP5 Laser Jet Printers at 2094.3 US dollars each.  The market price, at that time, was 625 US Dollars; a very big difference.  In this case, the procedure was properly conducted, but the price quoted was deliberately inflated.

Fuel supplies. 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee found out that fuel for use under LSP was obtained from 13 stations, six of them in Kampala, 2 in Entebbe, 3 in Mbarara and 1 each in Kiboga, Masindi and Hoima.  Fuel should have been bought directly from oil companies at slightly lower prices instead of paying for fuel in advance, as  detailed in Tables 6.4.
Mr. Speaker, when you look critically at the use of fuel at the Ministry Headquarters, more investigations need to be carried out because one vehicle got fuel at Entebbe and on the same day it got fuel at two other petrol stations in Kampala.  There was no attempt to reconcile the statements from the petrol stations where money was paid in advance. This was confirmed by the Project Financial Controller.  Some  vehicles at the Ministry headquarters, used by the Senior Officers, consumed over 1000 litres of diesel per month, instead of 25 litres per day for 22 days each month, as budgeted.

It is our humble view, Mr. Speaker, that those officers who got more fuel than they were supposed to get should be made to refund the excess fuel consumed or produce the letters of authority.

A calculation of the money spent for fuel in Kampala and Entebbe alone shows that this would have constructed at least 5 to 10 dams, which would be very beneficial to our poor farmers, who are badly in need of water.

The Committee noted that there was no proper procedure on repair of vehicles.  In 1994, when the LSP started, officials bought new motor vehicles and motorcycles which were expected to run for a period of four years, without major repairs. Because there was no proper control over the project vehicles, the officials concerned spent Shs. 935,370,250/=.  The invoices attached on the payment vouchers, in our view, are excessive.  

It was noted that LSP runs a fleet of over 45 vehicles with no proper control. It is very difficult to believe that the new vehicles could be repaired at a cost of 935,370,250 shillings.  This is an astronomical repair bill of 20 million per vehicle! Assuming that most of the repairs occurred in the last five years, this would make a whopping 40 million per vehicle! It would be cheaper to buy new vehicles instead of spending such amounts on repairs and servicing.

The management report written by the external auditors, who audited the books of accounts on behalf of the auditor General, confirmed that there was no adequate control of the motor vehicle system.  

The Committee discovered that cash was withdrawn in big amounts and taken from Kampala bank to Entebbe unescorted, which was very risky.  Mr. Yawe, a cashier, used to collect the cash, sometimes carrying up to 15/= million.  This cash in transit was not insured nor was it escorted.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee would have expected the financial controller to ensure that cash in transit, as well as the cashier, were fully insured.  This was a case of gross neglect on the part of the financial controller.

Incentives and allowances paid to the livestock staff:
Mr. Speaker, the Committee unearthed an arrangement whereby the staff of the project were paid incentives in accordance with the circular from the Ministry of Public Service.  Unfortunately, the staff who were supposed to pay taxes on that payment did not pay.  The Finance Controller, who was employed as a consultant, did not care to deduct the taxes due from the project staff's incentives and allowances.  It is common sense that all allowances paid to various support staff were subject to Pay As You Earn(PAYE).  Secondly, PAYE was not correctly deducted from the monthly remuneration. PAYE is a statutory obligation, which must be fully complied with. Uganda Revenue Authority should recover this money and take action as permitted by law.  

The total incentive paid out was Shs. 628,807,475/= and in addition to that, Shs. 221,791,531/= was paid in form of allowances.  The Committee has supporting documents for these amounts.

Senior officers employed by the project who initially evaded paying PAYE and instead deducted small amounts in breach of the Income Tax law were Obira, Kanagwa and Byoona.  Mr. Fatokun also owes 97,000,000/= in Pay As You Earn, and he should refund this money.

It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the project management did not care to meet its statutory obligations by contributing or making deductions and submissions to the National Social Security Fund.  NSSF should take legal action against the project management.

Procurement and control of procured material and vehicles.
Mr. Speaker, the Committee discovered that very expensive stores were procured and some materials were sent to various districts in Uganda.  Most equipment was sent to districts without other support facilities and could not possibly be used. It is hard to imagine a veterinary doctor in Adjumani using expensive, sophisticated obstetrical equipment, when he cannot even drive to the place where the sick animal is located because he does not have a single vehicle. It is also hard to imagine that a veterinary doctor can carry camping equipment, surgical equipment, obstetrical equipment on a motor bike.  In addition, he has to carry the sterilising equipment, since the work is in the field.  

When the Committee visited Pallisa, Members found out that the stores obtained from Entebbe, under LSP, worth millions and millions of shillings were kept in the house of a veterinary officer who was interdicted.  The Committee visited the house where the stores were and found expensive equipment, which included surgical, obstetrical, post-mortem, camping and sterilising equipment. They were all kept under a shaky, rickety vono bed.  This equipment was so neglected as if it had no value. There was no bin card with each item and no inventory was kept.  The motor cycles sent to Pallisa were dumped in a store, due to lack of minor spares and lack of fuel.

We also looked at other certificates to contractors, Mr. Speaker.  The Committee discovered that all payments were certified for payment by Fatokun, the Director of Animal Resources (Dr.Bamusonighe), and a senior Internal Auditor of MAAIF.  There are Tables showing all the money that was spent. 

Disobeying the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries leading to a loss of 73/= million.  
Mr. Speaker, it is surprising to note that on 30th October 1998, the PR.S/ACU.GEN (the Anti-corruption Unit in Her Excellency, the Vice President's office) wrote a brief to Her Excellency, the Vice President, after a tour of Migyera in Nakasongola.  The subject matter was the fraudulent and anomalous omissions in the construction of Migyera valley dam by Afro Building and Electrical Contractors.  In that brief, it was stated: "Our recent findings with regard to the construction of Migyera dam have brought to light a number of anomalies and omissions which could have been avoided if the earlier complaints had been objectively investigated and subsequent construction supervised and monitored closely.  We strongly suspect that what transpired in Migyera dam construction could be happening or could have already happened in other dam constructions hence the need for you to consider our recommendations in this report."

Documentary evidence shows that the construction of Migyera valley dam is not according to the initial design specifications.  This was fraudulently done by the constructors in a bid to save money to their advantage, but to the detriment of the dams and their intended purpose. About 30 per cent of the earth works, with a cost implication of about 40/= million, was not carried out.  The brief recommended that payment due to the contractors in respect of the other dams should be stopped until the anomalies are thoroughly investigated and rectified.

Hon. Members, the Vice President and Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, in reply to the briefs, instructed her PPS to sign the drafted letter urgently and to ring her colleagues in the Ministry.  The letter was written on 9th November 1998, stopping payment to Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd.  A Loose Minute was written to the Director Animal Resources on 9th November 1998 instructing him to stop payment to Afro Building and Electrical Contractors(U) Ltd.  

Despite the brief in question, which was written on 30th October 1998, payments to Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (U) Ltd. were made immediately after that date.  A cheque of 47/= million was dated 2nd November 1998.  Another cheque worth 25/= million  was dated 4th November 1998; that is a total of 73/= million.  It is surprising that the brief to Her Excellency talks about 40/= million to be recovered from Afro Building and Electrical contractors(U)Ltd. for earth works which were not carried out at Migyera, but the officers concerned paid the contractor 69,433,272/= on top of the contract sum.

It is also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that at about the same time, the following payments were made to Basangira:  On 2nd November 1998 - 189/= million, on 10th November 1998 - 181/= million, on 18th November 1998 - 42/= million.   

In the view of the Committee, the Minister should have followed this case more vigorously and stopped all payment to contractors on 30th October 1998.  
We have already talked the bad work done at Rwenjubu and Bijura in Bukanga, so we will now move to 6.13 which deals with supervision and control of expenditure of public funds at technical level.

Among other things, in summary, the Committee observed that there was no supervision and strict control of expenditure of public funds as there were no strict budgetary estimates to follow.  Money was diverted as the project Manager, Dr. Bamusonighe, wished.  The Financial Controller, Mr. Obira, was made a paying cashier, and he did not observe any financial regulations.  Taxes were evaded; deductions were not made from the people who were supposed to pay taxes.  Money was paid to petrol stations in advance and no attempt was made to reconcile the statements from those fuel dealers.  No clear fuel issues were made.  The cashier at the head office, Mr. Yawe, was drawing cash and carrying it from Kampala to Entebbe without any insurance cover. This is just a summary to cover what we had said earlier.

Supervision and control of expenditure of public funds at a political level.  
Mr. Speaker, at a political level, in summary,the Committee found  out that the Ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries did not know how money was being spent.  The Ministers did not even care to find out how the project funds were being transferred from Bank of Uganda and Stanbic Bank to  Uganda Commercial Bank.  There was a collection account in the Uganda Commercial Bank. The Minister and her two Ministers of State did not know the importance of Loose Minutes, which had to be attached to many payment vouchers. Diversion of funds from the project, which is illegal, was common and not strictly controlled.  

Contracts and agreements were not properly studied by the political leaders; as a result, the technical people used this ignorance to keep giving people salaries and allowances when their terms had expired; for example engineer Fatokun.  In fact, the sector Minister, hon. Kezimbira, shocked the Committee when he confessed that he had not seen the contract, which he was supposed to be supervising.  On a mission to monitor three dams which were due for rehabilitation, he said, 'if de-silting is included in the contract, then the dam is 20 per cent complete,  if no de-silting is in the contract, then the dam is 40 per cent complete.'  His juniors, however, had recommended payment for 90 per cent of completed work and this had been reported to Parliament.  The Committee could not understand how a whole Minister could not have access to bills of quantities and contracts if he was going to inspect.  These documents were available with his junior staff.  This is gross negligence of duty by hon. Kezimbira Miyingo.

I have already reported on the Audit firm and management reports and they will be laid on Table. 

Critical observations.  
In its investigation, the Select Committee observed that many staff of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went for further studies and managed to get Masters degrees and PhDs. The secretaries were also exposed to new technologies.  This was excellent as far as training of staff was concerned.  The training component of the project was well utilised.
Top officials of the project management have a lot of information which they decided to keep to themselves.
The people/farmers who were supposed to benefit from the water component of the project got very little out of this project but staff of the Ministry benefited alot.  Alot of project funds were spent in Entebbe and Kampala in form of allowances, incentives, motor repairs, instead of sending the project money to our farmers in rural areas.  
Deliberate plans to cheat.
Mr. Speaker, among other things, the Committee found out that deliberate plans were made to steal money from the project, as exemplified by the following;
An increase in payment by 69/= million on Migyera; above the contracted figure given to Afro Building and Electrical Contractors Limited.  Kasejere dam has also been increased by 8/= million. 

The change of responsibility in the management of finances from Namalere Engineering Unit to Dr. Barigye, District Veterinary Officer, caused the incompletion of Nyakahita dam  and increased the cost in fuel and allowances.  This simple change in management led to the loss of colossal sums of money.  

The advance payments to various petrol stations, without reconciliation of these accounts with project vehicles' fuel consumption, caused some officials to draw fuel from Entebbe and  Kampala.  We also found out that many officers drew beyond their normal drawings of 550 litres of fuel and also fuel refunds to the tune of 262/= million.  

It was observed that the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, borrowed money from the project Account and from Uganda seed project to the tune of 37/= million.  

Seminars cost the project 392/= million.  This sum would have been used to improve the well being of the people.  It is not normal for Government - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. chairman, is it true that you are tired?

MR. KANYIKE:  I am not tired, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I have received a note from your Colleague, the secretary, that you might be tired. 

MR. KANYIKE:  I am not tired, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I want to tell him that there is no indication that you are tired.

MR. KANYIKE:  No, I am not tired. 
It is not normal for a government department to charge concessional rates to a business entity other than a Government department, as when Basangira Building Contractors (1977) Limited got a Contract worth Shs. 1,817,292,883/-. They paid Namalere 186,014,695/- million only, for all their equipment which they used on construction of dams, including the cost of repair and allowances.

We have noted that three units of HP 5 Laser Jet printers were priced at 2094.3 dollars each.  During that time, the price was US 625 dollars on the open market; a difference of 4,408 US dollars on the whole and US Dollars 1,469 for each.  This should be recovered from those responsible for the purchases.

Another loose point from where money was taken out of the Ministry was the motor vehicle repairs; the cost came up to 935,370,250/- shillings

Increase in the cost of construction of dams from a figure of 90 million to 150 million shillings and from 150 million to 300 million shillings without increase in size cannot be justified at any cost.

Forage improvements, and costs and distribution of seeds, cost the project 212,057,319/-, which would have been on recovery system or cost sharing with the farmers. There should have been large stocks of seeds somewhere.  This is nowhere to be seen on the ground; meaning that there was no value for money spent. During our upcountry tours, we found many bags of rotten pasture seed in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries' stores in at least three districts.

key players in the Ministry.
Hon. Members, I am going first skip chapter 7, which deals with key players in the ministry. I will first go to Chapter 8, because it is connected with our findings, before we come back to who ate what in the Ministry. (laughter).

Chapter 8 deals with Poverty Eradication Action Plan (Seed); this is otherwise known in the Ministry as Project AG08C.  It deals with the famous two billion shillings to build seed capacity countrywide. This morning, some Members of my Committee received a certain document confusing this project with other activities in the Ministry. We shall lay papers on this Table. What was circulated this morning, from the Ministry, is a different matter all together.  We are talking about money that was put in place for the distribution of seeds at sub-county level.

We also looked at the two billion shillings for capacity to avail high-yielding improved seed at sub-county level throughout Uganda.

The Modernisation of Agriculture Plan: 96/97 - 2000/2001
Mr. Speaker, the Modernisation of Agriculture Plan, 1996/97 to 2000/2001, was initially developed in 1996. This was a deliberate effort by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to define a new vision for agriculture and its contribution to poverty eradication and food security.

Both Government and the donor community, however, remained cautious about moving forward, basically because of limited consultation and lack of resources to implement the plan in the form it was at that time.

One of the major activities envisaged under the original Modernisation of Agriculture Action Plan was the transfer of existing technology available at research stations, mainly in form of improved, high yielding and disease resistant seeds.The strategy proposed was to use the sub-county as the point of entry for seed multiplication and distribution, and also as a focal point for the promotion of farmer sensitisation and provision of extension services.

Tradable commodities to promote growth.
Under the Modernisation of Agriculture Plan, it was anticipated that the bulk of growth for the agricultural sector had to come from tradable food crops like rice, wheat, beans and other pulses, oil seeds etc. There were three main reasons for this:

First; growth in non-tradable food crops sub-sector, that is crops like millet and sorghum, root crops, plantain, would be limited by the population growth rate estimated at 2.7 percent per annum and growth in incomes, which was projected not to exceed four percent per annum.

Second; export crop at the time constituted five percent of agricultural GDP, therefore their over all impact on the overall sector was minimal.

Third; growth in the traditional export crops was expected to be consistent with the global demand, estimated at a rate of only two to three percent per annum.
Among the tradable commodities, maize and beans were selected for four reasons that were given in the project document:
First; they are grown in the 45 districts of Uganda and fit well in the farming systems.
Second; they have large domestic and regional markets.
Third; among the tradable food crops, maize and beans have a comparative advantage in the regional markets.  
Fourth; promotion of maize and beans was consistent with national food security objectives. (See Appendix: Strategy of nation-wide adoption of high-yielding maize and beans during 1997/98).

It was against this background that a special project, AG 08(C) Poverty Eradication Action Plan (Seeds), was formulated by the Agricultural Sector Secretariat, then in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Original objectives of the special programme.
Because of budgetary constraints during the financial year, 1997/98, the idea was to only have two seed crops, maize and beans, selected for immediate promotion and support throughout the country, in order to make sure that the Modernisation process started without any delay.

Key features of the plan highlighted by the strategy document included:
(a) Grain of maize and beans would be procured by Uganda Seed Project for planting during the first rains (February/March 1998).
(b)  The procured grain would be transported to Masindi and Kasese facilities of the Uganda Seed Project(USP) for treatment with chemicals, to turn it into seed for planting. Treated seed would not be attacked by pests or be consumed directly (eaten).
(c)  Treated seed would then be transported to 45 districts, using agents at the offices of the chief Administrative Officer, for temporary storage before delivery to 850 sub-counties countrywide.
(d)  Each sub-county was to receive 2.5 tons of Long 1 maize and 1.2 tons of beans ( both improved and high yielding varieties).
(e)  Seed was supposed to be distributed by each sub-county Development Committee.  For each sub-county, 250 farmers would receive maize at 700/- shillings per kilo, and 50 farmers would receive beans at 800/- shillings per kilo on credit. This would be payable in kind after harvest. The farmers were supposed to promise to sell some harvested seed to other farmers in the sub-county.  This is the multiplier effect. 
(f)  This demonstration and multiplier effect system would continue for four seasons (2 years) by which time 40 percent of the 2.5 million farm families would have adopted modern, high yielding maize and beans varieties.
(g)  By year 3 (1999/2000), 102,000 tons of beans and 979,000 tons of maize would come from improved seed.
(h) Marketing - to increase and sustain farmer enthusiasm in this  modernisation plan, government was supposed to reach an understanding with the World Food Programme for export to regional markets.  Government was also supposed to ask our neighbours with trade imbalances, such as Kenya, to buy crop surpluses.
(i)  During year 3 ( 1999/2000), when the seed distribution was to end, impact assessment was to be done to determine success and which other crops to add to the programme.

Appended to this Report,Mr. Speaker,is a copy of the project document. ( Appendix:  Strategy of nation-wide adoption of high-yielding maize and beans during 1997/98).

On taking this project, Mr. Speaker, MAAIF produced a work plan and budget of two billion shillings which was approved for the 1997/98 financial year for the purpose of covering seed purchase, transportation, processing -(Interruption)

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, although it is true that the Chairman did say he was not tired, I have been following him closely and I realise he has now got into the habit of jumping very many words. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, you can help this House, for our record purposes, because what he is reading is what goes down into our transcript. He might find a way to save us; maybe he can ask for a five minute breather and then we come back and he continues. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Chairman, may I hear from you?

MR. KANYIKE:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to promise you and the House that I will not jump any more words.  

THE SPEAKER:  For this reason, I would also advise that this is an important Report, so take your time.  You do not need to read as fast as an English man. You paid a lot to learn that language, so take your time. 

MR. KANYIKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
The Committee has had an opportunity to look at the budget; which is indicated in Table 8. The plan and budget all talk of two billion shillings for maize and beans, as envisaged in the original Ministry of planning strategy document.

We shall lay on the Table, the work plan and budget that was approved.

Who Implements; Ministry of Planning or MAAIF?
Mr. Speaker, initially the project was to be implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the first cheque of shillings 666,667,000 million was printed accordingly.  However, after high level meetings, it was agreed by Government, without reference to Parliament, that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should take over the implementation of this project.

We shall lay on the Table copies of release letters for this money to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The 1997/98 financial year closed without the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries receiving the balance of 335 million shillings because of failure to account for the first 1.65 billion released on this account. The Select Committee has authoritative information that the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, failed to account for 1.65 billion shillings released for the account on capacity building for maize and bean seeds at sub-county level countrywide.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just request you, Mr. Speaker, to save the hon. Member so that he adopts his original speed. By being slow, he has lost all his style, and some Members may also begin dozing.  You either give him an interval of five minutes, or you allow him to adopt to his original speed. (laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  My advice was really intended to get him composed and to make sure that he does not jump certain words or lines.  Otherwise, read it the way you want, according to your normal speed.  Hon. Dick Nyai, when they transcribe his speech, he will be able to correct it,I think that will allay your fears, but that is not to say that he should make a million mistakes.

MR. KANYIKE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Reported releases of funds for seed.
Mr. Speaker, this money was transferred to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries under the following documents, which we appended to this Report:

A copy of a letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, dated 10th November 1997, signed by Mr. Francis Mukama for the Permanent Secretary. It is entitled; 'advance payment for seeds Uganda shillings 666,667,000/-'. It will be laid on the Table.

The above cheque was received by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and acknowledged on the 11th of November 1997, under Finance/3/1, signed by Dr. Bamusonighe for Permanent Secretary.

On Tuesday 19th August 1997, under reference C/AGR.50, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Mr. Opika Opoka, wrote to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, confirming, among other things, that it had been resolved that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was to co-ordinate the two billion seed programme.  

Mr. Opika Opoka advised that the Uganda Seed Project was to coordinate the procurement, processing, and distribution of the maize and bean seed.  He further advised that a Technical Committee had been established at the national level, a liaison office in the Planning Department of MAAIF in Entebbe and the District Production Committee at district level was to have the overall responsibility of overseeing the programme in each district.

The Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, in this letter, requested the Secretary to the Treasury to authorise the release of the initial funding for what he termed 'the Emergency Programme'.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee has evidence that the release to the Permanent Secretary was made by the Secretary to the Treasury. Mr. Speaker, I will lay on Table the reply from the Secretary to the Treasury, dated 29th July 1997. It indicated that 660 million shillings had been released as an advance for seed procurement, processing and distribution by the Ministry of Agriculture.

These investigations were necessary because, during several meetings with MAAIF officials, the Sessional Committee on MAAIF demanded to know what was happening to this money but information had been received that the MAAIF had failed to account for this money and that the Accounting Officer of the Ministry, the permanent Secretary,  was being evasive and unable to provide the demanded accountability. To everyone's amazement, before MAAIF submitted accountability  to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, contrary information was given in the Ministry Policy Statement for the Financial year 1998/99 regarding this money. Thi0s information was completely different from the original design of what the project was intended to achieve.  This information is captured in the table you will see.

The Select Committee has learnt that this money was spent, as shown in Table 8.2, which Members can read through at their leisure. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we urge you to study Tables 8.1 and 8.2 to see these anomalies.

(a) The original allocation of funds (Table 8.1) was for beans(Shs.792 million) and maize(Shs.552 million), totalling to Shs.1,214 billion  or about 50 per cent of the Budget.  The operational costs were rather high; about 50 per cent. As bad as this was, what happened next cannot be forgiven.
(b) After submitting the work plan and budget shown in Table 8.1, MAAIF altered the whole project and allocated only 667 million shillings to the  Uganda  Seed Project for maize and beans (Table 8.2). This sum includes operational costs (not known, but expected to be around 50 per cent).  So, at best, the Uganda farmer would end up with maize and beans worth only 330 million shillings, out of the intended 2 billion, a mere 15 per cent.  But as we shall later show, even this did not reach our poor rural farmer.

(c) The remaining money from maize and beans was spread thin among six  programmes of NARO and MAAIF to promote things like bananas, mangoes, oranges, silkworm, fish fry, bulls, cows et cetera. This had nothing to do with the original objectives of the project -  tradable commodities, specifically maize and beans.

(d) Most of these six programmes are difficult to evaluate.  Take fish fry development,  when we visited Kajjansi, they showed us ponds containing 'thousands of tilapia fish fry obtained as a result of the MAAIF special programme.'  We could never verify the species, let along the numbers or indeed whether there was any fish fry.  
At Kawanda, we could see impressive mango, orange, avocado, and other seedlings, but we could never distinguish them from those developed using the normal Kawanda recurrent budget.  
At Entebbe Bull Scheme centre, bulls from the LSP scheme, those from the special programme and some donated by farmers, were all mixed.  They said some had died of tick borne diseases.  We had to take their word on which bull belonged to which programme.  

(e) The figures given by MAAIF do not add up.  They reported in the 1998/99 Policy Statement that they had received two billion shillings, but only showed how they were going to use 1.65 billion. It was our investigation that revealed that inspite of accounting for 1.65 billion shillings, Treasury refused to release the balance of 335 million shillings.  Please take a look at Table 8.2, you will see that even what is reported by MAAIF as 1.65 billion is actually 1.484 billion. Where is the difference of 166 million shillings?  MAAIF should tell us, on behalf of the rural farmers.

In view of the fact that there had been no accountability to the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development for funds released for this special programme, the Sessional Committee on MAAIF queried this information and reported to Parliament. Parliament then decided that this programme and other projects under the Ministry be investigated by this Select Committee, now reporting to Parliament.

Committee findings and recommendations on seeds.
Mr. Speaker, the Select Committee has been working through a sub-Committee and has visited Western, Eastern and Northern regions for on the spot verification, in addition to operating from the centre.

The Committee wishes to report that there is an acute shortage of seed, planting and stocking materials in the 20 districts we visited and possibly in all the 45 districts of Uganda.There is no evidence that a special programme took effect with any tangible results.

The so-called seed agents and stockists are hard to find.  The few agents are business people selling at prices farmers cannot afford.  Please remember that this project was to give farmers seed on credit, and they would pay back after harvesting, not in cash but in kind(with seed).  In the districts that we visited, we found mainly Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) assisting farmers and commercial seed traders; they were selling imported seeds at unaffordable prices to farmers.  There was absolutely  no seed capacity built at sub-county level in all the districts visited, and the district production Committees had no knowledge of the project activities.  

The 667 million US dollars advanced to the Uganda Seed Project must be accounted for by the political and technical leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, since it cannot be traced on the ground where it should have gone.An explanation must be given by MAAIF as to why the intended objective of building an adequate seed supply of maize and beans was sabotaged.

With regard to the US.239 million that was diverted to Kawanda, the Committee would like to report that Kawanda has always had its on going programme on bananas, passion fruits, mangoes and other high value crops.  Kawanda, under the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), a research parastatal under MAAIF, has always had its budget approved separately by Parliament. NARO is performing extremely well on its programmes.  It has never requested for any emergency funds and it is inconceivable that any funds should have been diverted from an emergency programme to routine programmes under NARO.

In addition, the Committee was informed  that after the Ushs.667 million had been passed to Uganda Seed Project, the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, went and borrowed Ushs.37 million for purposes yet to be explained.  The Committee is demanding that the former Permanent Secretary in MAAIF explains this borrowing and the diversion of funds from maize and beans to other unrelated programmes. In this regard,Mr. Speaker,the Committee has the following comments concerning other areas where the money is claimed to have been spent.

All the above were on going programmes under the Ministry of Agriculture and were covered under the normal budget.  The provision for the special projects AG 08(C), Poverty Eradication Action Plan Seeds, was to ensure that there was adequate availability of seeds at affordable prices at sub-county level throughout the Country.  

The Committee is satisfied that Ushs.1.65 billion was released to MAAIF through the Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, as indicated through the documents received from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Edith Kateme-Kasajja, writing on behalf of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, under reference ED/C/MAAIF/ED/C/MAAIF/ACCOUNTABILITY, dated 11th February 1999, confirmed to the Select Committee that accountability for Ushs.65 billion has not been received from MAAIF.  

Policy Shift.
Before this money was released to MAAIF, the Ministry of Finance had been informed, through the minutes of a meeting held in the Agricultural Planning Boardroom on 15th August 1997, that a Technical Committee had been established at the national level in MAAIF to handle this programme. This meeting was held between MAAIF, APSEC and USP on emergency maize and bean seeds distribution programme.

This Technical Committee was to be chaired by the Permanent Secretary MAAIF, and it was to report to the Minister and her two Ministers of State.  The Commissioner of Agricultural Planning was to be the Secretary to the Committee. The responsibilities of the Committee included the following:
Under responsibility No.1, the Committee was to serve as the decision making body for the whole programme.
Under responsibility  No.7, the Technical Committee at national level was to monitor use of funds and effective distribution of seeds.
Following the report from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, programme funds amounting to Ushs.1.65 billion have not yet been accounted for and are therefore presumed missing or, at best, diverted to unauthorised programmes.

During our up-country tours, our Select Committee did not find, in 20 of the 45 districts we visited, what is referred to in the strategy as, the district co-ordinating Committee for this programme.  As stated earlier, the Select Committee did not find seed agents in the districts visited.  The population and the local political leadership complained of unavailability of seeds not only at sub-county level, where they had been intended to be, but in most cases there was no seed at all in all the districts.  In the Select Committee's view, therefore, the national level Technical Committee coordinating the distribution of seed failed and/or neglected its responsibility for effective distribution of seed and must therefore take responsibility. It must be charged for neglect of duty resulting into non-execution of a Government programme, in addition to failure to account for public funds.

Select Committee recommendations on seeds.
Mr. Speaker, unless the Members of the national level technical Committee produce accountability to show that Ushs.1.65 billion was put to the use it was intended for, the following officials should not only be punished for negligence of duty and responsibility, but should be made to refund the public funds squandered:
1. The former Permanent Secretary MAAIF, Mr. Opika Opoka, who was the Chairman and head of the technical team.

2. The political leadership, which included the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

3. The two Ministers of State at the Ministry then, hon. Israel Kibirige Ssebunya and hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, to whom the Permanent  Secretary was supposed to report.

This is not a case of corruption, Mr. Speaker,it is a case of criminal negligence of duty and responsibility resulting into deprivation of services to the people and loss of public funds amounting to Us.1.65 billion.

The poorest among Ugandans, from all corners of our land, have been denied an important service by those whom government has entrusted responsibility.  Parliament must view this as a very serious matter and must take appropriate action on those concerned.  

Seed money used at the national Bull stud, Entebbe.
Mr. Speaker, it was reported that Us.212 million was used at the National Bull Stud at Entebbe. The Committee is still investigating this sensitive topic.

Seed money used on the Bull Scheme - 51 million shillings:
The Committee is still investigating this scheme.

Seed money used on the National Elite Herd - 287 million shillings.  
At the time of writing this report, the Committee had not finalised its findings on this particular programme.  Under this programme, about 1,500 high producing cows of exotic and local breeds were supposed to be bought from farmers and kept at specified government farms for multiplication and later distribution to farmers. The first government farm supposed to participate in the programme did not even have a single cow.  The Committee is carrying out further investigations to establish whether there is value for money under this scheme.  

At this preliminary stage, the project seems to go against the stated government policy of getting out of direct production and letting the private sector do it. Ordinary farmers can participate in the establishment of high production (elite) herds.  In fact, they have been doing it, albeit informally and without government support.

Hon. Members, those are the Committee findings, as far as the livestock services project is concerned.  We now want to go chapter 7 which details the Key Players in the Livestock Services Project.

THE SPEAKER: Which page is that?

MR. KANYIKE: That is chapter 7, we start off with 7(1). Mr. Speaker, allow the Committee to highlight the first key player in LSP, Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Kazibwe, Minister in charge of MAAIF and Vice President.  Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, a medical doctor, a surgeon by profession, is the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.  In this capacity, and as provided for in the Constitution, she deputises for the President in the country.  She also represents her office and often that of the President at conferences and meetings internally and abroad. In addition, she holds a number of ceremonial duties such as meeting important visitors to Uganda.  She is the leader of Government business in Parliament, and she is also in charge of the anti corruption activities, along with the newly appointed Minister of Ethics and Integrity.
As Vice-President, her office is located in Kampala.  As we can see, the long list of duties fills her vice presidential plate.

Hon Dr. Specioza  Wandira Kazibwe, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.
As Minister with an office in Entebbe, Her Excellency Dr. Kazibwe heads a team of three Ministers of State: hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, Minister of state Animal Husbandry, hon. Kibirige Sebunya Minister of State for Agricultural Sector and hon. Fred Mukisa Minister of State for Fisheries.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is the backbone of the Uganda economy - 90 percent of Uganda's population depends on agriculture. Food security is the lifeblood of the whole country, hence the Mission of this Ministry is central to life.

The Ministry has depended on donor funds and has therefore many projects, totalling to 57 in number at present.  It has two directorates, 8 Commissioners and many Assistant Commissioners.  It has a number of parastatal bodies like NARO, which has 9 institutes, UCDA which co-ordinates the coffee industry, the main stay of Uganda's economy, and CDO,the cotton development  organisation. Through NARO, it has 9 research institutes scattered all over the country and a number of district Farm Institutes.  It is central in poverty eradication, food security  and rural development. Other crops such as tea, banana,  vegetables, rice, maize, beans and other fruits are also co-ordinated by this vital Ministry of Agriculture, animal Industry and fisheries.  The Minister in charge of this vital Ministry, H.E. Dr.Specioza Wandira Kazibwe,whose Ministry office is in  Entebbe, drives to and from Kampala, where her more important Vice President's office is located.  This return journey is about 2 hours each day.

Decentralisation transferred a lot of responsibilities to the district authorities, but in practice, financing has not yet been fully decentralised.  The modernisation of agriculture policy has led the MAAIF Minister and H.E the Vice President to spend a lot of time in the field educating the wanainchi and monitoring rural development.

Her Excellency the Vice President, Dr. Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, as Member of Parliament for Kigulu South,  like all MPs, has to serve all the people she represents.  There have been  a lot of political problems in Iganga, her home district, and she is playing a leading role in settling these problems.  Dr. Kazibwe plays a leading role in Busoga region. This long list of duties cannot be expected to be performed by any one human being; this is humanly impossible.  

Hon. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe as a community leader.  
Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, like  the rest of us, has  family responsibilities as a Nalongo with a family,  and like any other mother, she has a busy role in the welfare of her family.  She is a leader in a number -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, the Select Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was to probe into that Ministry. I find it absolutely distasteful and lacking ettiquette, Mr. Speaker, for a whole Select Committee to report to this House about the ability to produce twins or otherwise. I think personal matters should be kept where they belong. Mr. Speaker, I wish you can rule and guide the Chairman of the Committee that personal matters are not to be included in this report.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the hon. Chairperson and his Committee were looking at the attributes of Her Excellency the Vice President as a Vice President of this country, as a Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and also as a community leader and so on and so forth. Those are her qualities, and I think in their conclusion they may say, in spite of those qualities, it may not be possible for her to perform all these other functions.  I think they are about to say that, but I agree that matters which are of a personal nature should not come into this House.  Thank you. Proceed.

MR. KANYIKE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling. We are trying to make a case as to why there should be a change in this Ministry. In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, the Committee feels it is important to show that the responsibilities that are carried out by an individual, as a person and as an officer, may hinder their ability to perform in a public office.  This is what we are trying to prove here. We do not intend to probe into the private, personal affairs of any individual, Mr. Speaker.  

Her Excellency, the Vice President, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, was appointed a Minister in July 1996 and took office on 9th July 1996.  She inherited from former Ministers a number of on-going projects, one of which was the LSP water component, introduced at mid-term review in February 1993 at the urging of the President.  

There was no feasibility study - the pilot phase was to give indicative requirements for the contract phase.  Work in this phase was slow due to lack of money. Even when money was available, because of secrecy and inconsistency, there was lack of commitment in the release of money.  We refer to a letter written by Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo and copied to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on 20th March 1996. We shall lay that letter on the Table.

Although a number of decisions were made prior to her taking over, Her Exellency, Dr. Wandira Kazibwe, inherited responsibility of this Project. The water component was far from being finished, finances continued to come, and she was the political boss in the Ministry.  

At her first appearance to the Select Committee, Her Excellency the Vice President stated: "Mr. Chairman, to me the question of water for agricultural production is very, very, critical...  As Vice President and Minister of MAAIF I want to submit that if we indeed want to modernise this country through agriculture, ponds  and valley tanks are very good for animals to drink water, but they will not modernise the agricultural  sector.  Valley tanks are good in areas where people are settled, they are good where the rains are predictable and may be come twice a year.  But in the traditional cattle corridor in this country, if we are to stop nomadism, if we are to get industries in those areas where livestock is produced or is reared, we shall have to put up dams".  

This is the basic concept on which Her Excellency the Vice President based her policy and her decision to provide large dams.  She made her decision with the overview of the economy and a long term provision of water for agriculture.  It appears the Vice President and Minister trusted the advice she received from her technical  staff in her Ministry.  They had changed to the view of having fewer dams to larger ones and contracted out.

The change seemed to have coincided with the hiring of Mr. Fatokun. She admits that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo did recommend more valley dams, she adds: "I believed that it was possible to have both because within the Ministry,  I found there was a vote of our own money which is not World Bank money, which you could actually use and determine how you are going to use it, whether you want to build a pond or a valley tank.  So, I decided that we have the big dams and use money from our own vote in the Ministry to construct the valley tank.  I subsequently charged hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, to Chair a Committee which had even bothered to come up with a list of sub counties which were going to benefit from this money for the valley tanks...  It was in my belief, correct at that time, and I want to say that right now it is still correct for me to have taken the decision to have the World Bank money go for the big dams, and we have our own project money go for the valley tanks."  
This was the political direction she made. Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo did make the effort to correct her, but she did not listen to him.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo was not very assertive in enforcing his policy, he stated at our interview that he had to go about it carefully, inquiringly; she is the Minister and also the Vice President -(Laughter).  

The Minister's stand and concept differed from the original intention of having 100 dams.  In her letter to His Excellency the President, she argues that this is the best policy for agriculture, for provision of water to both animals and people and she erroneously believed it would stop nomadism. She provided water in only 6 districts, she hopes to reach the others with our own government finance, which is actually less than the LSP money.  Moreover, of the 19 dams; 4 pilot and 15 project, less than 5 are in use.

Enforcing of her directives.
On a loose Minute; Director of Animal Resources to Permanent Secretary, dated 15 August 1998, she wrote a directive telling the PS to guard against escalating costs and to make sure that local authorities do the implementations.  However, the project continued to be directed from the centre as costs escalated and local authorities were not involved in most LSP activities.  Many district authorities told us that they were never involved in any planning, supervision, implementation, and maintenance of LSP project components or facilities as the project document of January and February 1994 (mid-term review) recommended.  The Permanent Secretary did not carry out his directives.

Relationship with other Ministers.
Judging from evidence given by hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, the Vice President and Minister of Agriculture,Animal Industry and Fiheries did not quite respect his contribution. He is a professional in the field under his charge, but the Vice President/Minister seemed to have been influenced by the technical staff and ignored his advice.  Was it too late to change?  Perhaps not.  Contracts had not been signed when she came in, hon. Nasasira had caused one meeting before submission of the specifications to World Bank.  Contracts should not have been signed.  Authorising the  Permanent Secretary to sign the contract when there was resistance in the Ministry, was a big mistake; an error in judgement on the part of the Minister, Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe.

The Select Committee sought the opinion of hon. Nasasira, one time minister of MAAIF, he said, "in case of disagreement between a Minister and Minister of State, the matter should be referred to the appointing authority who should then decide on the next action." (Hon. John Nasasira, interview with the Select Committee on Friday 5 March 1999).  We think this should have been done.

When asked about ignoring and frustrating her Minister of State, during her interview, she demonstrated that she did not take him very seriously. She said, 'he keeps writing loose minutes'- Her Excellency, the Vice President, told the Select Committee. She went on to say, 
"So on the issue of the management of my Ministry and linking up with my Colleagues, it is my belief that I do not have a problem.  The problem is conception, because we all want water. One says we want valley tanks,  and I say we want dams and valley tanks and ponds.  Where will the money come from?  Let us do the dams, in accordance with the figures; a dam costing 600 shillings per cubic metre as opposed to over Shs. 3,000.   That is the only point of diversion. Managementwise, I do not have any problem with the Ministers of state..."  

"I am on very good talking terms with hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, I have even been to his farm and his wife sells me passion fruits..." -(Laughter).  "But, here is a veterinarian, giving me advice on veterinary practice and production, going to inspect dams without a certificate from Netherlands on engineering and water and he gives me a report on an activity where he does not have technical competence."  Mr. Fatokun had qualifications form Netherlands.  
"So for me, my position was to establish; are these figures too high or too low and should I go ahead or not?  But the report that I got came from the Director and he said him, as a Director of Animal Resources, he was not on that due diligence team which had an engineer on it."

Supervision over personnel, the work and finance in the Ministry.
The State House inquiry led to the asking of the CAO Mbarara to get Dr. Barigye arrested. The Accountants and financial Controllers at the Ministry Headquarters, who violated such gross financial regulations, were not arrested.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo's recommendation to interdict Dr. Bamusonighe and the former Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika-Opoka, was not given the attention it deserved.  

Supervising the work:  The Minister is a very active person and has moved a lot upcountry on various policy matters.  However, in the note sent to the select Committee and to all Members of Parliament,she states: "I personally went to check on the progress at two dam sites and also visited and compared notes with local governments and individual farmers who have put in place their own facilities.  I have kept up to date by technical reports which I read".  
This indicated to the Committee that she had an over dependence on technical reports.  

When asked to comment on her relationship with the Minister of State, she said, "because sometimes we have to make this clear, and I take total responsibility for my action,  I have not at any forum denied that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo submitted what he did.  But as Minister responsible and in charge and accountable for today and tomorrow, for my action while in the Ministry of Agriculture, I stand by that responsibility and I am not going to say the Minister should have done this or that.  The Minister should have helped me to supervise and give reports at all times; written reports and not loose minutes."  

Later in the same interview, Her Excellency refers to loose minutes as a reflection of a loose meandering mind.  The Committee took exception to a Minister describing her junior Minister in that manner.  This is the attitude that led to the change of plan in the construction of dams from 100 to 15 in a few selected districts. This was inspite of a colossal sum of money that had been spent. To the Committee, political responsibility goes with financial responsibility; and we shall see more of this when we come to the recommendations. 

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo is MP for Bukoto mid-west, and he was appointed Minister of State in November, 1994.  He has since been Minister of State in charge of the animal sector.  His work includes overseeing and supervising, planning and setting up the policy of the livestock sector under the substantive Minister.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo has worked under substantive Ministers,  Mrs. Ssekitoleko, Engineer John Nasasira and currently under Her Excellency, the Vice-President. 

At the time of appointment, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo found the water component at the level of excavation of pilot dams in Mbarara District.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo told the Committee that he understood the LSP and particularly the water component for which 2.1 million US dollars was supposed to provide water for the livestock industry, taking into consideration disease control.  He also told the Committee that until July 1996, the water component was being managed by hon. Nasasira, whom he supported.  He added that he took full responsibility of the project in July 1996 after Mr. Nasasira left and was replaced by Her Excellency, the Vice-President as substantive Minister.  

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo told the Committee that at the time he took up the project, he did not know how much money had been spent and what the balance was.  This clearly shows that the Minister was not serious in his work; he should have demanded to know the financial status of the project at the time of taking over.  

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo told the Committee that the money provided for the water component, under LSP, was supposed to construct 100 valley dams/tanks and that he accordingly advised the technical people in the Ministry to re-design the project such that the money available would be able to provide water in small to medium size dams.  

Relationship with his Minister and permanent secretary. Mr. Speaker, we examined volumes of correspondence between hon. Kezimbira Miyingo and his Minister.  The relationship between these two is best described as strained and acrimonious.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, on 6 September 1996, wrote to the permanent secretary, Mr. Wagonda Muguli, and advised that they do not award the tenders to contractors to construct 15 dams instead of the 100 dams until a way was worked out to provide water in small sources and at lower prices, between 10 and 20 million, instead of big dams of 100 to 300 million.  This letter was copied to Her Exellency, Dr.Specioza Kazibwe.He informed the  Committee that although he halted the award of the tenders, he later found out that the tenders had been given out behind his back by the permanent secretary, Mr. Opika-Opoka, and his team, following the advice of the substantive Minister, Her Excellency Specioza Wandira Kazibwe.  He further stated that when he and hon. Kibirige Sebunya wanted to cancel the contract, they were told by Mr. Opika-Opoka that if the contracts were stopped, this would be a breach of contract and government would be sued by the contractors.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo denied responsibility for the big dams and told the Committee that the decision was taken by the permanent secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, in consultation with Her Excellency Specioza Wandira Kazibwe in total disregard of his technical and sectoral advice.  

He indicated that, because of that, he neither wrote to the permanent secretary condemning him for the action nor asked the Minister, in writing, as to why this had been done without consulting him.  He thought it would be disrespectful and a challenge to the authority of the Minister, Her Excellency, Mrs Wandira Kazibwe, if he challenged the award of the contract. 

Although, through his Ministerial policy during the budget time, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo told Parliament that one of the areas where the Ministry had performed very well was the provision of water for animals,  he later told the Committee to disregard the same.  He apologised and disassociated himself from that part of the statement after he physically verified the state of the dams - (Laughter).  

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo visited the dams and his report will be laid before this Committee.  When he visited, he found a lot of anomalies and no action has been taken to date.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo told the Committee that the confusion in the LSP project was caused by the arrival of Engineer Fatokun who was supposedly a water engineer consultant recruited at the time hon. Nasasira was Minister, to be in charge of the water component of LSP.  He added that Engineer Fatokun escalated the costs of dams from the original price to three times higher, despite hon. Kezimbira's repeated advice to the director, animal resources and the Minister not to increase the cost of the dams. The advice was disregarded.  

The Committee found that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo received letters with letter heads of Engineer Fatokun and passed them on with his comments, although he should have known that Engineer Fatokun was locally recruited and that he was not representing any consultancy, whether local or foreign.  Asked how effective the Minister has been and whether he has not been effective because he was a Minister of State, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo said his work was advisory because of hierarchy and that he could only act after consulting his Minister.  
Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo said this, "Mr. Chairman, I said before, I am a Minister of State and this is known to everybody, the Minister of State acts after consultation.  You consult, you recommend and if action is accepted, you go ahead.  Otherwise, you get embarrassed."

The Committee found out that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo wrote out many letters of advice which were either ignored, not replied to or not acted upon.  Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo lamented to the Committee that although he was in charge of supervising the sector in the Ministry, and despite his efforts, he was not able to achieve his vision of providing water country wide. Money was spent in colossal sums because the permanent secretary, Mr. Opika-Opoka, did not heed to his advice and his Minister, Her Excellency Specioza Kazibwe, did not take his advice.

Select Committee's observations.
Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo testified to the select Committee that he did not have a chance to look at the contracts pertaining to the construction of the 15 big dams.( See pages 119 to 123 of his  of this testimony document).  This statement raised two important issues: 
1) What was he supervising when he did not know the contents of the contract? What was he monitoring?  What was he overseeing?  
2) Who denied him access to the contracts?  

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo did not give the Committee satisfactory answers to the above questions.  

The hon. Minister of State in charge of the sector knew very well that the Nigerian consultant, Fatokun,  messed up the project,  (see his interview on page 116 and 117) but he just looked on and went ahead to supervise the construction of the dams.  

The Minister of State further knew that the two contracts did not have the requisite capacity to handle the job, but he still did not take necessary action to stop this. He went ahead to supervise.  

The select Committee further observed that there has been a strained relationship, full of acrimony, between the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Her Excellency the Vice-President, and the Minister of State in charge of animal husbandry, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo. This is evidenced by consistent disregard of the letters of advice from the Minister of State( This is dealt with in depth in another part).  This relationship lead to bad judgement by both Ministers, and the technocrats took advantage of this. The result of all this was lack of supervision and financial loss.  

Dr Kezimbira Miyingo said that the director, animal resources and the permanent secretary kept the documents from him despite the fact that he demanded for them. The Committee therefore found that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo was supervising what he did not know, since the contents of the contracts were unknown to him. The action of the director, animal resources and the P/S in the Ministry denying him access to the contract, was derogatory, an abuse of office, insubordination and high-handedness by these officials.  

The Committee also finds hon. Kezimbira Miyingo's inability to assert himself very unfortunate and bordering on abdication of office.  Failure to stop the signing of the contracts, failure to acquaint his mission of 100 dams and failure to acquaint himself with work he was supervising was a gross weakness and negligence of duty on his part.  The Committee finds this irresponsible and unassertive behaviour to have been the cause of financial loss to government; a political failure of government to provide water to the animal and human sector of our economy.  

The Minister admitted that as far as the water component of LSP was concerned, there was no value for money.  This was caused by lack of direction and supervision at a political level, these are his words.  The Minister admitted that the rehabilitation of the diagnostic and laboratory facilities in the districts was not quite implemented, although it was a component in LSP. 

As far as the water component is concerned, under LSP, Ugandans have not had value for money.  This has been caused by lack of supervision particularly at political level. Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo has been a player but did not play his role as expected.  At the political level, the Committee holds the Minister of State in charge of animal husbandry, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, responsible for this loss, along with others mentioned elsewhere.  The role of hon. Kezimbira Miyingo in Namalere is discussed in chapter four, section 412. 

As Minister in charge of the livestock sector, Dr. Kezimbira was intimately involved in the bull scheme and in the ban of semen imports.  The Committee found him guilty of failing to implement Cabinet decisions.  He stopped the commission of veterinary services from easing the importation of semen and thus not implementing Cabinet decisions.  It took him a whole year to implement a Cabinet decision.  As a political leader, he should have listened to professionals who showed conclusively that mad cow disease was not transmitted through semen.  

Hon. Kezimbira Miyingo disregarded the professional advice of the commissioner, veterinary services and experts at the Artificial Breeding Centre when he forced them to use one bull for semen to distribute to farmers.  This can damage the national herd for a whole ten years or more.  He knows very well that to start  artificial breeding (bull stud) of about 50 bulls, you need to select from about 10,000 young bulls.  The exercise takes at least five years and costs about 212 US dollars; when you need some 20 million US dollars for a standard bull stud. 

The Committee found a loose memo where he claimed to have examined bulls belonging to the bull scheme at the Livestock Experimental Station. We, as a Committee, had asked two independent experts to examine these bulls and give a professional opinion.  The opinion these two experts gave and his examinations do not agree. The Committee felt that the Minister's evaluation of bulls was bordering on interfering with professionals in their field work. On the basis of this examination, he made drastic recommendations to stop the bull scheme.  This goes contrary to the policy of modernisation of the livestock sector.

We now go to hon. Kibirige Sebunya:  He was appointed Minister of State, general duties, in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in July 1996.  In the Cabinet reshuffle of August 1998, his brief was changed to Minister of State for Agriculture in the same Ministry.  

He appeared before the Committee to throw light on his experience while working in the Ministry.  Hon. Sebunya stated that he was surprised soon after elections in 1996 when he received a telephone call from Her Excellency the Vice-President inviting him to her residence in Bugolobi where she informed him that he had been appointed a Minister of State and that they were to work together in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  He further informed the Committee that a few days later, he was invited to Masaka state lodge where he took the oath of Minister of State.  Hon. Sebunya informed the Committee that since then, up to the present day, nobody has ever detailed him about his schedule of duties.  (Laughter).  

He further informed the Committee that as far as he was concerned, he has no specific responsibilities but that he contributed to team work.  He further stated that everything in the Ministry was moving smoothly through two Committees namely, top policy Committee and top management Committee.  When pressed further to state his role in the Ministry, he stated that he curved out for himself -(Laughter)- responsibilities to look after crops and NARO.  

Replying to questions regarding the relationship between the Minister and Ministers of State that had been alluded to as not good by the Minister of State responsible for Animal Husbandry,  hon. Kibirige Sebunya denied any knowledge of such short-comings.  When he was pressed further and shown copies of letters and loose minutes that had been exchanged between the Minister and Minister of State Animal Husbandry, which had also been copied to him in his capacity as Minister of State, general duties, hon. Kibirige Sebunya stated that he only remembers letters addressed to him and not copied to him.  (Laughter).  

Hon. Kibirige Sebunya was further asked to explain the implementation of projects, for example, the AG.08(C) Poverty Eradication Action Plan (Seed), the Minister pleaded ignorance and requested time to go back to the Ministry.  When asked how much time he needed, the Minister informed the Committee that he needed one hour to drive to Entebbe, one hour to obtain information from office and one hour to drive back. (laughter).

Hon. Members, the Committee allowed the Minister the time he requested for, but the Minister never came back to the Committee up to the time we finalised our Report.
The Committee recommends to Parliament that this Minister be referred to the relevant Committee of the House for necessary disciplinary action.

The Committee received evidence that while working as a Director of Kawanda Agricultural Research Institute, Basangira was hired by Kawanda to construct a store.  This work was unsatisfactory.  Hon. Kibirige Ssebunya should have known that a contractor who cannot construct a store of 20 million cannot construct nine large dams at a cost of 1.8 billion shillings.  He should have warned MAAIF top management, he did not.  We find this gross neglect of duty.

Mr. Hector Simon Opika Opoka.
Mr. Speaker, our fourth key player in LSP is Mr. Opika Opoka, currently the Permanent Secretary to the Education Service Commission. He joined the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in November 1996 where he stayed until 1998.  He found the Livestock Services Project on going, but the water component had been added at mid-term review in 1995 and was still at its early stages.  Implementation of this component was executed during this period, hence making Permanent Secretary, Opika Opoka, one of the key players in this project.

The Committee found out that in his time of service, Mr. Opika Opoka had frequent transfers for short periods. During his interview with the Select Committee on MAAIF, he was asked why he had had such frequent transfers, he replied; "because I am very strict". Commenting on his most recent transfer from MAAIF,however, he said he was victimised, most probably due to the influence of the two Ministers of State and he added,  "I believe when I moved, the two Ministers of State were very happy".

Mr. Opika Opoka, the Ministers of State and other workers' relationship.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Opika Opoka worked with three Ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:

1. Her Excellency the Vice President and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: At the time of the interview he demonstrated that he respects her - he had served under her in the Ministry of Gender and Community Development.

2. Minister of State for General Duties, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: Although hon.Kibirige Ssebunya refused to let the Committee know how Mr. Opika Opoka treated him, the interview with hon. Kezimbira Miyingo indicated that the Permanent Secretary gave the two of them a difficult time and this came out clearly in the interview with Mr. Opika Opoka.

3. Minister of State in charge of Animal Industry, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo: When this Minister met the Select Committee, he informed the Committee that the Permanent Secretary and his technical team frustrated him and did not respond to his directives and this contributed to his failure to give political leadership, particularly in the livestock Services project.  The Permanent Secretary, Mr. Opika Opoka, confirmed this view when he was asked who he reported to in the Ministry; he replied " I was reporting to the Minister of Agriculture". When asked  'how about the other two Ministers of State; were they below you?' His reply was, "they were fully briefed because whatever report I made to Her Excellency the Vice President was always copied to them... I was reporting to the Minister and when a matter was relevant to each of the two, I would report to them...  I report to the three, the Minister and the two Ministers of State."

When Mr. Opika Opoka was transferred from MAAIF, he believed this was caused by the two Ministers of State and that they were very, very happy when this happened.  He reported to the Committee that other workers were threatened by the two Ministers when they wanted to give him a farewell party.  Mr. Opika Opoka believed that Dr. Miyingo did not like him because, as Permanent Secretary, he had questioned him about a car hon. Miyingo wrecked and he had refused to sanction the use of project money to finance hon. Miyingo's travel.             

This relationship affected their work, and this explains why the Permanent Secretary ignored hon. Miyingo's legitimate directive not to sign the contracts before there was a consensus on the dams/valley tanks' size, cost and location.  

On why he signed the contracts, the Committee thought that a reasonable Permanent Secretary would have advised Her Excellency, the Vice President to meet with the Ministers of State and obtain a consensus before signing. If he carried out the directive of Her Excellency the Vice President and Minister MAAIF and signed, he would have informed the other two Ministers of State rather than embarrassing them in a meeting with the information that he had already signed.  Mr. Opika Opoka informed the Committee that there were quarrels within the Ministry which made the Ministry a rather difficult place to work in.

The Role of the Permanent Secretary - Mr. Opika Opoka's attitude.
Mr. Speaker, the Permanent Secretary is the Accounting Officer, he/she is accountable for money, for work, personnel and delivery of services in his or her Ministry.  He signs contracts, signs cheques and is the custodian of government's property.  He is the overall supervisor for all activities in his Ministry. Donor funded projects do have a co-ordinator, but the Permanent Secretary is responsible for supervision of the overall performance and seeing that Uganda gets value for money.  In the LSP project, Mr. Opika Opoka chaired the Steering Committee and received reports and so on.

The Committee interviewed Mr. Opika Opoka on the 10th February 1999 and found him not a very friendly witness - may be as a defence mechanism. He denied responsibility for LSP and when he took over, he stated that he did not think the project was important because it should have come to an end.  He said that projects are not run by Permanent Secretaries but have their managers and implementers; the project staff.  Mr. Opika Opoka  said he was not directly involved in the management of the projects all over the place and that donor funded projects are implemented by designated officers and not Permanent Secretaries.  He stated that his limited role was to receive reports, sign cheques and other duties.

Although hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, Minister of State, on the 13th of February 1997, alarmed that so far very little work was done on the dams/valley tanks but a lot of money was spent, pointed out to the Permanent Secretary that it was his responsibility to check on the work and demand accountability,Mr. Opika Opoka said he did not know when the letter was written.  Even when a member drew his attention to Nyakahita dam where a lot of money had been spent and work was not completed, he said all that he remembered was that the work on Nyakahita was stopped.

Mr. Opika Opoka did not visit any one of the sites that were being excavated, and he emphatically stressed to the Committee that he did not go. Asked whether he ever wanted to look at the capacity of contractors, his reply was that he had technical people who could do that job and that he never discussed contracts with anybody else other than the Commissioner.   

He accepted that as Permanent Secretary, he was the Chief Adviser to the Minister and that when he received reports, he gave them to his boss without a comment because he was not a technical person.  He admitted that if junior staff misled them, that was very unfortunate, and if experts- the technical people- misled them, he was sorry for that.

The Mismanagement in the Livestock Services Project.
Mr. Speaker, the Committee found out that although the Chairman, Central Tender Board, had protested in writing against awarding the contracts without the involvement of the Central Tender Board, Mr. Opika Opoka continued and, with his officials, awarded the contracts illegally and irregularly, by-passing the Central Tender Board.  Most Permanent Secretaries follow the Central Tender Board procedures, the exceptions being the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health.  The Chairman Central Tender Board informed the Select Committee that the Central Tender Board would not have selected these companies - they would have re-advertised had they been forwarded to the Central Tender Board.
He awarded the contracts for excavation of valley dams/tanks to firms with no competence to do it.They did not have the equipment, the personnel, nor the money, as stated in the tender bids.

He never went to see the sites, he let Dr. Bamusonighe remain the co-ordinator of the component, despite his promotion. Since he depended on reports, there was no single custodian for the people of Uganda, the peasants, who were the beneficiaries of this project.  Dr. Bamusonighe became the judge - and the judged.

Mr. Opika Opoka mismanaged and mis-advised the Minister.  

We shall talk about the fifth person, Dr. Bamusonighe, who also committed a lot of offenses.  In fact, he was the centre of this problem of the water component in the Livestock Project. We have another two people to comment about, one of them is Mr. Jide Fatokun, whose background we have enlisted here-  he was a much smaller person who committed a lot of offenses too.  

There is a lot we have written about Mr. Fatokun, but in order to save time, I will briefly inform you about him.   Mr. Fatokun, has been operating in Uganda as an engineer, contrary to the Engineering Registration Act of 1969 and as amended by Decree 1977.  And therefore, all the work he has done in this country has been done illegally and his qualifications are very questionable.  Another person who committed a lot of offenses in this Ministry, apart from Mr. Fatokun, is our friend, Dr. Mbuuza.  Dr. Mbuuza was responsible for authorising a lot of money to be spent on technical matters when he had no capacity to do that. 
Because of the Committee's findings, the Committee wishes to make the following recommendations to Parliament.
We go to Chapter 9, which is the last Chapter, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. Having discussed our findings, our Committee would like to make some fundamental recommendations:  
1. Over a long period, projects and funds in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have been mismanaged as we have seen from its long history.  The people of Uganda were hopeful that after July 1996, the strong team put in charge would check the mismanagement. 

Her Excellency, Dr. Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, hon. Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo and hon. Israel Kibirige Ssebunya had been entrusted jointly and separately with giving political direction to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Over 90 percent of Uganda's population depends on the Ministry for their livelihood.  The Ministry is responsible for the eradication of poverty and ensuring food security. 

During this period, the Ministry functions have been mismanaged in the following manner:  

i) The Constitution has been negated through the signing of contracts to construct 15 water dams/ tanks outside the scrutiny of the Central Tender Board, and contrary to the agreed policy and established procedures. 
ii) The contracts so signed were defective and both companies, that were awarded contracts, were incompetent and lacked capacity to execute the contracts to the expectation of the people of Uganda. This is contrary to Article 164(2) of the Constitution of Uganda. The Minister expressly authorised the signing of contracts, despite advice from one of her Ministers of State.                                            iii) In Project AG 08(C) Poverty Eradication Action Plan (Seed), Uganda shillings, 1.65 billion was diverted to programmes for which it was not intended.  This money remains unaccounted for up to now.  This has had a disastrous effect on the modernisation of agricultural plans committed by the Government of Uganda.  
iv) Public funds and opportunities have been lost during this period. The Select Committee found that the poor management style was responsible for the incompetent delivery of services in the Ministry.  They have let down the President, Parliament and the people of Uganda. The Select Committee recommends that Parliament resolves that the Appointing Authority takes appropriate action on the Ministers in question in order to reverse the present trend of mismanagement of public affairs in this important Ministry.  
Because of the importance of agriculture to this country, any Minister holding the Agriculture portfolio should not be assigned any other responsibility that will divert his or her attention from full time concentration on the Ministry.

2. During his term of office as Permanent Secretary in MAAIF, Mr. Opika Opoka has committed Government to fraudulent and incompetent contracts which he signed without verifying vital information of the bid documents contrary to the established Procedure and Law.
As the Principle Accounting Officer, he failed to ensure that Project AG.08 (C) was properly implemented and he failed to account for Shs.1.65bn. voted for this Project.

The Select Committee recommends that Opika Opoka be held fully accountable, interdicted and prosecuted to recover public funds that have been mismanaged through his negligence and/or participation, in accordance with Article 164(1) and (2) of the Constitution.

3. The Attorney General be directed to review the contracts signed with Basangira Building Contractors(1977) Limited and Afro Building and Electrical Contractors (Uganda) Limited, with a view of recovering the money fraudulently paid to them. And the DPP be requested to consider prosecution of the officials of those companies for possible offenses committed.  The Committee further recommends that M/s Basangira Building Contractors(1977) Limited be made to pay money owed to Namalere forthwith.

4. Mr. Jide Olujide Fatokun misled MAAIF on the competence of the contracts, escalated the prices of the dams/tanks, and certified false payments to the contracts thus causing financial loss. Mr. Olujide Fatokun has been illegally operating as an engineering consultant in Uganda contrary to the Engineers Registration Act, as amended. The Committee therefore recommends that he should be prosecuted, all the contracts which he executed be nullified and public funds paid to him or authorised by him be recovered.  He evades Tax Payments (PAYE), which he should pay with fines to URA.

5. Through their activities, Dr. Bamusonighe, Dr. Mbuza and Mr. Obira are responsible for mismanaging the water component of the Livestock services Project. They caused financial loss and failed to prevent mismanagement and embezzlement of project funds.  The Select Committee recommends that they are interdicted and prosecuted with a view to recovering public funds - in accordance with Article 164 (2) of the Constitution.  Mr. Obira should, in addition, pay tax arrears in form of PAYE to URA which he evaded paying from his earnings.  

6. Government must ensure that in future,MAAIF does not award contracts that have not been scrutinised by the Central Tender Board.  The Committee recommends that the Standing Committee on National Economy reviews circulars on Procurement of goods under IDA Projects to ensure conformity with Constitutional Provisions.  
7. We strongly recommend that the Ministry management, who changed the control of finances from Namalere to the D.V.O Mbarara, and all those officers who received fuel or money from Ankole Shell, or any other Station, and have caused financial loss and/or non-completion of Nyakahita dam, in particular, and other dams, be identified and prosecuted to recover public funds stolen.

While at Nyakahita dam, equipment was privately diverted to construct dams for other farmers .  The officials responsible for the diversion should be identified and prosecuted to recover public funds lost in that process.

8.  There should be a follow-up of the LSP by the Permanent Secretary MAAIF, with a view of attaining its original objectives and streamlining the existing activities to ensure that LSP equipment is secured. Finances unaccounted for and the uncompleted works on the dams should be completed as originally planned.

9. The Committee recommends that the Auditor General conducts a detailed Audit of  LSP and submits the report to Parliament.  

10. In order to stop the abuse through misuse of equipment, MAAIF Engineering Division should be reviewed with a view to turn it into a limited liability company, with Government holding 100 per cent shares. Immediately thereafter, it should be turned over to the Privatisation Unit for disposal to willing investors.

11. In order to provide balanced Agricultural development, MAAIF is urged to develop equitable, sustainable, nation-wide agricultural sector programmes.  In line with this, the Committee recommends the formation of an Agricultural Commission to achieve the above objectives.

12. Donors, inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations should be encouraged to equitably distribute their development programmes on a Country wide basis and should link directly to the districts.  

13. Funds meant for projects should be decentralised to districts for effective management and supervision of the projects.

14. The Committee strongly recommends the construction of smaller valley dams and tanks spread throughout the Country, to reduce nomadism and to control the spread of livestock diseases.  

15. A special programme to restock and provide water for livestock in Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, and other northern areas should be put in place.

16. Considering that the Seed Project Multiplication and distribution  down to Sub-county level was mismanaged and failed to take off, MAAIF should revitalise the Project for the benefit of Ugandans.

17. Budgetary inputs for projects should be restructured to exclude those baseline inputs going to the headquarters from those going directly to the field projects.  Projects should largely be based in the field with minimum supervision from headquarters.  

18. Government should consider lifting the ban on semen importation. 

19. Agriculture, being the backbone of the National Economy of Uganda, Parliament should closely supervise the sector to ensure implementation of Parliamentary Resolutions. The select Committee strongly recommends that Parliament establishes a Standing Committee on the Agriculture Sector, in accordance with Rule 119 of Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

1.1 In this respect, the House shall refer to the Committee on the agricultural sector, bills, inquiries and other matters relating to the Agriculture Sector generally.

1.2 The Committee on the Agricultural Sector shall, in particular, have the following functions:

(a) To examine and monitor the Policies, Regulations and Implementation Strategies in the Agricultural Sector.

(b) In conjunction with the Standing Committee on the National Economy, to examine and make recommendations to the House on all agricultural sector loans,grants and Agreements required to be authorised or approved by the House under Article 159 of the Constitution.

(c) To explore means of improving the Agricultural Sector and to protect Government from entering into badly designed projects like what we have found under LSP.

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the Committee has instructed the Association of Professional Engineers in Uganda to quantify the value of work so far done on the dams and make recommendations as to what steps to be taken to complete them. The Committee will, at an appropriate time, present to Parliament the report of the Association of Professional Engineers.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries diverted about 4.169bn/= from LSP without approval.  The Select Committee recommends that this sum of money be verified by the Auditor General and recovered from the Ministry budget in order to finance the provision of water Country wide.  

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker, but before I do that, I would like to lay on Table a number of documents we have used during these investigations - I beg to lay.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to appreciate your resilience in having sat here for more than four hours and yet playing the minimal role of listening, which can be a very difficult thing to do.  This is convenient time to adjourn, but before I do so, I would like to confirm that the Chairman had requested that at an appropriate time, he will be able to assist us with a visual aid.  I do not know whether this would be a convenient time?  I am entirely in your hands.  For how long?

MR. KANYIKE: Mr. Speaker, the video film is only for 15 minutes. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed!  Hon. Members, this is still part of our proceedings.  While watching, we still keep order.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, now that this is part of our proceedings, I do not remember anywhere that this House is allowed to see video evidence.  Is it, therefore, in order to proceed as we are going to?
THE SPEAKER: I am aware that this is not provided in our Rules of Procedure, but on this particular occasion, I am allowing this. (Interjections) Order!  According to our rules, you do not clap; you do something else and that is all.
 
(A video presentation was made)

MR. KANYIKE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  That is the end of the Select Committee's presentation.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think it is now a convenient time to adjourn.  I adjourn the House until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose and adjourned until 2.00 p.m on Wednesday,17th March, 1999)







