Wednesday, 14 March 2012

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, good afternoon and you are welcome for this sitting of Parliament. I will use my prerogative under Rule 22 to make an amendment on the Order Paper to insert immediately after item No.3, which is Bills First Reading, a petition by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi from Kanungu on the issue of licensed timber dealers and traders. That is the only alteration on the Order Paper; the rest of the business will continue as scheduled on the Order Paper.

2.19
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much Rt. Hon. Speaker. I stand on matter of public importance - although it is quite localised - involving Kanungu District, which is a very important district in this country.

I am raising the issue of the pledge by Government to tarmac the road which connects Rukungiri to Kanungu. In 1988, when the NRM Government had assumed power, there was a pledge by Government to construct 16 main roads, including Ntungamo- Rukungiri-Kanungu and the people of Kanungu got excited because they were going to see tarmac for the first time. Since then, about 10 to 12 years ago, the road between Ntungamo to Rukungiri was constructed and it ended somewhere, but the other last part of Rukungiri-Kanungu has not been constructed.  All of you who have been to Kanungu know that it is a very difficult area to access. Actually, Kanungu is categorised as hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay and hard-to-survive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, where is the urgency of the matter you are raising? State it for us please. Because you are stating matters of 10 to 20 years back; they cannot be urgent today, can they?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I was building the case to demonstrate the urgency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No state for us the urgency such that we move forward with it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The urgency of the matter is that Government did pledge and during the tours of His Excellency the President, we did raise this matter in 2008. He did pledge and even put it in writing - if you allow me, let me just read the part of the communication from the President where the people were demanding that the road should pass through the route from Rukungiri to Kanungu. The President was of the view that a change in plan would unacceptably delay the project. Instead he proposed to the people of Kanungu that the present design be implemented as it is, but in addition, study how to hook a branch from this road to Kanungu, Lugyeyo and Nyakishenyi. He said that if we follow the route which the people wanted then there would be a delay and this is the letter dated 4 December 2008. 

Indeed, the Ministry of Works and Transport budgeted for this road and the information I have is that they even procured a contractor to work on this road, Rukungiri-Ishasha-Kanungu, but when the contract was awarded, it was then immediately halted and even the road was removed from the budget. 

The concern of the people of Kanungu is that how can a priority road be in the budget, be contracted, and then all of a sudden you halt the whole process. And, therefore, the people of Kanungu would want to know what the Ministry of Works and Transport is planning.

The question is: Is this road going to be in next year’s financial budget? There is a lot of tension on the ground. Actually, people have signed a petition which they are going to bring to this House, and 80,000 people in Kanungu have already appended their signatures. 

I want to inform you that a petition will be coming, but we would want to get assurance from the Minister of Works and Transport on what the ministry plans are with regard to construction of the Rukungiri-Ishasha-Kanungu-Nyakishenyi Road in South-Western Uganda. That is the urgent matter that the people of Kanungu would want to hear Government answering today. 

2.23
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Eng. Abraham Byandala): I thank hon. Chris Baryomunsi for raising this issue. I want to assure hon. Baryomunsi and the people he represents, and Ugandans in general, that this road is still a priority to Government. It is among the roads which we tendered and had the best evaluated contractor, but we have not issued a letter of award because of the financial situation. Yes, some money was budgeted for in last year’s budget, but what was there was not even enough to be given to the contractor as down payment; so we could not move, and all along, we have been fighting, talking to treasury to see if they can get extra money to ensure that this road is worked on. 

We are now in the process of seeing how we can legally maintain being engaged with several contractors we have evaluated to be the best; give them a letter of assurance that as soon we get money we shall engage them. This involves some legal technicalities, that is why I am engaging the Solicitor General. 

As soon as I am advised, I am going to write to all contractors, including the ones for this road, to say, please hang on; as soon as we get the money, we shall start working. We are doing this because if we stop our engagement with these contractors, the cycle will take another year plus, and we do not want to get into this problem. 

I request hon. Chris Baryomunsi to tell the people of Kanungu that Government is very mindful and serious to see that this road is worked on.

MR BARYOMUNSI: I have information that the contractor who was given the deal to construct Rukungiri-Kanungu Road has written to Government saying that he is ready and has the competence to start on the road, and he will be paid later when Government has money. So, why are you not committing yourselves if the contractor has said that he is unable to work on the road until when Government has paid them. I have a copy of the later which I can lay on Table if need be. So, can you clarify to the same people of Kanungu?

MR BYANDALA: Hon. Baryomunsi is right, I saw that letter and I reacted to it. These are financial issues; I had to consult the Ministry of Finance. There are certain amounts of money you can release in the economy. After putting financial and economic considerations in place, the Ministry of Finance is saying that we wait because we may bring instability.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You cannot send out a tender without a budget. The moment there is a budget, it proves that there is a commitment from Ministry of Finance that they will pay. How did you send out a tender you advertised before getting money? Even under the PPDA Act, you cannot advertise so that you committee Government unless you are sure of funds; how did you send out the tender when you never had the money?

MR BYANDALA: As I said, we had some money in the budget and our estimate was not to the tune of the down payment we were going to receive from the tenderers. The amount of down payment is determined on the contract sum somebody has asked for and this was beyond our estimate. As you know, roads are not constructed in one financial year; they spread over three to four years. So, our first instalment in first year was less. We did not know that the contract sum would come to the magnitude it was, and it would not be covered on our budget provision.

MR SAM LOKERIS:  I raise an issue of a similar road; that is between Moroto and Nakapiripirit. This financial year, Parliament appropriated money to the tune of Shs 10 billion, but the road needs over Shs 49 billion. The contractor is there, but now our issue is, why Government should have no money to ensure that this road is started. The contractor has written to the Ministry of Works that they are willing to start working on this road if they are paid another Shs 17 billion. 

We have ever interacted with Ministry of Finance and that of Works, but we are always told that this Shs 10 billion that we have will be used for compensation. When you look at that stretch between Moroto and Namaru, there are no homes, and murram is free; where will this money go? We are even worried that the Shs 17 billion that the contractor needs may not come; we may get another Shs 10 billion.

We feel that Government is not serious; if you know that you have funds to do a project, why do you have to put it in the budget and then that money later disappears. We would like to ask the Ministry of Works what it is doing. 

MR SIMON ALEPER: Just to give more information to my brother, the issue of this road of Moroto-Nakapiripirit is not just coming to Parliament today. This road has appeared several times, during the State of the Nation Address, the President pronounced very clearly - the budget speech - it was very clear that this was one of the priority roads. From 12 roads they were reduced to nine because we were told Government is constrained. Now from nine to six; out of the six, the Karamoja road has disappeared into thin air and we have been following this matter  all this time. 

Hon. Speaker, we have made consultations in the party; we have met relevant ministers; we have met UNRA; we have met all the persons we thought could help us. We have been wondering what the problem is. The contractor needs only Shs 17 billion plus the Shs 10 billion making it Shs 27 billion. You cannot convince me that the Shs 27 billion for the Karamoja road is not there and yet you can access Shs 142 billion within seconds. So, why can’t we get this Shs 17 billion to ensure that this Karomoja road - at least for the first time in the history of our country, we also get a tarmac road to open this region to the rest of the country and to the rest of the world. 

MR SAM LOKERIS: I happen to be a member of the Committee on National Economy; we are always given proposals for borrowing loans. There is actually a pending loan for Kamwenge-Fort Portal. They want to borrow USD 75 million, but you imagine we cannot get only Shs 17 billion against what we are going to sign for. Some are saying we will not sign not until Government has looked for some more money. 

MS ALASO: Thank you honourable colleague. The information I want to give you is that if you follow through the records of Parliament, in the last Parliament, when we were approving a loan request for one of the roads in the West, this House demanded that a provision should be made for roads in Karamoja. The minister then committed that he would come back to the Floor with a special loan request to sort out roads in Karamoja. That was in the last Parliament. I think it should be followed up.

MR LOKERIS: I would like to urge the Minister of Works that if there is no money for these roads, they should tell us, so that the Shs 10 billion should be removed and we go and inform our communities. 

When you reach Sironko, there a signpost which says, “tarmac ends here”, can you imagine; you do not know what is ahead of you. We feel that they should even remove the Shs 10 billion so that we advocate for our murram roads. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that the tarmac road ends on that signpost? It is true that the tarmac ends there.

Honourable minister when you stand up to respond, you need to know that I have the District Speaker of Kanungu District Council and they have come to listen carefully to what you are going to say. I also have Charles Bisesa and two district councillors from Kanungu District Council, that is honourables Muhumuza and Kabureka. They are here to hear what you are going to say about these urgent roads. 

MR BYANDALA: I want to assure those from Kanungu that their representative is constantly reminding me; we are working together to see how we can get the money. On the 8 April 2012, I was discussing this issue with Rt. Hon. Prime Minister; we are trying to see how we can get money and have this road done. 

Having said that Mr Speaker, let me put on record that Government is serious. One of my colleagues said Government is not serious. If you look at the Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road, Government spent money on feasibility studies and on detailed designs, and  also went through the procurement cycle. As I told you, this is one of the priority roads and we have already got the best evaluated tenderer.
 
As my colleague has said, we couldn’t issue a letter of award because of the shortage of funds, and the President of the Republic of Uganda has assured the people of Uganda and my colleagues here that this road is going to be worked on soon. We are working on the infrastructure bonds and this information was given to my colleagues. 

I also want to make correction that murram is not free. We cannot get free murram in Uganda. Wherever we get murram, we either pay for it or compensate.

Mr Speaker, my colleague has also talked about the money we are trying to borrow for Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road. It is US$ 75 million; and he was comparing it with the 17 billion. This 17 billion is only down payment; it is not the total contract sum; it is far beyond this.

And to my sister Alice, I will check on my records to see. But even without checking, I want to inform you that Government is seriously looking around to see that all roads in Uganda, including those in Karamoja, are fully tarmacked, to ensure smooth flow of goods and services in the country.

2.38
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to raise a matter of public importance. On the 7th March, which was the eve of International Women’s Day, we lost 23 citizens of this country; 17 of these were women; five adult gentlemen and a two-year old who died with the mother. 

Mr Speaker, the fateful lorry that plunged into Mvara River in Vurra County represented by my colleague Dr Sam Okounzi, was from a border market called Zewu in Zombo District. Women from Arua, specifically from my Constituency, normally ply this route to go and buy produce and other merchandise which they bring to Arua Market. 

When this lorry reached this bridge which is timber decked, and which I think was built in the 1950s – it is unfortunate that we still have timber decked bridges. There are a number of them in Arua and West Nile - the bridge gave way, plunging all the passengers on board into the water; only 11 of the passengers survived. The bodies were trapped under the truck until the next day; that was on Women’s Day, when the bodies were retrieved and sent to different homesteads for burial. 

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate for us as West Nile people because on the 8th March, the whole of Uganda was in the West Nile, but for us in Arua, we were mourning. About 25 of the victims were from my constituency. So, if you never saw me during the Women’s Day, we were busy distributing bodies.

It is very painful; you are all aware that the livelihood of the family depends on women, and I think that is why most of the victims were women.  You can imagine how many children are suffering because they became orphans. 

Mr Speaker, I raise this with the hope that the Minister of Works will take urgent action, first to look at all timber decked bridges, like the one which gave way; it was built in the 1950s and most of these are roads which connect to our markets and border districts. Some of them do not need real bridges; they just need culverts to be fixed so that people can travel normally. 

My prayer is that the minister comes to our rescue and looks at those bridges that are timber decked and fixes them. 

Secondly, I think all over this country, we still see people on the back of vehicles that are not supposed to carry human beings. I do not know what the department of transport is doing, because if a vehicle is not licenced to carry human beings, it must not carry them except the driver and maybe the turnboy. It is not the first time; last time we lost women coming from Panyimur where they had been buying fish. Almost 17 died on the spot with their merchandise. We continue to lose people just because the people who are supposed to enforce the law are taking bribes on the roads - that is what the Police are doing along those routes. They wait for these vehicles to come and they get their pay and that is why they have continued to carry people. So, I think it is prudent for the Minister of Internal Affairs to look into that issue so that vehicles that are not supposed to carry human beings do not carry them.

Lastly, the issue of compensation or insurance. It becomes difficult in such circumstances where a vehicle has not been licenced to carry human beings. How do we compensate the innocent lives, because the insurance given to such vehicles does not cater for passengers. I need your support together with the responsible ministries to see how we can rectify the situation. Thank you Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Atiku. Honourable members, let me issue some caution here. When an honourable member is speaking near you and the matter seems to be of a sad nature like that one that has been given now, avoid laughing. It looks very bad on television. This is the second time I have seen it happening. There was a day they were talking about the Nodding Disease and the deaths people are facing; the problems victims are going through and the honourable member sitting next to the person speaking was busy laughing away. It does not look good on television.  

So, if a Member is speaking on this sad issue and something strikes you that would need you to laugh, kindly walk away quickly and go and enjoy your laughter somewhere else so that we do not look so bad. 

The case of the Nodding Disease; I was not the one chairing and I watched it in my office; it looked bad. I have just seen another one here now. I am sure people watching television are saying, “One is talking about death, and one is laughing just next to him, and it is the same Parliament”. It does not look very good.

2.46
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to associate myself with the sad narration that has been given to this House by my brother hon. Bernard Atiku. This fateful accident occurred on the evening of 6th March, just to correct the record. It was Tuesday evening when this truck in the registration series of UAP, an Isuzu lorry, plunged into the river. By Wednesday morning, that is the 7th March, West Nile was in shock, and I also lost, in this vehicle, people related to my family, and indeed it was a very sad incident. 

Mr Speaker, at the risk of being misunderstood, I want to say this, to this House, and more particularly the Frontbench of Government. In the Seventh Parliament, where the senior Minister for Works was not a Member then, we, as a Parliament, approved a loan for construction of 21 bridges in the West Nile and this bridge which has killed many of our people was one of the bridges to be constructed. It is nearly ten years down the road and we have never received any plausible explanation from Government. 

I will really challenge Government, if they are really committed to the causes for which we beg and borrow money on behalf of our people. How many more do we want to see die before we can wake up from our slumber and begin putting to use the money that has been procured already for this service?

In the Seventh Parliament, we approved the loan for 21 bridges, but by the last Parliament, we were told the number had been reduced to 14. I wish the 14 had been constructed, probably the situation would have been different, but even out of the 14 that they are talking about, not even a grain of sand has ever been deposited at any riverside to say we are now ready to construct. Business is normal as usual. Really, we make all these sentiments out of the emotions that are in us, that we cannot continue time and again to lose our dear ones because of negligence on the part of Government. The issue of there being no resources does not arise. It is only that there is no commitment because the money was procured ten years down the road. 

Mr Speaker, it is only in places like Jinja, Kampala, Mbarara and Masaka, and it is on these highways where people talk about decent means of transport; where you can sit in a Kamunye or a taxi commuter; where you can even come up and say, let Pioneer buses not come to the roads. 

In the part of the country where I come from, and I believe even in other parts, especially Karamoja and Kapchorwa, I can certainly say this about Kapchorwa; when you see a person hanging on the back of a tractor, you even envy him or her because that is the only means of transport, and in a place or region like the West Nile, the only time when you can sit in a bus to travel is when you are either coming from Paidha, Arua, Koboko, Moyo or Adjumani to Kampala. You can only come around that time –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Kassiano, for giving me this opportunity. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give this House is about the roads, in support of what hon. Kassiano said. In as far as public transport is concerned, especially in my area, as we speak, Agago District does not have any public means of transport in terms of buses or taxis. Everybody who owns a bus or a taxi has withdrawn their vehicles from the roads to Agago because of the bad conditions in which the roads are.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. I want to share with you my experience of travelling on roads. The days when I was in Poke and Lacor Seminaries, I never at any one time boarded a lorry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kassiano, don’t you think you should wind up?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am coming to the end. So, I think the issue of having decent transport is of importance that we need, as a country, to address our minds to it. 

Secondly, after this accident which occurred on the evening of the 6th of this month, it was even found to be more prudent to take the injured to Kuluva Missionary Hospital instead of Arua Regional Referral Hospital. I am happy the Minister for Health is here and she ever worked in Arua Regional Referral Hospital. So, if people can lose confidence in a whole regional referral hospital and they opt for a missionary hospital, that speaks volumes. The facilities and the attendants of Arua Regional Referral Hospital could not even match. So, we really need to do a lot as a country in terms of ensuring that where unforeseeable occurrences of this nature happen, we must be able to address them. We should be able to mitigate them and be able to make an attempt to save the lives of the few who are in charge. I say this because if a whole regional referral hospital cannot live up to the expectations of the people, and the people decide to go to Kuluva of all hospitals, a small unit, which is where they go on the onset whenever they have got problems –(Interjection) 

Mr Speaker, as I said, we say all this with heavy hearts; but my appeal to Government is that, let Government use the money that we procured for construction of these bridges so that next time if there is any mishap, then we can appreciate and understand it, but as of now, to have money lying on our accounts without doing the work for which it was procured, I think is a shame. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The problem with this particular rule that we use to bring matters of this nature is that it only gives you 50 minutes and is very limited. The matter is certainly a tragic one. Tragedy has hit this country; tragedy has hit the people of West Nile and it is sad, but the discussion is only limited to 15 minutes, and I have to enforce the rules with an iron hand. I am going to ask all of us to join the people of West Nile in mourning, by standing up and observing a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable minister, you need to make a carefully crafted statement and we close this debate. I am sure you need to come with a comprehensive report covering this issue of bridges so that the Members can be abreast of all the issues. Tragedy has happened. 

2.55
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I sincerely thank my colleagues, hon. Atiku and hon. Kasiano Wadri, for bringing these issues here. My sincere condolences to the people who lost their beloved ones, from my ministry and the government in general, and we feel really touched for what happened, and Government is going to focus on the safety - 
   
Mr Speaker and honourable members, yes, that bridge has a timber deck, but unfortunately, on that day, the vehicle was also overloaded. Of course, the operators wouldn’t have known it was overloaded, but that is a statement of fact. However, let me assure the people of Uganda and those in West Nile in particular, that the loan we secured from BADEA – okay, it had some problems with the conditionalities, but these have been worked on by my ministry.

Let me also take this opportunity to inform the hon. Kassiano Wadri that the roads we are about to commission from Vura to Arua and Oraba, will cover ten of these bridges. So, as we finalise with BADEA, at least we are sure of these ten because they are covered by the project we are about to start.

Mr Speaker, we are really sorry about this. But I would like to inform you that Government will seriously think of borrowing more money. As I speak, we have started to work on other bridges in the East.

I want to assure Ugandans that Government is going to work on these bridges. We have taken note of the tragedy that took place. In the circumstances and given the sensitivity of this matter, allow me come and present a detailed statement on the Floor of Parliament sometime to come, to clarify and provide answers to issues that Members are not happy with now. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.58
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 41(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, to make a statement of urgent public concern. The issue is about the eviction of my people who are resettling in their original places in the sub-county of Ongongoja.

One particular incident happened on the 8th Day of this month, where a group of Karimojong who had illegally crossed from Napak District to settle in Ongongoja sub-county – this is where the Minister of Education and Sports comes from. This sub-county has been invaded illegally by these Karimojong apart from only a few villages.

On the fateful day, the Karimojong mobilised themselves before they attacked and evicted people, including destruction of homes. When I heard of this incident, I called the responsible district Police Commander. Yes, the Police intervened, but they were overpowered. It was only after the UPDF intervened that three culprits were arrested. These three were: Mr Charles Moru, Mr Lomkol Peter and Mr John Angela.
	
These three were detained at Katakwi Police Station before being produced before the Magistrate’s Court of Katakwi yesterday, charged with malicious damage to property.

I would like to condemn this inhuman act, which the Karimojong have continued to inflict on my people in Katakwi District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please state the urgency of that issue so that you can get the good response. What is the urgent matter that you want to inform the House about?

MR OROMAIT: The urgency in this matter is about the illegal eviction of my people who have been trying to resettle in their homes. During the last recess, we mobilised our people to go back to their ancestral land. But now they cannot do so; they have gone back to the camps because of these problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the condition of the people who are resettling? The ministers are here. Please tell them the situation so that they can make responses.

MR OROMAIT: My appeal to Government is to sort out the border issue because this situation only rotates on this. This matter on the border was first brought to this Parliament in 2008, but up to date, no solution has been found. The other time, they said the Karimojong were armed and that they could threaten the surveyors. But today, I am being told that the Ministry of Lands does not have money to do this work, yet they found money to transfer soldiers from Masindi to Katakwi to settle within a day. 

Mr Speaker, thousands of the Karimojong have settled in my place illegally, causing problems to my people. For example, a borehole that is meant for only 250 people is now being used by thousands of people. A health centre that was meant to serve a few people is now providing services to beyond capacity. What I am trying to say is that the situation down there is very pathetic.

What these people do is to cross back to their territory to vote, but after that they come back. Now I know that the census is about to be conducted in the country. This is a very important exercise because it guides the allocation of resources according to the number of people in a district. And I know that during the census, these Karimojong will go back to their land in Napak; but after that they will cross back to Katakwi to encroach on the district resources, which will have not been budgeted for. Mr Speaker, I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there somebody on the front bench prepared to respond to this matter?

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I can only look into the matter and report back to the House. As of now I don’t have the details. In the circumstances, I would like to request the House to give me time and I look into it before coming back with detailed information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving us a timeframe, Mr Minister? Is Tuesday of next week okay for you?

MR BABA: Yes, I will respond on any day of next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will take that. Yes, hon. Adolf Mwesige.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to extend my sympathies to my colleague, the honourable member for Usuk County, for the tragedy and trouble that his people have gone through at the hands of bad elements – the neighbours.

On behalf of the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Lands – and I think I speak for my colleague – that we shall constitute a team of experts this week to come and look at the border issue between Katakwi and Napak districts. (Applause)

The Minister of Internal Affairs has promised to handle the security aspects of the situation. But I am also happy to learn that the UPDF and the Police are already on the ground to control any criminality that may be arising from this border dispute –(Interruptions)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of guidance. The issue which the honourable Minister for Local Government is addressing our minds to is of a recurring nature. Border conflicts are everywhere. Every newspaper that you read everyday talks about skirmishes across common borders. Sub-counties fighting each other; counties fighting each other; districts fighting each other. 

The guidance I would like to seek from you, Mr Speaker, is wouldn’t it be right for the Minister for Local Government in consultation with that of Lands, and more particularly the Department of survey and Mapping, to come up with a comprehensive solution to some of these problems. 

Some of these problems need nothing more than a technical person going with a GPRS to say this boundary is like this, because all these places are on the map. Is every person going to come to you, Mr Minister, to raise this and you work on a piecemeal basis. Don’t you think with all the complaints that are in your office, you should be prepared to come up with a comprehensive report so that we put some of these things to rest once and for all, rather than every other time seeing people losing property and lives? 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the technical people are already doing their job and they have been doing their job. If politicians left the technical people to demarcate boundaries without interference, we would not have a problem in this country. So, it is not enough hon. Kassiano Wadri to say that –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I wish to apologise for the machinations I am doing here. What I know is right; that I wanted to get hon. Adolf to recall that in the very portfolio he is in, and in the very Government he is serving, and in the last Parliament, we handled the issue of the Teso-Karamoja-Katakwi-Moroto border. And the team, the one he is now saying will be set up, was actually set up. We traveled to the border and we had problems. I actually even thought at the time hon. Baba made his intervention, the former Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija, was here. 

We went with him and he knows the difficulties we met at that border. So, when we come here to resuscitate those matters, and people in Government are pretending that they have no idea, that this is a new matter altogether, Mr Speaker, I am forced to try to manipulate the House so that I bring this information and even ask whether they are in order to behave as though they don’t know that their very Government tried to handle this matter and they should be giving us the final position. Are they in order to behave hypocritically on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alice Alaso, you are ruled out of order. (Laughter and Applause) But the information as relayed deserves some responses from them. Honourable minister, please close and we move forward. 

DR LULUME: I think these are very pertinent issues that this country needs to handle with a lot of care, but at the same time, to ensure that national integration indeed takes place. 

For us who come from the South, when we hear these issues of demarcating borders –(Interjection)- yes, but I am a national leader and knowing what takes place elsewhere helps us to make important decisions. 

The Minister for Local Government would want to go and re-examine the borders as if there is a plan to construct “Berlin Walls” between the peoples of this country, which is not going to happen. I don’t think there is a plan for that. I believe that the Minister for Local Government and other ministers, including the peoples of this region, need to sit together, even outside this Parliament, in order to concretise a framework where people can co-exist within their country. I would demand a response from Government about that.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance through you. This was an issue that we handled in the Eighth Parliament; the issue of the border – Katakwi, Teso and Karamoja. A team was sent. They went there. I believe there is a report. 

I am seeking guidance that, isn’t it about time that we first received that report before another team is sent there to sort out the same problem. I am seeking guidance through you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you help us with this so that we can move forward. 
 
MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, we cannot look on when people’s huts are being burnt. So, it is only logical that a combined team of Government, comprising of Lands, Local Government and Internal Affairs, goes to the site. 

First of all, to bring peace in the area. (Interjection) We know how to do it. We are in Government. Government knows how to do it. You may not know how to create peace, but we know how to do it. 

We will go as a team, talk to our people, guide them and calm them down. The report of the technical committee will definitely be discussed by Government and this Parliament will be informed.  That is all I can say for now, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Kwon-kic and Odom Primary Schools in Agago District. They are represented by hon. Okot John Amos and hon. Akello Judith Franca. They have come to observe the business today. Please join me in welcoming them. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY REGULATORY BILL, 2012

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you very much. I beg to move that the Uganda Communications Authority Regulatory Bill, 2012 be read the first time. The certificate of financial implication is also hereby laid on Table. 

 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for action. We have a time limitation of 45 days within which it should come back to the House for second reading. The clock starts ticking now for the committee.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION

3.15
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I move under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present a petition on behalf of the licensed timber dealers and traders in Uganda. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the humble petition of the licensed timber dealers and traders in Uganda presented by I, Chris Baryomunsi, MP Kinkizi East, Kanungu District, and state that: 

1. 	The subject matter of this petition is a public notice issued on the 6th March, 2012 by the honourable Minister of Water and Environment, halting the harvest of timber countrywide.

2. 	The petitioners are Ugandans and duly licensed timber dealers and traders in various parts of this country.

3. 	The petitioners apply for licences to deal in timber once every year, in different districts, and such licences usually run for a full financial year, commencing on the 1st of July and ending on the 30th of June the following year.  That means the petitioners acquired licences for the financial year running from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now go to the prayers.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Much obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. As I read the prayers, the issue is that the Minister of Water and Environment issued a directive halting all activities to do with timber harvest. But the petitioners have running licences which expire at the end of June and, therefore, this directive has severely affected them, and their businesses are collapsing.  They are, therefore, petitioning the Parliament of Uganda to come to their rescue and resolve as follows: 
“
1.	That the directive of the honourable Minister of Water and Environment suspending timber harvesting, be lifted to allow the timber dealers operate their licences for this financial year ending 30 June, 2012 and then the minister  can go ahead and streamline the activities of the sector. 

2.	That the directive by the honourable minister suspending timber harvesting be exclusive of tree harvesting on private land in accordance with Section 27(1) of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act (2003), which prohibits Government or local governments from having ownership over trees or forest produce on private land. 

3.	That the 14 days notice issued by the honourable minister for clearing the already harvested timber be extended for at least six months. 

4. 	That the petitioners be compensated for all the losses they are incurring as a result of the directive by the minister.  Your petitioners are duly bound with ever prayer.”

Rt Hon. Speaker, accompanying the petition are signatures from 1,124 people involved in this industry, representing thousands of Ugandans who are affected by this directive, and I beg that I lay on Table the signatures from the petitioners. 

I also want to lay on Table a memo written by the Executive Director, National Forestry Authority, to the senior management of NFA, outlining this directive which she purported to have copied to Members of Parliament, through the Speaker of Parliament. 

I  have never seen this directive from the Director, National Forestry Authority dated 6th March, 2012 and signed without indicating the name of the signatory. It is entitled: “Memo to senior management, managers, coordinators, plantation managers, range managers, sector managers, law enforcement supervisors, Police liaison officer and forestry supervisors,” and copied to Chairman, NFA Board of Directors; from the Executive Director,  with his signature, and the reference is: “Addressing the rampant depletion of the country’s forest resources.”

Basically, he is communicating the halting of timber harvesting and curbing of illegal activities, and the contention of the petitioners is that they have valid running licences and they are not illegal and yet they are being stopped from doing their business. With you guidance, I lay this memo on table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured at such. Have you finished? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: No, I have more documents. The petitioners also attempted to seek an appointment with the responsible minister, but they did not get the chance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those matters with the documents are now going to be referred to the committee so that the petitioners can interact with the committee directly and then we shall have a report to Parliament. The documents you have submitted are sufficient for this matter to be heard. Conclude so that I can make my statement on it.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. As I conclude, I also lay on Table a sample of some of the licences that these petitioners hold to demonstrate that they have valid licences and, therefore, feel that this directive should not negatively affect them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wouldn’t it be proper to bring them in the committee so that they are brought the other way as I said earlier? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Much obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

3.23
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the same point, I would just like to seek your indulgence and that of the House to raise this issue so that when it comes out at its formal time, Members can appreciate why it is being moved.  Mr Speaker, you have just ruled referring this matter to the Committee on Natural Resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I haven’t, though I am going to. (Laughter)

MR DOMBO:  But in anticipation of that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, resume your sit and Dr Baryomunsi winds up. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I appreciate the support by hon. Dombo, because this has affected people in Butaleja. The petitioners would want expeditious handling of this matter because the directive says they should vacate the business within two weeks. We would, therefore, request that this matter is handled expeditiously. I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very clear about petitions from members of the public. This is urgent and there is a 14 days’ notice; it stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources and we give them one week to report to Parliament so that we can have a proper debate and take some decisions on the way forward. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had the opportunity in the last Parliament to serve as the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, and I progressively appreciated the magnitude of work and the size and limitations of capacity within the committee, given the type of work as we have sent to the committee. 

We are at the time of amending our Rules of Procedure. Right now, the natural resources committee has about four Bills; they also have a number of inquiries that are being investigated. Yet at the same time, the Natural Resources Committee handles Water, Environment and Forestry; they also handle energy, minerals and now they are adding oil. 

May I propose, Mr Speaker, with your indulgence to the Chairperson of the Rules Committee, to consider whether it is not high time this committee was split into sectors that will make work in this House efficient?  This could be at the right time when we are dealing with the rules and amending them. It could come up for reconsideration because that specific item was already dealt with and that is what the chairperson told me. But in case it has not, let the Members be on notice that we would rather split the functions of this committee in order to make this House a bit more efficient than what it has been. Mr Speaker, thank you for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo, you know the rules. It is called recommittal and you do not recommit even before the subject matter of the discussion on rules has come up. To that extent, you are ruled out of order.

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.27
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (MR Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole House for consideration of the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of the Whole House to examine the proposed amendments to our Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we stopped on the issue of contempt of Parliament, rule 195. The committee made some proposals and there were debates on constitutionality and consistency with the laws and several other arguments against the proposed amendments. That is where we stopped. By now, I am hoping that there have been some consultations and that we are able to resolve this matter in the next one minute.

Rule 195

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose that we stand over this matter for about 20 minutes. We should be able to report then.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Matter stood over. Next.

Rule 199

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute for sub-rule 1 the following: Sub-rule 1, “There shall be published a verbatim report of all the proceedings of the House unless the Speaker is satisfied that this is rendered impossible by some emergency.”

The justification is that this is for better drafting and better use of parliamentary language. The current rule reads, “The Clerk shall be responsible for ensuring that all speeches made by Members in the House or in the Committee of the Whole House are reported word for word and that an official report of the speeches made is published as soon as possible.”

The view of the committee is that our proposal is better draftsmanship and better use of parliamentary language. We only thought that we would make the draftsmanship simpler to read and understand and in the same vein, convey what the current rule states.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But it is passive. It is drafted in a passive way and does not assign anyone any responsibility.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I just want to seek clarification from the chair of the committee on what kind of emergency the committee foresees that can disable Parliament from recording the proceedings of this House. In what circumstances would it happen where the House would proceed but we cannot record what we are debating?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is on the publication.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. In fact, I expected the chairperson of the committee to introduce amendments to ensure that even reports of committees and not only Committee of the Whole House are published. We have had problems where decisions that are taken in committees sometimes contradict the reports that are tabled here. We do not have committee Hansards and even in the past, committee chairpersons have been accused of doctoring reports and so forth.

So, I thought at this time the chairperson would need to introduce an amendment to take care of committee proceedings, Committee of the Whole House and minutes of the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ekanya, are you suggesting that proceedings of committees should be recorded in Hansard form the way the official record of this House is recorded? Is that practical? With how many committees?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, we now have technology that is available and very cheap. There is technology where all our voices - In fact the manual Hansard system in this House is now very archaic. There is a system where you can speak and whatever you are speaking is transferred into data and it is very cheap. So, I want to propose that, that is done and we can - If it is impossible, let the provision be there. If technology and resources makes it possible, it is better.

Last time I was accused here during the Budget Speech and you remember. I stood in defence of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and I was disciplined by my party that, that was not a position that was agreed in the committee. The Speaker then had to roll call all Members to say yes, that was what we agreed on, but if there is a Hansard system, it makes it clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ekanya, Hansard system for committees? Is it practical?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, for the reasons that you have given, I think we have more than 25 committees now. It is not realistic to say that we can have a Hansard for all the proceedings of all of the 25 committees meeting everyday and minute and that a Hansard is produced and reported on time.

Secondly, committees do not make definite decisions. Committee decisions are recommendations to this House and once they are brought to the House, discussed and approved, then they form the official report of Parliament.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There is a proposal made by the committee and I partially support it, but I want to amend the proposal by deleting from ‘unless the Speaker is satisfied that this is rendered impossible by an emergency.’ I feel that in terms of the official record of Parliament, there never arises an emergency and this has been historically proved. This goes with the question that my brother Dr Baryomunsi posed to the committee chairman, “Under what circumstances does an emergency arise?” It never arises in this case. I would like to propose the deletion of that part of the amendment. Thank you.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My reading is that the current rule satisfies the objective of this House. The amendment does not state who does what, while the current rule specifies responsibility. It says, “The Clerk shall…” and so, it ensures that someone is responsible for this work. In the amendment it says, “There shall be…” without giving details of who is responsible. So, I believe the current rule is sufficient.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Akol that the current rule is enough for our purposes because it talks about compiling the Official Report of this Parliament. I do not know the import of publication – are we going to publish the report of Parliament in the newspapers or the Gazette? What is the purpose of publication yet the Hansard is available to the public on the Internet and even in Parliament? So, I do not see the necessity of the amendment unless the chairman really brings serious reasons to convince us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odoi, do you want me to put the question or are we going to use other methods to resolve this issue?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I beg to move that you put the question. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Proposed new rule

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: 

“Expunction
The official record of Parliament shall stand expunged;
a)	when the House votes to expunge such record; or

b)	if the Speaker is of the opinion that the words that have been used in debate are defamatory, indecent or un-parliamentary or undignified, in his or her discretion, order that such words be expunged from the proceedings of the House.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is part of the parliamentary practice and procedure that is never written down. I do not know whether you want to have it written down now. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think as a presiding officer, you have the obligation of ruling somebody out of order if you think the language used is not parliamentary. You can then direct that it is expunged from the record. It is the discretionary powers of the presiding officer and they do not need to be addressed in the Rules.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are situations where a Member uses un-parliamentary language and he or she is ordered to withdraw. But after the withdrawal, the record remains on the Hansard. This can haunt someone because after a number of years, someone else can read this Hansard and can de-campaign you with that statement on the Hansard. We could have a rule such that after somebody has withdrawn the statement, it should be expunged from the Hansard to avoid the record being kept there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought a withdrawal would essentially mean that the space originally occupied by the words uttered would be treated as though it were empty. That then would be the necessity of someone retracting their statement.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairman, what harm does it have to delete what a Member has said? Something might be very bad and anybody may not have read the part that says that the Member withdrew their offending statement. (Interjection) No, it is not I who has mentioned it but someone else has insulted me in the House and after the Speaker has told them to withdraw the statement, the Member reluctantly does it. So if we had it in our Rules – because after withdrawing and it still stays on record, of what purpose is it on the Hansard?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable members, the way it is drafted makes it look like it is the whole Official Report involved. It says, “…the official record of Parliament shall stand expunged.” Are you talking of part of it or the whole of it?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the qualification is given and is in respect to the use of unparliamentary language and defamatory statements and all the others defined therein. It is only the offending part of the record that stands expunged. And I need to put this in perspective; the committee strongly felt that we need to define what should not go into the official record of this House and we need to set these parameters in writing and include them in our Rules. That is the justification for this proposal.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, Rule 77 talks about defamatory statements being investigated by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. When a Member makes a defamatory statement, the procedure of handling it is provided for in Rule 77. And after investigations, the committee makes a report to Parliament and the Member will be required to apologise to the victim or withdraw the statement. Maybe we can provide that once the Member apologises, then the statement made on the Floor of Parliament be expunged at that level.

DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, I am trying to examine why there would be need to even expunge a statement made in Parliament. The Hansard teaches us something; if at all someone has made a defamatory statement, the people who will read the Hansard will learn that the particular statement was unparliamentary. So, the question of expunging it does not arise as far as I am concerned. How else are we going to learn what unparliamentary language and defamatory statements are if we want to make reference in future?

MR TODWONG:  Mr Chairman, we are trying to cause ourselves problems. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear, on conduct, the behaviour of Members of Parliament, how you debate and how you should respect one another. Even in the appendices. I really do not think we need to put it in writing when the rules are already clear about this as you earlier on ruled. I think we need to continue with the current provision other than bring in an additional amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any contrary opinion? Hon. Amongi you have a contrary opinion? No. Honourable members, I will put the question. The proposal from the committee is that the new sub-rule be introduced called expunction in relation to - “...the official record of Parliament shall stand expunged given the circumstances...” The proposal is that this be included in the rules. I now put the question to the proposal that it should form part of our Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and negatived.)

Rule 202

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Coming after 199?

MS AKOL: Yes, immediately after 199, because it is also to do with the Official Report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Did you propose it, and was it circulated?

MS AKOL: I proposed it and I gave the Chairman a copy. I also gave the Speaker’s office a copy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can proceed.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The new rule is to do with the official Hansard and is to be inserted after rule 199. This is what the new rule should read, “The official Hansard shall list a record of business of Parliament and shall also provide for the record of Members present, Members on official duty both within and outside the country, Members absent with apology.” 

The justification is that the Hansard is the official record of Parliament and should, therefore, show in detail, business for day within the House, and also records of Members of Parliament who participated in the deliberations for the day. Besides, it should also record Members of Parliament on parliamentary duties within and outside the country, either as individuals or as a committee. That is the justification.

Mr Chairman, we have always been marked absent especially when Members are not in this House, and yet they are actually on duty. They could have travelled on duty as a committee or as individuals on assignment of the House. So, this new rule is in line with other rules that we have considered where one of them is that a Member shall only be out by permission of the Speaker and the others as well. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Rose Akol for being very creative, but I would like to seek clarification as regards the role of the Member of Parliament and whether we have adequate systems to be able to address the current amendment. This is because besides a Member of Parliament being in the House, our role is basically legislation, appropriation, oversight and representation - very important. And when we talk about representation, it involves the whole life of our voters in the constituency. 

Mr Chairman, today I was called by my people that three very important persons had lost lives. Besides that, I received a call that in one of my Health Centre IIIs, they do not have a midwife and there was going to be a serious meeting in the sub-county where they wanted me. That was at six o’clock. If I was to move to that place, the record of this Parliament would have shown that hon. Ekanya is absent. 

Therefore, if we are to introduce this very important amendment for purposes of public oversight, we need to work out a system that if I was to leave my residence at five o’clock to go and conduct representation so that women stop dying in my constituency, I am captured because I am performing parliamentary duties as prescribed in the Constitution -(Interjection)- it is very important because it is useless, Mr Chairman, for me to be here when we do not have a midwife and women are dying due to labour related problems. It would not be proper for me to be here when the people who brought me here have lost their dear ones and then after five years I go and say, “Give me votes; I have put a road and water,” and yet when they are in grief I am not with them. Some voters do not want only money. If you send money then tomorrow if you lose somebody in your home, they will also gather money and send to you and say, “You also bury your own alone.” So, that needs to be put in the rules, otherwise I have no problem. I really need clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Ekanya if something happens to you and you get this urgent call and you have to leave at five in the morning, the rule is very clear that you notify the Speaker and get the Speaker’s agreement to go. You notify the Speaker so that there is a record. It is in the rules and so there is a system. Unless you are saying that the rule that you have provided for Members seeking leave of absence is irrelevant in some circumstances. We passed those rules and the modification we made was that you can use any means and then it can be rectified, regularised or formalised later; that you can send a message or do whatever is necessary, but at least notify the Speaker that such a thing has happened so that you can move. That is what we agreed here. So, there is a system of capturing it. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the point you have made is very important. My concern is to define and manage it. The parliamentary calendar for the whole House is Tuesday to Thursday. On other days, as Members of Parliament, we leave here on Thursday and go for fieldwork. That also needs to be captured, and if there is no fieldwork or committee, I am in my constituency on Monday. Do I need to seek leave of absence that I am in my constituency on Monday? The rule is not clear on that one. The proposal is good, but we need to go into detail so that some of us who are diligent and committed to observing the rules are not caught off guard due to a technicality.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, although the proposal is good, I am looking at the practicality of the proposal and what it intends to cure. I know, maybe my sister has had the issue of the African Leadership Institute, which has given a lot of headache to Members because of the record. But Mr Chairman, for example, are we going to put a co-ordinating office to manage all the different activities of Members? You can find that right now we have maybe five committees out in the field. 

The clerks have their record and usually if you want those records, the clerk can avail them. Now, if it is to be in the official record, the Hansard, I see that it will be first of all too big and very cumbersome, and I would rather – I do not know whether there has been a problem that we have had with the record, which this amendment is trying to cure. But if it is for purposes of compelling - is it for compelling attendance? Is it for purposes of the record; because we also sign? We sign the attendance list and the book is always there. So, is it going to be that the people in the Hansard will have to record the list in the Hansard?

Then they have to go to all the clerks and collect all the names of all the MPs who are out; then go to the Office of the Speaker to collect those who have gone abroad; those who have - what will be the operational administrative mechanism to implement this? This is what I am trying to clarify. Can the Member clarify the how the implementation will be coordinated?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the official record of Parliament is a record of proceedings of the House; that is why you do not have an official record of Parliament on a Sunday. You only have it on a Sunday if Parliament sat on a Sunday –(Interjections)- it is possible; Parliament has ever sat on a Sunday. So, the official record of Parliament which is called the Hansard is the record of the proceedings of this House as recorded in this House. So, I do not know whether this helps to understand the situation.

MS BETTY AMONGI: So, Mr Chairman, let me conclude. Therefore, her proposal is that we add names on the official record. Today, we are in Parliament and there will be an official record. Her proposal is that in that official record, capture those who are present here, those who are abroad and those who are doing committee work. That is her proposal. Now for me, the concern I am raising is, what about even those who have run for burial? They are also there and it is part of the work - those who have apologies –(Interjections)- she also says those who have apologised. What will be the administrative mechanism for apology if I have run for an emergency? There should be an administrative framework according to her proposal. I will take information from hon. Alaso.(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, your time is up; so, if you are making a contribution, you just make a contribution. I will have hon. Otengo after hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chair. I appreciate the spirit of the proposal, but I just think that it is very cumbersome and I am wondering, what sanctions do we have at the end of the day? Because the only sanctions that are provided for is after a 15 day consecutive absence from this House. I think to the best of my recollection, the rest of it - one or two days - I do not know what sanctions can be managed or meted out to me if I am absent.

You know, Mr Chairman, I am a very good law abiding person. I will be here, but I am just asking, what will be done if I am not here and the Speaker is not aware? To what effect are the sanctions? To what effect is the record? To be very realistic, you know we have to go to those constituencies. I have been here and I have watched people who attend religiously and they are lacking there; they disappear in the next election. So, you should leave us some room for flexibility to disappear once in a while to go there and survive the next election. If you become so hard, Mr Chairman, you will have us good here while the other people are galvanising support there and we will not survive. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The background to this is that sometimes something happens and the Speaker’s Office does not know where a Member is. You might come and people want you urgently and they just cannot tell where you are. That is why it is important that there is some record of your whereabouts as a responsible honourable member of a national Parliament. Your whereabouts should be traceable when the need arises. I am sure if you want to do some covert operations and you do not want anybody to know, you can go against the rules and nobody will follow you, but should anything happen to you there, then the House will have a problem. That is the basis really.

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I listened carefully to hon. Akol and I was looking at the import of the amendment she is trying to bring. I think the most important thing is hon. Akol wants us to be responsible as honourable members and she is also trying to ask your office as the Speaker to have clear records of the Members. But I think this is administrative. Whenever we move out, we write to you and you have always communicated back, but the problem sometimes is that you discover that even after communicating back to me, I have been marked absent. This is not an issue which must go in the amendment. It is very clear, Mr Chairman, that we are putting it back to you that it is your office to strengthen that so that the records and systems are clear. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just say this. There are two things that happen about records of Parliament. There is the official record which is the Hansard, and then there are the minutes of proceedings, which are about two or three pages, capturing the highlights of the discussions and the list of the people who have contributed. It is possible that in the minutes, you could record people who are absent with apologies and things like this, but to put it in the official -

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the proposal by hon. Akol is pertinent. It is a very good proposal because it reflects what has gone on. Yet having said that, from the discussion of colleagues, it needs to be re-examined in detail. It has other consequences. I do propose, if hon. Akol can later on examine this detail with the committee, to address the worries and concerns of Members. After all, this committee is a standing committee and it is still continuing to do its work to amend and update the rules. So, you might need –(Interjections)-  yes you have circulated the proposal to the Chair, but the committee needs to sit and critically examine and internalise the proposal and then maybe give further details on how it can be managed.
 
As we discuss now, if we are to pass it, it might cause more problems, yet we could lose out on this idea. So, my view is, you may need time, hon. Akol, to go back to the committee, examine this proposal and you will come back at some appropriate time. I beg to move.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairperson, I believe this rule is not out of the blue. It is for clarity because the provisions are already there in the rules. The Speaker is accountable at any one time for every Member of Parliament. Currently, the Office of the Speaker may not be able to deduce where all Members are. It is also already in the rules that if you have to move out for any reason, even for the reasons being given by Members and by hon. Alaso that, “I have gone to bury”; even if it is an emergency, the rules currently require you to notify the office of the Speaker. This is just to ensure that the official record, which is the Hansard, has a record of your absence with apology -(Interjections)- it is already known to all of us that we sign that book, but where do Members who have travelled on duty sign? Where do I find that record? It must be in the official Hansard. The only record which is official is the Hansard. Besides that, we are Members of Parliament; we must be accountable. This is part of accountability as Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Akol that the new proposal on record of Members present and absent on official duty should be included in the official record of Parliament.

 (Question put and negatived.)

Rule 202

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman -(Interjections)- we propose to add sub-rule(8) after sub-rule(7) to read as follows. There are some corrections we have made. “In accordance with the rules made under sub-rule(1) of this rule; a member of the press may be admitted into the press gallery with an electronic device.” The justification is that technology is now very advanced. The press may need to be facilitated to record and report on the proceedings of this House, telecast and convey news. I beg to move.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While I appreciate the intention of the committee to allow the press to bring in electronic devices, I am seeking for clarification from the chair of the committee. You are introducing a terminology, Uganda Parliamentary Press Association, which I do not see to be originating from anywhere in our Rules of Procedure. Is it your intention to introduce this within our rules, and is it also your intention to lock out any other member of the press who is not part of that association? 

MR BAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to move that we do not adopt this proposal from the committee because whereas technology has advanced and we need to help the press capture the recordings very well; you recall very well in this House how the argument ensued on allowing Members of this House to come here with electronic gadgets. That argument was very hot and eventually, we had to cut down on some gadgets. We cannot undo what we have done by allowing the press with all their gadgets like recorders and cameras which have zoom lenses, to detect who is about to sleep and who is sleeping; the one who has small legs or big legs; the one who has torn socks. We must have some privileges and I think this would erode our privileges as parliamentarians. We should be able to sit here in a free environment, well aware that we are not over-monitored. This would be monitored. Haven’t the press caused enough damage to this House? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I am in charge of the dignity of this House and I can say without any fear of contradiction that no honourable Member has torn socks. (Laughter)

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw that statement. (Laughter) I beg to move that we accept the proposal to allow members of the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association, but without the electronic gadgets.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like to support this provision, while appreciating the fact that the public needs to know precisely what goes on in this House. I feel it is unnecessary to hide anything. If you must not come here with a short skirt or torn socks; why should you come with that kind of attire? We have rules to guide our code of conduct; we have rules to guide the way we dress and I think the public needs to know how decent this Parliament is. I think there is no problem having the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association, who are actually part of us; having their gadgets. 

All I would like to say is that electronic devices are very broad. I would like us to qualify the electronic devices. Therefore, I would like to propose an inclusion between electronic and device, to include the word, “recording device.” That way, we would narrow what the press can carry here to cameras. They might bring an x-ray machine here. It is electronic. (Interjections) So, let us define them, unless – unfortunately, we do not seem to have a definition clause in our Rules of Procedure; otherwise we would define and probably just limit -(Interruption) 

MR BAKA: I am seeking clarification from you, honourable member. Right now, under the arrangement the press has with Parliament; they can receive recordings of the proceedings from our protocol office. I wonder why they would need to come here with their gadgets, because they can access all the recordings from our office here in Parliament and relay them. I have heard voices; I have seen footages. So, I do not know what we would be aiming to cure.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, at the moment, the press has not got the liberty - without special permission from your office to carry cameras to take still pictures – remember that they cannot rely entirely on the public relations unit in Parliament because different media houses have got different interests -(Interjections)- yes, they have got different interests and -(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Amuriat. I do not know what we see ourselves as, in this House. We are a public institution. We come here to legislate on behalf of the public. This House has also made a law - access to information. It is operational. We have also approved that Members of Parliament will carry electronic gadgets. What is it that we are trying to hide? Today, without the electronic gadgets, the media does not exist. We no longer use ball pens to do our work; media uses electronic gadgets to do their work. So, once you allow them in, then they must be allowed to come in with their tools of work.

Secondly, we have said include, “Members of the Parliamentary Press Association”. But I think we should just say, “Members of the press”. One time we might get people who are not members of the Parliamentary Press Association. There are foreigners who come here and want to cover an occasion; maybe when the Queen is addressing the House; maybe President Obama. Will they have to become Members of the Parliamentary Association first? We should just say, “Members of the press should be allowed to come in here with their equipment.” Those tools will be cleared and electronically checked; we agreed on that earlier. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, hon. Wafula, for that valuable information. I would like to respond to hon. Baka’s interjection and say that I am sure that members of the press will carry gadgets that they need. There shouldn’t be fear and it does not even warrant your assertion that the system here is able to record what goes on. If they find they are able to capture that information there, then there will be no need for them to bring video cameras here. So, they will only bring the equipment they feel is necessary for them to get information that they would otherwise not get from the Parliament system. So, I support this proposal strongly.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In my view, this amendment does not add anything new because our press office is enjoined and if it is not enjoined, we can do so to ensure that every member of the press has access to the information that is being relayed in this House. 

Mr Chairman, if you have followed, you will find that televisions all over this country can relay the proceedings of this House without hindrance. Radio stations also relay the proceedings of this House without any hindrance. 

Hon. Oguti is talking about the right to access to information. But that one also has limits. Some of the limitations include the right to privacy. The other limitations include sovereignty and security. So, we are not going to expose the security of Members of Parliament in the name of everybody seeing what is happening here. If there is anything for the public to see, what is provided is enough. So, I would like to submit that this amendment be rejected.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the right to access to information relates to information that is in the possession of the State. So, it is not just any information. You do not have right of access to information from me; you do not have it. All parliaments around the world have limits. Go to the British House of Commons, they have limits on how much of their things are taken outside. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is my view that we can easily resolve this matter. One, the journalists are our partners in this business because whatever we transact here, we would like them to relay to the public. And what we have got to do is to enable them do their work as long as they do not infringe on the law. All the rules we pass should be facilitative to them to do their work. 

A journalist without a tape recorder is not a journalist these days. And it may also lead to conflict. If someone does not have a tape recorder, he will misquote you and the following day you will say, “I did not do that”. So, I think we need to facilitate them. When you look at –(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, my brother. I would like to give you information that whenever we make these rules, we target all people to live in harmony. I will refer you to rule 7, which says that when motions fail, we apply Article 2 of the Constitution. Article 2 stipulates that we follow the Commonwealth standards. In that regard, recently I was in the UK. In the Commonwealth, they are very democratic, but there is a limit to which people can enter the House of Commons with gadgets. 

MR KATUNTU: The honourable Woman Member of Parliament for Iganga was in the UK recently. Actually, I was in the House of Commons in 2002 and I do not know where the Woman Member of Parliament was at that time. 

Having said that, I think we need to go back to the rules. Look at sub-rule (5), which is the disabling sub-rule. It prohibits any person from carrying into the gallery a briefcase, firearm, weapon, a camera, tape recorder, a transistor radio, mobile telephone or any other electronic device. 

This sub-rule (5) was actually word for word with what applied to Members of Parliament and we have since then amended that in this process –(Interjections)– yes, we did that. Honourable member for Ruhama, in your absence we amended it. When we amended it, we actually allowed in electronic devices that are not disruptive of the proceedings in Parliament. 

For example, now you may be allowed to come in with your I-pad. Then it was not allowed. We thought now that the I-pad can assist you. A Member making a submission might need to cross-check for research purposes on the Internet and give information. 

So, my view is to reconcile sub-rule (5) with what we provided for ourselves. The tools of business for a journalist are clearly spelt out. A journalist works through cameras; how can you stop a journalist from carrying a camera – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, hon. Abdu Katuntu, and thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want hon. Abdu Katuntu to clarify to me and other Members what rule we have been using. For example, when the President comes to address us, I see rays of media, both local and international, within the Chamber. When the Speaker was being sworn in, I saw journalists with cameras here. When I was sworn in as a youth Member of Parliament in 1998 with four other colleagues, we had external press enter here with all gadgets and recordings, and when hon. Janet Museveni was sworn in, we had the press here. So, what rule have we been using? (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Honourable colleagues, allow me to finish though I would like to yield the Floor to anybody. I really don’t want to suffocate any Member –(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, with your indulgence, I will take it after the Prime Minister, he always yields the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is happening now, hon. Katuntu? 

MR KATUNTU: You can see many colleagues have stood up and I don’t want to be seen like I am suffocating anyone. Anyway, the point being made by the committee is, can we allow these people to record your proceedings enabled by our Rules of Procedure, and I don’t see any problem with it. So, if we allow them to access - and to answer hon. Ekanya, actually, for any Member who has been elected in a by-election, you will see people coming in with cameras. I don’t want to take the argument by hon. Baka that if one has got bad eyes like maybe the ones I have, I should not allow these cameras to take my picture. You see, we are doing public work and there is no way you would want to do public work and not enable people who report about it in detail. There is a limitation and I agree with the chairperson - the Speaker, but that limitation in our instance is provided by Article 41 of the Constitution. That is the only limitation. Other than Article 41, we cannot create more limitations as to what can be accessed because once you do –(Interjections)- let me conclude. I don’t want to say so much on the Floor, Mr Chairperson. 

The point I am trying to make is that the press are partners; they are part and parcel of this process and they should be facilitated fully, and their tools of trade are these electronic devices. The only limitations we can have on them are those limitations which we provided for ourselves. Otherwise, we cannot lock out the press cameras, recorders or even ipads. They should have them and they should cover these proceedings fully. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question. The committee has proposed an amendment to rule 202 to insert a new sub-rule immediately after existing sub-rule (7) in the terms proposed. I put the question to the proposal of the committee for an insertion of a new sub-rule (8).

(Question put and negatived.)

Rule 204

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the proposed amendment to rule 204 is withdrawn and that also applies to the proposed insertion of a new sub-rule. It is also withdrawn. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, redrafting of sub-rule 204 is withdrawn. Next.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: That is the number marked 94. 

“Business of committee not to lapse on prorogation of the House -
1.	Any business pending before a committee shall not lapse by reason only of the prorogation of the House.

2.	A committee which is unable to complete its work before the expiration of its term or before the dissolution of the House may report to the House that the committee has not been able to complete its work. 

3.	Any preliminary reports, memorandum or notes that the committee may have taken shall be availed to the new committee.”

Mr Chairman, I propose that we handle both of them. The only thing we are trying to cure is that sometimes the term of Parliament lapses when there is committee work, where Government has invested a lot of resources and that needs to be saved and passed on to the succeeding Parliament as a resource that can be used. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what we had to do this time round was to move a motion to save the work that was left by the Eighth Parliament, to make it workable in the Ninth Parliament because the rule was that the business of the Eighth Parliament would have lapsed with that Parliament and nothing could be carried forward. The proposal, therefore, is seeking to make an automatic transfer of this work that is incomplete, to the next Parliament to handle. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, is it only business from the Eighth Parliament to the Ninth Parliament or any business to transcend Parliament so that it is carried over?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That was just an illustration, hon. Lulume. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am only worried that, and I beg to be guided, whether it may not be unconstitutional because after every five years, Parliament renews its mandate and the people decide who they need to lead them. So, when we go back for elections, others will come back and others will not come back. So, to carry the business of the previous Parliament to the next Parliament, I would seek your guidance on whether it would not amount to even extending the term of Parliament. The point I am raising, for which I seek your indulgence, is that we did it at the beginning of this Parliament; whether it will not amount to violation of Article 1, where power belongs to the people and they exercise it through regular free and fair elections and all those related provisions. I seek your indulgence, Mr Chairman. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the need to save the work of the previous Parliament so that it can be moved into the new Parliament. However, to have this done automatically would be to infringe on the rights of the Members of the new Parliament.

My suggestion is that we should let the new Parliament have the discretion to resolve on this matter. The new Parliament should have the mandate to resolve this matter the way we did it here in this Ninth Parliament. Otherwise, for us to tie them to this kind of work will not be fair. Yes, we have chosen to retrieve the work of the Eighth Parliament, but that was done on our own will. That is why we are moving on very well. I would like to move that we don’t impose that work on the new Parliament and we don’t have to put this in our rules.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Chair. I think this rule is in good faith. It is also administrative. The experience we had in the Eighth Parliament, especially towards its expiry, there were a number of Bills that had been pending. So, I would want us to think that this will cure the big burden likely to fall on the Executive to relay such Bills on Table. Saving this work is a good transitional arrangement. 

However, as we look at rule 94, I would like to suggest that we read it together with rule 95. The reason is that yes, we might pronounce ourselves on rule 94 yet, in my opinion, rule 95 contradicts its intentions. This rule stresses the fact that a Bill, petition or motion, tabled during a session of Parliament, lapses upon dissolution of that Parliament. May I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee on that?

Otherwise, I would like to say that the intentions of rule 94 are good. As I said before, they are administrative, to help the next Parliament have something to start with. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When you read rule 95, you realise that there is no need for rule 94 to exist. That rule 95 captures everything including what should have been in the committee. However, I would like to say this. You will recall that a few months ago, we were faced with this scenario when the House tried to resurrect the business that had lapsed, yet we did not have any rule(s) to cater for that. In fact, the Speaker at that time just tried to rely on the practice of Commonwealth parliaments, borrowing something from the Canadian Parliament.

But as it is now, there is no rule that allows us to resurrect lapsed business. So, we cannot talk of saving business because the previous Parliament automatically lapses. What the committee is providing for under rule 95 is sufficient. We only need to redraft it – no, actually, we need to have paragraph (2), which is just permissive, allowing the current Parliament to retrieve the pending Bills and so on – just being permissive. 

If we redraft rules 91 and 92, then we will not need rule 94, in my view. I am saying this because it will give the new Parliament the discretion to determine whether there is any unconcluded business to be saved from the previous Parliament.  But I think we need to indicate that that should be done with reason. We should not talk of an automatic saving because some of that unconcluded business could be useless to the current Parliament. I think we need to redraft rule 94 to get that expression properly crafted.

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over the discussions in respect of rule 94 and sort out rule 95. If we sort out rule 95, I may have to withdraw rule 94; it is broader.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I really support rule 94 as proposed because the institution of Parliament is one. Yes, there are terms for Members of Parliament. You may have served three or four terms, but essentially, you are serving one institution. So, for us to break the work of the House just because terms of Members of Parliament have changed, does not make sense to me So, I thought, unless –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, my brother, for yielding the Floor. The information I would like to give is that we should not look at this as only being about the institution of Parliament. You need to realise that there is usually a new Government after every five years. You may have a second, third NRM or whatever it may be, but that will be a new Government.

But also, you need to realise the fact that you could have a situation where the new Government is actually not NRM. So, will you say that whatever was decided by the previous Government should automatically become part of the current Government? What we need to do - in my view and really I ask you to look at it that way – is to recognise the fact that we are not only talking about a new Parliament, but also about a new Government. You need to also recognise the fact that every Parliament comes with a new Government. (Mr Kiyingi rose_) You can’t give information when I am also giving information. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi, that is the rule.

Mr Chairman, that is the information I wanted to give to hon. Adolf Mwesige. It is not only about a new Parliament, it is also about a new Government being in place with a different mandate, which could actually contradict the mandate and the business of the previous Parliament. What we need is the permissiveness of the new Government for it to have the leeway to take only whatever it chooses.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, under normal circumstances, the new Government should continue with the work done by the old one, unless –(Interjections)– yes! So, the continuation of the work should be automatic unless the new Government or Parliament has reason to review it. But for us to say that whatever the old Government did should lapse with the end of that Government, I don’t think we would be building good institutions.

So, the work of the old Parliament should continue, but can be reviewed or even reversed by the new Government. It shouldn’t be for the new Government or Parliament to declare null and void whatever happened in the old Government, whether good or bad.

So, for me, this amendment is good. I do not find merit in rule 95, but we can discuss it. If the chairman wants us to look at it again, it is up to him, but I fully support the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, which one is the rule? Upon dissolution of Parliament, not prorogation; like the Eighth Parliament was dissolved. Now, upon dissolution of Parliament, is there a Parliament? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] There is no Parliament. If Parliament is dissolved, there is no Parliament. Then what happens? You inaugurate a new Parliament. How do you transit into the new government? I think this is the point we are making. Are we saying the rule is that the things that are pending with a particular Parliament, when it is dissolved, its business is dissolved with it - I am trying to break it down. In which case, if it is so, then the new Parliament will have its prerogative to take over relevant business from the Parliament that has been dissolved. Because you don’t have a situation where there are two parliaments sitting, and then you just turn the other side and then you are in the other Parliament. The other one is dissolved, even if it is in a space of one minute. So, which is the rule? If the rule is that the work goes with that Parliament, which is dissolved - so, what we are trying to keep is an exception to that rule. How do we create that exception?   

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I thought the chairman of the committee made a very reasonable request. That in light of the apparent solution to the problem that is being sought under 94 and 95, well considered and possibly even modified, could actually cater for both situations. Couldn’t we accede to his request that we look at 95 and once we adopt it, we see whether there is still need for 94, because it sounded very reasonable to me? I don’t see any problem with that procedure. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if I knew that was what you were going to say, I would not have allowed you. (Laughter)

Honourable members, my immediate reaction notwithstanding, it might be appropriate for us to look at it again so that we recast and move forward in a more unified way. (Ms Akol rose_) I have already stood over the matter. So, you want to discuss it when it is stood over?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I am only seeking guidance, that as you stand over it, I also want Members to go with this in mind. The budget process normally straddles the parliamentary terms. As you go and think over this, we have to be mindful of the fact that normally by the time Parliament is dissolved, we are half way the budget process. By the time we resume, we are actually resuming and taking on what the previous Parliament presented and now concluding in the new Parliament. So, when we are providing for this rule, let’s think over that process. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Mr Chairman, I know you have ruled that we stand over this, but I still want to comment on it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Baba Diri, you are ruled out of order. (Laughter) Please resume your sit.

Hon. Members, before we go to the appendix, we move back to rule 11.

Rule 11

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, Rule 11: “Election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly.” Our proposals are as follows:

"1.	The nine Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament, not from among Members of Parliament, representing as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda. 

2.	The election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly shall be held in accordance with the rules set out in appendix (b) to these rules.

3.	Members of the Assembly shall report to Parliament on the activities of the Assembly in accordance with appendix (c)”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee. It is not the original proposal. The original proposal that was contained in the attachment to the report has been modified as a result of the standing over we did the first time. They went and sat and came back with this redrafting. So, what we are seeing is not the original text that was presented to the House, which was given to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when he asked for a stand over to look at it. It was circulated even on that day. 

Honourable members, this document was circulated and I remember the day when we stood over it, the Prime Minister said, “We have just received it; we need to go and look at it.” It was circulated. That was last week. A few days have since passed. Unless honourable members are saying they don’t have copies. I see honourable members with copies. So, how do we proceed with this?

MS KABAALE: Thank you. Well aware that the other time we got copies and we stood over this matter, we cannot again bring those old copies when the chair has modified the information. Can we please get that modified information before we take a decision? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the one that was redrafted. 

MS KABAALE: Mr Chairman, it is different. I am looking at yours, but it is different. The one we had was numbered and the one you have is not numbered.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is numbered; you are a distance away and I doubt whether you can see my numbering here.  
MS KABAALE: We would like to get on board with the wording of the moderation. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are they different? Okay, then we stand over this once again. Members, do we have the copies? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am aware that the institution of Parliament under your leadership has one of the best photocopying machines that can take only three minutes and we all have copies. So, may I request through you that the necessary action is taken? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I rise to propose that while copies are being prepared for that modified amendment, we go to the next one, which we may have carried out consultations on and have not modified, so that we come back to it later.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How many clauses did we stand over? Honourable members, we have stood over rule 11, East African Legislative Assembly; rule 12, Pan-African Parliament; rule 139; rule 141; rule 146; and rule 152. So, can we go to rule 134? There was a proposed amendment that was stood over. Can we go to the one on the Committee on Appointments, Mr Chairman?  

Rule 139

MR ODOI: Mr Chair, our proposal is that we delete sub-rule (2) and the justification is for transparency and to have the committee meetings open to the press and members of the public. This will safeguard against suspicion and misrepresentation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we had long discussions on this matter and the Prime Minister requested that we stand over this matter as there were difficulties in resolving it at that time. Are we going to have any more discussions on it or I put the question? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Chairman, we have once again looked at this on this side and we think there is a very strong case for maintaining the status quo -(Interjections)- you think we don’t think so? The position is this; the Appointments Committee of Parliament handles appointments of ministers, judges, commissioners to constitutional commissions and many other people. Now, some of these, as I said last time, if it was me, for example, or even hon. Ssemujju –(Laughter)– in the unlikely event, it may make sense. But you know, not all these appointments want to be subjected to public scrutiny. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, who gave way and the clarification is that he was referring to him – I understand the hon. Amama Mbabazi and a one Ssemujju. So, I was wondering which Ssemujju it is just to contextualise the argument of the Prime Minister. I am quite aware of hon. Ssemujju Nganda, the one who sits in this House; is it the same and one that the Prime Minister wants to refer to as “Ssemujju?” I just want that clarification so that I can follow the Prime Minister accurately. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My friend and honourable colleague, Alice Alaso, there are many Ssemujjus. (Laughter)  So, Mr Chairman, really, when you look at it, there are many people who will be happy to serve in many of these places where the appointment is by the President with the approval of Parliament, who wouldn’t want to subject themselves to public scrutiny. For instance, you know what we do here. So, you are going to limit the choice of the President because it is really not necessary. When we debated this - as I said, in 1996, we had a similar debate, which was very strong and there were those who felt that we should follow the American style that appointments should be subjected to public scrutiny and so on.

On serious consideration of our country and conditions, we thought we could entrust a committee of Parliament with the responsibility to carry out this scrutiny and take decisions as they have done consistently since then and successfully. Our proposal, therefore, is that we should maintain the status quo, have the President present his nominees to the Appointments Committee, let them appear there, let the Appointments Committee go into every detail and the decision be made there in a closed session.

If there is any reason to appeal - I think we even have an arrangement under the present rules to appeal to the Whole House. If that happens and this particular individual does not wish to subject himself or herself, because in the House here, it is open and you know what happens - then they are free even to withdraw, but to say that every appointment by the President must be subjected to that is not fair. I want to give way to hon. Ekanya.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable members, before hon. Ekanya comes, the standard rule of the proceedings of this Parliament is that it is open. We only create exceptions to it and that is a standard rule. I have not heard anywhere in the world where parliamentary proceedings are held in secret as a rule. They create exceptions and those exceptions have to be justifiable. If it is presented, this House will sit in a closed session and yet it is an open Parliament.

The same extends to the committees of this House. All committees of Parliament are open to the public as of rule but exceptions can be created where circumstances so require that such hearings or the meeting be conducted in camera. Reasons can be cited. Even courts of law are open places, but circumstances can be created where the evidence of a particular witness can be heard in camera. 

Is it, therefore, possible for us to consider making the rule for every committee of Parliament open and then we create exceptions? Even in the Appointments Committee and against all rules, we had to make this from the perspective of the presiding officers. If there are such categories of people who would not like to be tormented by the appearance of many eyes and many mouths, then an application can be made to the Appointments Committee for them to be heard in a closed session of the Appointments Committee, but the general rule should be that it is open because there is no constitutional restriction or other restriction. That is why we are saying if you want, you can create the exceptions in the rules that under these circumstances, this particular one will be in closed session. That is what I would suggest to the Members to consider.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for your guidance and I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. I am having legal problems and I need the Prime Minister to guide me. Article 90 of the Constitution reads, “1) Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.

2. Parliament shall, by its rules of procedure, prescribe the power, composition and function of its committees.”

The word is, “committees”. If it was committee and then (s) you would say exceptions of some committees. This is English. That means that you would have exceptions for a given committee and then for other committees you could have different terms and conditions, but the word is, “committees” which means all committees of Parliament are equal just like all Members of Parliament are equal. There is no big MP, there is no small MP. We all have the same rights, but we can be assigned responsibilities. One person can be a shadow minister and another a Prime Minister.

So, the clarification I am seeking is, in this constitutional provision, don’t you think that if we really make exception for the Appointments Committee, it would really be unconstitutional?

The Prime Minister also needs to educate me. I, Ekanya, Member of Parliament representing Tororo County, and him representing the people of Kanungu, can be denied access to the Appointments Committee. That is my point of contention. Even Members of Parliament are barred. I can attend all committees, colleagues of Parliament, but one day you try to go and you want to just listen to the proceedings of the Appointments Committee, a policeman, the Sergeant-at-Arms, will tell you that you are not allowed. Do we have the right of representation? Therefore, don’t you think our right of representation as regards our role here is being infringed on? 

The final clarification I seek is, the current rule says a member during a proceeding can move a motion that a proceeding of a committee be handled in camera. I have been a chairperson of a committee and we had witnesses. One witness requested for this; I put the question to vote and Members agreed. Even in this Parliament in the past, a motion was moved and we had a proceeding in a closed session. Therefore, I want to find out - don’t you think we have adequate provision to cater for your interest so that it now becomes necessary to delete 2 and we have a fair rule that is constitutional?

MR KATUNTU: I am seeking clarification. Mr Chairman, at the appropriate time, I will make a substantive contribution, but I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister if he has addressed himself to rule 204. For colleagues who may not have the rules with them, rule 204 says, “Any Member may, without notice, at any time for the purposes of enabling any matter to be debated in the absence of strangers, rise and move that strangers do withdraw. If that motion is seconded, the Speaker or Chairperson shall put the question on it immediately without amendment or debate.” 

So, in circumstances where the Prime Minister is saying there could be other people who may not be comfortable with their issues or appointments being discussed in public, they could take advantage under our present rule 204 to have their debate in camera. As you can see, if it is the House, then the decision is for the entire House, and if it is the committee, then the decision is for the entire committee. That is if there are no adequate reasons given, but to have a blanket one that, “because you see, it is not about a job; it is not about a certain Katuntu being appointed a minister.” But that office is a public office and the public is entitled to know who this Katuntu is. Why should one just walk in and walk out when one is a minister? That office is not even the President’s office; it is a public office. And I would like to caution our colleagues who have been going through these appointments –(Interjections)– I get the point. This is a public office, but should necessity arise, then that can be cured under rule 204, without a blanket closure of the public from knowing how a person who has been appointed the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs –(Interjections)– no, I was looking this side and not that way -(Laughter)- whether they actually deserve this office. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The Prime Minister said that there are many people who want to serve in these positions, but may not want to go through this kind of scrutiny publicly. The clarification I am seeking is whether he has now established for a fact that there are fewer people who want to be prime minister, speaker and deputy speaker or vice-president? Such that for those offices, we can come here and debate, but for the ministers, since they do not want to be the above, we can close. 

The second clarification concerns what the Prime Minister meant by saying “this side”. I do not know whether he meant Cabinet or the ruling party. If he did mean either, did he also consider, when he came to that conclusion, that some of the Members who were elected from various constituencies will need to be updated and monitor their activities here, unless they are ex-officio. But part of your side consists of people who were elected and their electorate would want to take advantage of their presence here to monitor these processes.

Finally, the other clarification is whether you do not think this committee can benefit from information available, not to the committee, but to the public, especially if it is conducting this vetting publicly. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Starting with my good friend, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju –(Laughter)– may I use this opportunity to welcome to Parliament this afternoon, the Congolese. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is very clear as to who can be a Member of Parliament and who cannot. We have laws in this country which also define citizenship. Furthermore, when you look at the various migrations, we know that there are those who originated from Burundi –(Laughter)– and came as missionaries and were attached to Mpororo Church of Uganda in Rukiga County, but with time we no longer regard them as Barundi – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is your point of order?

MR WADRI: I am coming to that, Mr Chairman. It has to be with a foundation, Mr Chairman -(Laughter)- ever since they came as missionaries, we have since forgotten about their roots. They are now here as citizens and nationalists and we look at them as Ugandans. And in no way can I – maybe having proximity to Congo by virtue of coming from Arua – but the migration of the Luo is very clear – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member -

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I am coming to the point – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please raise the order.

MR WADRI: Please, I am coming to the order. It is a well known historical fact that the Luo migrated from the Sudan and I am their descendant. Is my brother, John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, who was even convicted and sentenced to death for deserting the NRA while in the bush and named “karya-sausage” instead of “karya-buro” when he became the collector of money –(Laughter)– is he in order to time and time again impute ill-motives directly or indirectly referring to me as originating from Congo? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have a saying in Acholi that when you find a group of dogs playing around and you throw a stone at them, the one that yells is the one that has been hit by the stone. I listened carefully to the Prime Minister’s statement when he welcomed the Congolese in the House – and this House includes the galleries – I looked up and saw some people up -(Laughter)- I do not know if they are Congolese or not – (Laughter)- so, unless the Prime Minister can substantiate where the Congolese is seated, I am unable to rule. (Laughter) Please substantiate. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But, Mr Chairman, in light of that great Luo saying, that when you have a group of dogs and you throw a stone, the one that yells is the one which has been hit by the stone -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question on making the Appointments Committee open. That is the proposal by the committee. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I think we need to get the gist of the actual amendment. Is the amendment that proceedings of the Appointments Committee be open to the press and the public or – (Interjections)- yeah, let us get the gist then we can pronounce ourselves properly -(Interjections)- no, there are exceptions. Committees differ in the nature of their work and so you cannot just open up every committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, may we move forward? There are other sub-rules on this. Can we receive the issues on all of them then vote one by one? Oh yes, the issue is if we decide on the deletion of sub-rule (2) then the proposed phrasing of what appears now as (3), “publication of names for approval”, would be redundant. Even the whole lot, the proposed 141, 144 would be redundant. So, that means we can –(Interjections)- let me hear from hon. Magyezi then I come to you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking your guidance on the constitutional implications of this particular matter we are examining. Is the status quo, whereby the vetting and approval of the ministers is closed and is under the Appointments Committee, and whereby the report of the committee presented to Parliament is not subject to debate, consistent with Article 113(1) of our Constitution, whereby this power is reserved for Parliament? “Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament....” It does not say, “...with the approval of a parliamentary committee.” Mr Chairman are we being constituent with our Constitution?  

MR KATUNTU: And I think I just want to -(Interjections)–clarifications.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, actually, I will begin with his. Hon. Katuntu’s answer was rule 204; withdrawal of strangers where the rules permit any Member to move a motion that strangers withdraw and that that would be put to vote without debate. But strangers means a person other than the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, the Speaker, a minister, a Member or an officer of the House. Those who are not on that list are the strangers. 

Once the Appointments Committee - the present rule we are seeking to amend is saying that the Appointments Committee will hold its meetings when it is approving appointments of the President in closed session. So, it will be only the Appointments Committee in sitting.

Hon. Magyezi and hon. Ekanya have asked whether this is constitutional and the answer is, yes. Of course it is. Why? Because under Article 90, Parliament is permitted by the Constitution to make Rules of Procedure to prescribe how it functions through committees and so on. So, when we pass these rules. It is under the authority of the Constitution itself - (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Parliament is empowered and correct, under Article 90, to make Rules of Procedure. But it is not authorised to make any rule especially one that can infringe on other provisions of the Constitution. For example, the Constitution says that Parliament shall approve, and when you look at the interpretation section, Parliament is defined. If you have the Constitution, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Parliament is defined under Article 257,  “Interpretation”, as, “Parliament means the Parliament of Uganda,” and not its committees. Parliament of Uganda is clearly, “Parliament of Uganda”. A committee of Parliament is not Parliament of Uganda -(Interjections)- that is why –(Interjections)- listen. And you see, we do not have to be selfish on this, because we think when we are going through this committee, we do not want to be exposed. I see the potential people going through the committee are the ones trying to close it and it is not correct -(Interjections)– no.

So, Mr Chairman, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order, therefore, to say and mislead this House that under Article 90 you can make any rule including that which is clearly contradicting other provisions of the Constitution?   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to trace the distinctions. It might help us. Article 108(2) says, “The President shall, with the approval of Parliament, by a simple majority, appoint a Vice President.” Look at 108(a), “Prime Minister: There shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority...”   

If you look at 113(1), the language changes - “Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament.” The simple majority bit is dropped from the appointment of the Vice-President and the appointment of the Prime Minister. That is what is dropped, but the approval is by Parliament in accordance with the Constitution and the rules it has made to facilitate that process. 

When is an appointment approved by Parliament? When is it deemed to have been approved by Parliament? Maybe you give your answer.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I am very grateful that you have given me this opportunity to give my humble opinion in the course of your ruling. 

First of all, I go back to the provisions which you read. It is not by accident that the Constitution itself has set different standards when approving the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and ministers. The standards are different. For the Vice-President and for the Prime Minister, the numbers are very clear. For the ministers, Parliament shall approve; there are no numbers fixed. Implicit in that provision is that Parliament can, through its Rules of Procedure, work out a mechanism of handling presidential appointments. 

Article 90 (2) says, “Parliament shall, by its rules of procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.” These are committees, including the Appointments Committee. These Rules of Procedure, as you said yesterday, are made under the Constitution. Now, it is not unconstitutional, in my view, for Parliament in its wisdom to assign one of its committees the power and function to approve presidential appointments on its behalf. This is what the Appointments Committee has done since the 1995 Constitution was promulgated. 

To say otherwise would mean that all the presidential appointments that have gone through the Appointments Committee as constituted in the past are null and void, including this Cabinet. That cannot have been the intention. To rule that way would mean that all those appointments have been done and approved in a wrong way - (Interjections) - No, it is not blackmail. I know it can be cured but clearly, that would fault the wisdom of the past parliaments in which we have served. I thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me a slot.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was in the process of making my ruling and the rules allow me to consult. What is distinguished between the appointment of the Vice-President and the appointment of the Prime Minister is that it is by simple majority. A simple majority by implication means it has to be by the House, but the principle of not being open is not captured in this. It is this same principle that is transferred to the appointment of Cabinet ministers. Even if we said it should be by committee, the principle that it is open is transferred there. What is delegated is the function that is not by simple majority, so a committee can handle it. 

What is not stated, and what is not regulated, is that the appointment of the Vice-President and the appointment of the Prime Minister is in open Parliament - the approval is in open Parliament - and that openness, by implication, is transferred to the committee. How can we then invent a restriction on the process of a transparent approval otherwise provided for in the Constitution and bring it at the stage of the committee? That is what you are battling with. That is the issue we are battling with.

Should we, therefore, in the circumstances proceed under the general principle of the conduct of business of the House of Parliament, which is always in the open except when it is raised that it should be in camera? – [Hon. Member: “204”] - Not necessarily 204 because with 204, in the Appointments Committee even Members of Parliament are strangers. That is the complication we are running into – (Interjections) - I am ruling now; you want to contribute to my ruling?  

Honourable members, the issue was raised whether the Rt hon. Prime Minister was in order to indicate in his submissions that rule 90 has the implications that he had proposed. The implications he referred to are that parliamentary committees will have those functions and powers regulated and that anything done under the authority of Article 90 is okay, even if it is in conflict with the other provision of the Constitution. 

My simple ruling is this – (Interjection) - I am supposed to get the opinion from the person against whom I am supposed to rule? (Laughter) My ruling is, therefore, that the spirit incorporated in the articles for the appointment of the Vice-President, appointment of the Prime Minister - the openness of it - is transferable to the appointment and approval held by the Appointments Committee. (Applause)

MR MWESIGE: I am not protesting your ruling, Mr Chairman, but your ruling has narrowed the issues. We are now very clear that it is constitutional and in order for a committee of Parliament to vet presidential appointments on behalf of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is correct.

MR MWESIGE: That is recorded. The second point is that the manner in which this committee handles presidential appointments should be open but exceptions can be created.

Point number three is that it is not proper, if I got you right, for sitting Members of Parliament other than members of the Appointments Committee to be excluded from the proceedings of the Appointments Committee, and on that I agree with you. I certainly agree that I, the Member of Parliament for Bunyangabu County, should be permitted to attend the proceedings of the Appointments Committee, however I will not vote. That one, I will agree.

I suggest that having agreed that the Appointments Committee can do the job on behalf of the House, we can create a general rule here, and I think that is permissible, that the proceedings of the Appointments Committee, which all Members of Parliament will have the right to access, should be closed. (Interjections) Yes, it is possible for us in our rules to create that exception. It is permissible for reasons which the Prime Minister has already given.

MS BUSINGE-RUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is still within the mandate of Parliament in this case to maintain the status quo. When you refer to Article 94 it states clearly: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees.” In which case, if you wish to maintain the status quo, you better put the question. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question. The proposal from the committee is that we delete the current sub-rule (2) of Rule 139 of our Rules of Procedure, which is to the effect that, “The proceedings of the Appointments Committee shall be closed.” I put the question that sub-rule (2) of Rule 139 be deleted. 

Honourable members, I am going to ask, through the powers of the Speaker, that this vote be taken by division. Can we have the division bells rung and the lobbies of the House cleared so that we vote by division. Division is ordered by the Speaker and you do not need a motion. I am authorised under rule 85. I have ruled that we will conduct this vote by division and then the House will proceed accordingly.

Division will be by lobby divisions. Sergeant-at-Arms, clear the lobby. Those who will be voting for “aye” will go on this side. Those who will be saying “nay” should go this side. There are two divisions. Those who are against the deletion of sub-rule (2) should go on this side of the lobby. Those who are for the deletion should go on this side - the left lobby. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who are abstaining will remain in the Chamber. 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered proposed amendments to rules 192 to 199 and adopted them with amendments. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What of the latest one for which a division vote has been ordered?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: And that a deletion vote has been ordered on rule 139(2) by division lobby.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is suspended for 15 minutes to allow division vote.

(The House was suspended at 5.55 p.m.)

(On resumption at 6.14 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion we are deciding is for and against, and those for deletion should be in the right lobby. This is for voting purposes and not for any other purpose. Those in favour of the deletion go on my right and those in favour of the status quo go to my left lobby. It is not crossing. This is for voting purposes. Let us do it properly.  

(Members voted by division lobby.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, how far have we gone? Honourable members, I ordered for a vote on the motion for the deletion of sub-rule (2) of rule 139 by division lobby and the results are as follows: Those for the deletion are 37 and those against it are 99. The total votes cast are 136 and there are no abstentions. So the “nays” have it. (Applause)

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

7.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the whole House for consideration of the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 139

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, all the proposed amendments were consequential to the first one. So I withdraw the proposed amendments of the new sub-rules contained under rule 139. We also withdraw the proposed amendments contained under rules 141 and 146. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I still have a problem. First of all, I remember that hon. Adolf Mwesige had raised a point before we went to vote. I do not know whether that was a Government position; he can clarify. He said that he has no problem with other Members of Parliament participating in the proceedings of the Appointments Committee. That being the case, I would like to say that legally, it is not correct to lock out Members of Parliament from a parliament committee. I want to be on record on that. So, if these rules are going to restrict Members of Parliament from participating in committee work, then they will infringe on the Constitution. (Interjection) Just listen to me. You may disagree and it is your right, but you need to listen to the other viewpoint. 

You see, I just want us to do the correct thing. If the Prime Minister does not want to do the correct thing, that is his business. As for me, I am saying that what we are doing is infringing on the Constitution. So, you cannot tell me that I should keep quiet when the Constitution is being infringed. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, is hon. Katuntu in order to take us back to the general debate? We are now at committee stage and considering specific proposals. You gave your ruling very clearly on this matter and its meaning is obvious. All we voted on was whether the work of the Appointments Committee should be open or closed. We have voted that it should be closed. If he has an amendment to make, he is entitled to do it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the point raised by hon. Katuntu touches on a big question of whether a closed sitting of the committee means it is closed to the Members of Parliament. A closed session, in the understanding of the Chair, is that it asks for clearance of the House, and you clear strangers. For purposes of a committee, is a Member of Parliament who is not a member of that committee a stranger? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the Member of Parliament is not a stranger to any proceedings of this House, then what has been happening has been in error. The implication, therefore, is that meetings of the Appointments Committee are open to all Members of Parliament. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: With that ruling and guidance, I thank the Chair for clarifying that what has been happening has been in error. Since the Chairman has given that clarification and therefore corrected the error, my concerns are answered. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are happy that the concerns of hon. Katuntu have been cleared. Mine is about the same. The Constitution is very clear in saying: “Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” Parliament is not a committee. Even if we assign committee work, it must come back here and Parliament is the one to clear. 

Mr Chairman, this can become a constitutional matter whereby the Appointments Committee approves on behalf of Parliament. There is no way a committee of Parliament can become Parliament. We may not reopen debate here but I want us - the Prime Minister can look at it – to look at rule 141. Even the one we have passed is open to challenge because it is not following the Constitution. So, Mr Chairman, is a committee of Parliament, Parliament? 

TEH DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I made that statement earlier. I do not want to repeat myself. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This House stood over an amendment I presented last week and maybe just for the refreshment of the members who were here, let me read it again. The amendment is to insert a new rule to read, “Save for the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition chief whip- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure. When the House came to the Committee of the whole House, we were moving orderly on provisions that were stood over. It is not only one; there are several others including EALA. There are about seven. So, is it procedurally right now to allow members to handpick their priorities as opposed to the system which we have been following, where the chairman of the committee moves in the order through all the amendments we stood over?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This was one of the amendments stood over. I do not know whether it would be the chairman to move it since it was not moved by the chair. We stood over it as the House, so is it the chair to bring it or the mover of the amendment? We can just propose that we do it that way, but I do not think the honourable member has breached any procedural issue here. If the agreement is that we first finish with what is –

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I consulted with the chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the proposal is that we deal with the ones that were stood over from the committee, then it would be okay, and then we move to hon. Amongi’s proposal or amendment. But there is no problem. So, are we now going to rule 11?

Rule 11
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the subtitle is, “Election of members to the East African Legislative Assembly.” Rule 11: “(1) The nine members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament not from among Members of Parliament, representing as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups of Uganda;

(2) The election of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly shall be held in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix B to these rules; 

(3) Members of the Assembly shall report to Parliament on the activities of the Assembly in accordance with Appendix C.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the proposals from the committee. Are there any discussions on this? Honourable chair, where is Appendix C? It is in the rules - “Procedure for Members of the East African Legislative Assembly to submit reports to Parliament.” 

Honourable members, hon. Ekanya asked how the members of the East African Legislative Assembly who are ordinary strangers to this House can report to this House. Is that the question?

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The appendix is there but honourable members, maybe we should go back to some of the Commonwealth practices and procedures that sometimes are not actually contained in the rules. The question is: can strangers address Parliament? The answer is “yes”. How do they address Parliament? How can strangers address Parliament and go on the record of Parliament? In the practice of the Commonwealth, strangers address Parliament from the bar. I will ask the Sergeant-At-Arms to demonstrate how the bar is set. 

In the practice of the Commonwealth, when those bars are drawn, whoever is beyond those bars is considered a stranger and they have access to address Parliament through that microphone which is in the bar, and the statements they make there go straight in the official record of Parliament. That is the easiest way you can have all the nine members of the East African Legislative Assembly sitting at the bar and they can even take turns addressing Members of Parliament, and they can even interrupt across. 

They enter through the Speaker’s door with the authority of the Speaker. At the right moment, the Speaker will allow and they will bring the strangers in and then the door will be opened for the strangers to come and address Parliament. That is the Commonwealth practice. So, that is the easiest way for members of the East African Legislative Assembly to address this House. You can now withdraw the bar, Sergeant-At-Arms. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that clarification. If it is going to be the wisdom of this House, based on your guidance, to have strangers address Parliament, I think it would have been prudent not only to limit the strangers to the East African Legislative Assembly. This is because some of us have other strangers in future or in the past that we would have wished to address Parliament. 

Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, for example, was the chairperson of the Security Council and assuming he was not a Member of Parliament -(Interjections)- I have been told he was not a Member of Parliament by the time Uganda was chairing the Security Council. You know our role in regional peace and security. It should be a rule of Parliament, I think, to allow Ugandans of that stature also to address Parliament. Therefore, I am seeking clarification; don’t you think it is better to widen the strangers and not only limit them to East African Members of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was just giving guidance because the question was: can a stranger address Parliament? That is the answer I was giving. A stranger is a stranger by whatever description.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the proposals of the committee, they had recommended that there should be a Committee on East African Community. The purpose was to actually solve this issue of members of EALA being strangers and being unable to present reports directly to the House but being able to present through that Committee on East Africa.
 
Now that we have taken this position, and I believe that committee was formed - (Interjections) - It was rejected? Fine. That day, I remember I was on other parliamentary duties and I did not attend but I presented. (Laughter) For sure, I was on duty. If this is the position, then that is fine. If the committee was not formed, then that is okay. We can have them address us through that arrangement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why those things are there. They are not decorations. The President is within the Constitution.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, of course, anyone who is not a Member of Parliament is now a stranger. It is just a matter of formalities whether they should address Parliament or not, just like the Queen came and addressed Parliament although that time from this other side.

I was wondering, what would be the value of having Members of the East African Parliament coming to stand there, present a lecture and then it is one way and then they go away. I do not think you can ask for clarification or procedure, in my understanding. However, when they present to the Committee on Presidential Affairs, for example, it can attract further questions and further investigations before a committee can formally present on the Floor of this House. 

So, I would see that having strangers stand there may not add value, unless they are really ceremonial strangers like the Queen where you do not have to question them, they come and only give presentations, or you can have the First Lady if she was not a Member of Parliament. There may be need to come and address Parliament on important issues, but I see that the point of having someone to come with a paper, read it there for two hours and then go away without me even asking clarification would not serve any purpose. 

They would rather go to the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs and then the committee can even travel to places in their recommendations like border points, customs unions and then come and present a formal report before Parliament. Mr Chairman, that is what I would strongly submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no prohibition to interact with the stranger who has been allowed the authority to address Parliament. There is no prohibition. You can have a discussion. Actually, what they say is that getting it from the horse’s mouth might be better for this House than through a committee when it comes. This is because when they finish, then the House can decide that the details should be sent to an appropriate committee.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, in the circumstances, I would personally have no problem whatsoever with Members of EALA addressing Parliament in the manner you have just explained. It would actually do no harm. It saves a lot other than us meeting them in the canteen over lunch and getting emails every other day. I would really support that idea.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With that guidance from you, shouldn’t this House proceed to amend Appendix C? This is because under Appendix C, the only option for the EALA members to present their reports is through the Committee of Foreign Affairs. So, I am seeking guidance on whether we should then amend to now include the option of them presenting directly to the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When we come to deal with the appendices, then that would happen. Now we are still dealing with the principle provisions of the rules. At the appropriate time, that would be the matter. Are we together on that this?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairman, I remember before we stood over this rule 11, I had asked something from the chairperson about this sub rule (1), when we talked about the shades of opinion in the House. When we talk about shades of opinion in the House, my understanding comes directly to the members who are independent. To the best of my knowledge - I may not be right; I need to be guided - each independent member has a shade of opinion in his or her own capacity. I do not know whether this House is coming out to say they are now a shade of opinion as Independents or one opinion. I want to be guided on this, Mr Chairman.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My submission is an amendment. If I am allowed, I will submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kiwanda rose on a point of guidance and he has raised the issue of Independents and whether all the Independents in the House are different shades of opinion. The issue is: do you have provisions for members to run independent of political parties? Do you have constitutional provisions to that effect? If you have constitutional provisions to that effect, then you can only recognise them. 

It is not about how many of them are in the House. You are not going to elect from Members of Parliament; you are electing from outside Parliament. The people who are coming and showing up as Independents are coming from outside Parliament. So, are you going to give them space to participate in the process of the elections, be considered, voted or whatever? I think that is the issue. It is not whether 40 Independent Members of Parliament form 40 shades of opinion. No, it is not about that. 

The other provision in the Treaty is on the various political parties represented in the House. Those are other qualifications. Several other qualifications are in the Treaty. So, are we together now?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairman, it is very clear; somebody comes from out and says, “I am not from any political party but I am standing to be part of the East African Parliament as an Independent -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I am standing independent of any political party.

MR KIWANDA: So, this means that we can have as many members as possible contest for this slot because there are no primaries for it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Precisely. The House will have to decide if the provision is there. 

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to submit an amendment to the proposal by the committee. When you look at this amendment which talks about taking into consideration gender, youth and persons with disabilities, there is at times a risk of losing what we have already stated in some of the related laws. I would like to submit that when it comes to amending this rule, we put a specific provision that at least one third of the members - that means they can be even nine - shall be women. This is because if you leave it the way it is, that it should take into consideration gender, there is a likelihood that gender may not be reflected completely and there is no way you will recall the election which will have taken place. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will offend the Treaty because it is here. If, for example, you decide that matters should be decided by smaller groups before they are brought to the House, those smaller groups must take gender issues into consideration. It is as easy as that. Honourable member, are you okay now?

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, I had given way for information so that I can summarise and justify why I am making this proposal. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give my sister is that yesterday, this House overwhelmingly adopted at least 40 per cent, which is already part of the rules. So, we will request the parties to abide by the rules we passed yesterday.

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, if that was the agreement, most obliged. Thank you. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am still seeking further clarification on the issue of independents. I know, according to this draft proposed rule, the different parties are going to give nominations, especially the Government side and the Opposition. Should someone participate in party primaries and lose, would such a person be considered on the Floor of Parliament as an independent candidate if he came? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is a pertinent issue. You remember in the Seventh Parliament that provision was sought to be put into the Constitution. I was chairing the process then and the debate was that if somebody participates in the primaries or a political party, that person does not qualify to stand as an independent, but it was defeated. 

The argument then was that we still have a very fragile multi-party system. The internal democracy rules are still suspect. Are we going to close people out the minute they participate? The House that time was very careful about it. It said, supposing you have senior members of your party who do not like you but your people like you and you go and participate in the primaries and they do something and you lose, which was likely to happen. That was the fear then and that is why it was not put into the Constitution, but the proposal was made. 

Now it is here for reconsideration. For this specific purpose, would this House – this is the point raised by the hon. Todwong – deem it proper for a person who has contested in the FDC caucus, in the NRM caucus or any other caucuses and lost to show up at the bar to campaign to the House directly, standing independent of a political party? Would that be proper? I think that is a legitimate question. 

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, I have some guidance to seek. Before I seek that guidance, my opinion on the issue raised by hon. Todwong is that today if I am in NRM, a few minutes from now I should be able to leave NRM if I wish. I should not be conscripted into NRM because I participated in their activities three hours back. Therefore, honourable members who participated in NRM primaries or FDC primaries yesterday should be able to return our card or their card today and proceed as independents. It is a human right. We should not be conscripted into parties by law. (Interjections) That is my opinion. Doing anything beyond that would be conscripting people into parties, which is unconstitutional. 

Mr Chairman, the guidance I wanted to seek is on number 1, part 1, where we say “parties represented in the House”. Up to that extent, I agree. Now, on shades of opinion, we are talking about the Independents. The Independents in this House do not represent the Independents out there. For that matter, the guidance I am seeking is: if we are going to create a slot which is not going to be for the political parties in this House - because we are talking about nine slots and I saw in the appendix a slot that is not going to be for political parties represented in the House - is it possible that candidates out there can come as Independents but also members can come from political parties not represented here to compete for that slot? Leaving it for Independents would mean we are ring-fencing it for Independents as if the ones here represent the ones out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Article 72(4) is fairly clear. This is what it says, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party.” Any person is free to stand independent of a political organisation or political party. That is what the Constitution says.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, to that extent it is very clear. This position, which we are going to preserve, will be competed for by those who are free to come as independents of any other political party and also by those who are members of political parties which are not in this House. The People’s Development Party, for example, are not represented here but they can come and compete under that slot -(interjections) - as a political party, and also independents come and then we shall vote as a House. This is because they are also a shade of opinion. 

MR KATOOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am asking myself what the meaning of “independent” is. I think things should stay the way they are. Parties come, an Independent comes as an Independent and if he wins one of the parties, then he or she should go. But when you say a slot be created for Independents again; what is the meaning of “independent” there? Create a slot for what? Independent of what? An Independent is independent and you will stay independent even if you go anywhere. An Independent will stay independent. I do not think that where we are going to create that slot, it is there. It is not there in this world. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. You asked a question as to whether those who will participate in the primaries can be allowed. I think the provision from the Constitution, which you read clearly, answers that. The Constitution provides that such members can still contest as independents. 

The challenge is that in the current rules, we did say the ruling party provides seven members and the Opposition two members. Mr Chairman, without putting you on the spot - I know you went to court and there is a constitutional court ruling - maybe you could also help us on what the court ruled on the issue of Independents. However, I think the major issue is that any Ugandan who qualifies to be an EALA member should be given a chance to participate. That was the issue of contention because previously, the parties would submit names and then we approve them. If you do not belong to NRM or FDC, then you would not have a chance to actually participate and be considered for election to EALA.

I think the constitutional court ruled but also DP went to court and there was a ruling, both of which are saying all Ugandans should be given a chance. The dilemma we have is, if we say that the parties should hold primaries, we shall then have to establish, according to numerical strength, how many members will come from, say, NRM, the Opposition, and then, if we allow, Independents. If NRM does its primaries and brings seven or six and then FDC or Opposition bring two or one, then what kind of election will be here? It would be automatic that those will be NRM members to EALA. What kind of election shall be here? So, the election will be maybe only for the Independents, if we give provision for an Independent Member of Parliament.
 
The other issue will now be the smaller parties, some of which are here, many of them outside this Parliament. That is the guidance I want - how we shall conduct these elections within the House?

We must draw a distinction between participating in the elections and also representing Ugandans on EALA. I think the major issue is to give chance to all Ugandans of different shades to participate in the elections in this House.

MR MUKULA: Mr Chairman, I wish to seek guidance from you as the chair. There is an authority based on the ruling of the constitutional court where hon. Oulanyah, as he was then, took the Attorney-General to court. It would be appropriate for you to guide the House on that authority because that matter will help us navigate through this legal quagmire.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I need your guidance on Independents. Assuming this House got the majority members as Independents, what would happen? If they were more than the Movement and the Opposition, would they form a Government, would they take the seven seats in EALA? I need your guidance on this.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I think the confusion about Independents is a direct parthenogenesis of the problem and contradiction between the provisions of Article 69 and 72 of the Constitution.

I will refer you to Article 69, which talks about political systems. Article 69(1) says: “The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda.” It then defines what you mean by a political system under 69(2): “The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this Article shall include- (a) the movement political system; 
(b) the multiparty political system; and 
(c) any other democratic and representative political system.”

When you come to Article 72(4), it says, “any person”. Now, it has already given a system; the Constitution has already pronounced itself on what you shall belong to as a political system, but later on in the Constitution, unfortunately, it now says, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party”. Now, which system is that? I think there is a contradiction.

MR MWESIGE: I would like to thank my brother for giving way. The information I would like to give is that Independents that stand independent of political parties are part of the multiparty political system. 

MR AYENA: I think that only increases my confusion. (Laughter) With due respect to my learned friend, I do not think this information has been very useful because you know, it is a question of definition of a system. Is an independent person enveloped within a system? As far as the framers of the Constitution are concerned, they were talking about a system; you must belong to a system and a system is defined as a multiparty political system and the Movement system. Now, in this case, if you chose not to belong to either of them, then you have abdicated your right to belong to a system. Independents, therefore, do not belong to a system as provided for in the Constitution. However, that said -

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Ayena Odongo. The Article he read says that the people of Uganda shall have a right to choose and adopt a political system. The people of this country adopted a political system; they did not adopt independents as a political system. They adopted a multiparty political system. So, you cannot say independents are a political system under multiparty.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I shall not take my learned friend’s information anymore because I may end up getting more confused. (Laughter)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, hon. Ayena. From an ordinary interpretation of this, because the Constitution should even be a layman’s document, when we have the three systems of governance – the Movement political system, multiparty political system and any other democratic and representative political system - I think I should understand that the Movement political system would have been better. This is because in there, we had the ingredient of individual merit that would fit well with Independents. I would rather think that the system we are practicing now would be Article 69(2) (c), any other democratic and representative political system – (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I will not take any more information for the time being, with due respect – (Interruption)

MR MUKULA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Ayena for giving way. I would like to give guidance to the previous speaker, and to say that the Constitution is very clear and there is no lacuna at all. The law states very clearly that when one political system is in place, the other political systems will stay. That is the position of the Constitution. That interpretation is very clear. 

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, from the contribution of various members, some attempting to inform me by actually probing my intellect to inform them, you can now see that there is a grey area in the Constitution about the matter of political systems as opposed to Independents. 

Like hon. Mukula says, the Constitution is very clear about systems. It talks about two systems, and then the third one is, “any other democratic and representative political system”. I dare anybody to come and reaffirm here that an independent person belongs to a democratic representative system. As far as I am concerned, an individual does not belong to any representative democratic political system.

I want to lay emphasis, for avoidance of doubt, on the fact that Independents are actually independent of one another. I now know that we have about 40 Independent members in this Parliament. Therefore, that means that we have about 40 independent shades of opinion. So, when we come to that position where we are accommodating all shades of opinion as far as feasible, warn yourselves of the dangers of not having sufficient accommodation for 40 different shades of opinion. That is the absurdity we are talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now ask the Rt hon. Prime Minister to intervene?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I would like to make a clarification on this. Article 69 gives the people of Uganda the right to choose a political system and the menu, as hon. Ayena read, is there. In this Constitution, if you look at Article 73, it says that when the people of Uganda have chosen one of the systems, the other systems must go in hibernation to allow the system chosen to work. We are supposed to have guidelines that would regulate that hibernation. 

The people of Uganda actually made a choice in 2005 and they chose the multiparty system as their political system of choice. So, at the moment, Uganda is under governance of a multiparty system of governance. Now, Article 72(4), which the chair read, says that any person is free to stand as an Independent, independent of a political organisation or political party under the system chosen. So, the current Independent Members of Parliament are independent of political parties but they subscribe to a multiparty political system and they subscribe to the system in place now. Their existence – (Interjections) – Yes, they do. 

What is implied in what I said before, on hibernation, is that once a system is chosen, the others must go in hibernation because the assumption is that they are antagonistic. The Movement system, for example, verses the multi-party political system; they are antagonistic. However, in the case of Independents, they accept multi-partyism but they do not want to subscribe to political parties. That is all. That is point number one. 

Point two; the debate we have is not about electing Independents as an entity. We are talking about those who do not subscribe to political parties having a right to participate in this election to the East African Legislative Assembly. That is not these Members of Parliament; they are not even eligible because they are Members of Parliament. It simply means that any Ugandan who does not subscribe to a political party has the freedom to participate in this election for a seat to the East African Legislative Assembly – (Interjections) – I will give you way, but let me finish this. 

The point about representation in the House is what we have here - the various political parties represented in the House or in the Parliament in this case. The whole idea of representation in the East African Legislative Assembly was to reflect the political opinions in the member countries. How do you determine political opinions in the member countries? They are determined in that member country by elections held. How do you tell the outcome of elections held? You tell the outcome by the representation in Parliament. That is why this idea of representation in Parliament came up. 

You can tell that in Uganda - or let me use Kenya, or Tanzania because it is even clearer - [Mr Katuntu: “Or Congo”] - No, it is not a member, for your information. I am talking about members of East Africa. In Tanzania, there are many political parties but the dominant one is CCM, then you have CHADEMA and others. So, you can tell that in Tanzania, the majority of the people subscribe to CCM and so many subscribe to CHADEMA and so on and so forth. That is how you tell the political opinions in that country. That is why, therefore, we had this notion of representation in Parliament but leaving an opening for those who may not necessarily be in Parliament. 

So, to answer the question asked by hon. Baka, and I think actually even hon. Kiwanda had the same point; what in effect is going to happen - I do not know whether we have adopted this already - is that in the case of Uganda, we will have representation by political parties in Parliament on the basis of proportional representation in Parliament. I do not know whether we have adopted it or it is a proposal – (interjections) – No, not in the Treaty but what do we adopt here? We shall then also have an opening for those who do not belong to this category. 

This is because in Uganda, we have three sides; we have the government side, which is the ruling party, and then we have the Opposition and then the Independents. For the parties, there is no problem but the Independents are independent of each other; they cannot institute an entity, they cannot have a caucus and they cannot have a candidate of Independents. So, you will have a slot, which will represent those who do not subscribe to a political party in Uganda, and that means anyone who subscribes or qualifies and has the qualifications required is free to contest. That is what it means. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on the issue of Independents, we have talked and talked and I think we shall talk until we die. Maybe during the amendment of the Constitution, we must find a formula for Independents. Clearly, Independents are independent of each other. Now, are the Independents in Parliament a shade of opinion? That is what hon. Ayena was bringing out. If we go by the view that they are a shade of opinion, then there are 43 opinions in Parliament. 

Having said that, if we are saying anybody out there who is independent can come, what about a party like SDP, which is not in the House? How different is it from the Independent who is from out there? So, as we make these rules, we must really take consideration. One, if we have gone a multiparty system, what do we mean by multiparty politics? 

So, my big brother, I want you to come and tell us how best you think we should send the members to EALA. If you start talking of numerical strength, what is the basis because the Treaty does not talk about numerical strength? If you talk of one person being a member represented by – 

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I think it is critical to give a critical piece of information. I think the rationale of this argument draws from the guidance which was in the popular Oulanyah case - hon. Oulanyah as he then was. In the Oulanyah case referred to, I wish to inform the honourable member that it was specifically stated like this: 

“Rule 11(1) Part 1 rule 3 provides that elected members of the EALA representing Uganda shall be nominated by the parties or organisations represented in the House on the basis of proportional party membership, taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and gender.” This is what the court proceeds to say: “This clearly leaves out other shades of opinions… The argument of numerical strength is also anomalous and prejudicial against the independents that number 37 in the House…” I think the emphasis should be laid on this part – “the argument of numerical strength is also anomalous”. That is a full statement in its own right. 

The other one, which they also go on to raise, is that apart from being anomalous it is prejudicial against the Independents. So, prejudice was relating to the Independents but anomaly was relating to the question of proportional representation. Where does this draw us? 

I do sympathise very seriously with views and the people of Uganda or the member states that decide on how they should be represented in Parliament, because that is the way they express their opinions. Ordinarily, if the Treaty had not said otherwise, this would be a logical sequence of events; the issue of proportional representation would be the in-thing. Unfortunately, the drafters of Article 50 of the Treaty seem to completely rubbish this state consideration of proportional strength. 

What I want to say is that I want to completely distance myself from parochial interest in this matter and speak as a professional person and say that we have a court decision on this matter. I warn this House that should we do anything that contravenes that decision, we are risking the interests of this Parliament in the representation in the East African Legislative Assembly. I can assure you that another Mbiddde will come out to challenge us in court. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to move forward. Please, conclude Leader of Opposition.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have just discovered that we have not even moved. I notice that the proposal of the committee has just duplicated part of the Treaty. We need to clear that before moving on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is important for us to recast, so that as we move forward we know how we are moving.  One, a multiparty political system is rooted on the right to associate. The right to associate also includes the right not to associate. That is what was stated by the court. What it means is that if I have a right to associate, I also have the right not to associate. If you force me to associate, you will be violating my right to freedom of association.

Two, political parties must guard against passing rules that would deter any other person outside there from contesting. That means that this Parliament should guard against passing a rule that anybody outside would feel they have been discriminated against, in violation of Article 21 of the Constitution. In other words, the rule we are going to pass must be non-discriminatory. 

Once you satisfy those two principles, you will be safe in your rules. You violate one of those two and you will be completely open to successful litigation. I say this with authority. (Applause) If the Constitution guarantees the right to associate, that same Constitution does not compel anybody to associate. So, do not attempt to compel people to associate. That is why the courts made the decision this way. The rule that was challenged in the Constitutional Court, successfully, limited participation in this election to only people who belong to political parties. You do not want a repeat of that. 

The second leg is; if you are going to say that participation in this election should be categorized - who should participate, which party should participate or what number should each party contribute – in essence it means that political parties are going to be involved in preliminary selections of candidates. Isn’t that so? If you are going to be involved in the preliminary selection of candidates, that means a person coming as an independent member cannot participate in that preliminary process in the political party because they are not members. So, there should be an avenue where the parties will have their way of bringing their candidates but somebody who wants to participate, independent of political parties, also has an avenue and access to the process of participating in this election. That is what we should do. 

If we start talking about guarding numbers, this time you might not find a kind person like the one who took it to court the other time and once the ruling was made, never bothered to pursue the matter because the statement was made. You might get a person who this time will pursue, execute and have members removed from the Assembly, therefore bringing the whole thing to a standstill. We will then go for a repeat of the election, changing the rules etc. That is my guidance on this matter.

After all this, if it is not yet clear, honourable members, then we might not be able to make any headway. So, the first principle that is agreed, that is proposed in the rules, is what is proposed under rule 11. Do we have any discussions on this? Do we have any changes to make on this?

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, the issue of proportional representation comes in handy. I would like to propose that as we look at proportional representation, we should look at the percentages of political parties – (Interjections) – Yes, just hold on, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the honourable member finish. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, my proposal is that if we are to know the shades that we are talking about, the strength of political parties and Independents and how they should be represented in EALA, we should go further and look at percentages. We should, for example, be able to determine which party got what percentage. If we add all the Independents, how much do they get in terms of percentage? In the end, you will find that all shades are represented. I am saying this because Independents also participated.

I think we should look at proportional representation and determine how these political parties should be represented. I suggest that we look at how much each got from the elections because that is what enabled Members of Parliament come here, instead of just coming to Parliament here and look at parties generally.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is not completely out of order to look at what happens in the region. I have a copy of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community Election of Members of the Assembly Rules, 2007 of Kenya. That is what is governing them now. Under Rule 4, it is said thus: 

“The number of candidates a party shall be entitled to nominate for elections under these rules shall be determined by the Clerk and shall be the figure arrived at by multiplying the number of elected members of the National Assembly of the party by nine and diving the results by the total number of elected members of the National Assembly. In making nominations, each party shall, as much as it feasible, take into account the need for fair representation of the various political parties in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, geographical representation, gender and other special interest groups in Kenya.”

That is how the National Assembly of Kenya dealt with this matter. They did not have the phenomenon of independent Members of Parliament. That is how they dealt with this situation, that each party picks their number, they multiply their number by nine and then divide by the total membership of Parliament to arrive at that ratio. That is what they would do.

I am just giving this as an example. You could reflect on this. You can see that they have adopted the issue of proportionality. This is proportionality – (Interjection) - It may not be in conflict with the Treaty. 
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with the Rt hon. Prime Minister that the intention of the framers of the Treaty was that they wanted all the political opinions as represented in Parliament, as far as possible, to be represented in EALA. We seem like we are now trying to see how we can place the Independents. The Independents, given the Oulanyah case, are already settled. They have their rights. 

However, the problem is even greater. We have political parties represented in this House and I have heard sentiments that some of them are small. How smaller is a political party than an Independent? For us who belong to the major political parties, I want to warn, let us not look at this and say that we have jobs there because it is about numbers. 

Mr Chairman, we go back to Article 50(1) of the Treaty. What reason would we have, for example, to exclude any political party represented in this House? (Interjections) Correct. We have nine parties; how many seats do we have? Nine! (Interjections) It is not about sentiments, and it is not about party arrogance. 

What the Treaty is saying, and I want to repeat because I heard these sorts of sentiments in the committee, is that the national assembly of each partner state shall elect not from among its members nine members of the assembly who shall represent. I heard people saying that the right guaranteed is participation, No! The right is those who shall represent, as much as it is possible, the various political parties represented in the national assembly. It goes on to give other perimeters - shades of opinion, gender, special interest groups and so on.

These are principles of statutory interpretation. If you want to interpret a statute, the first thing you do is to give it its literal meaning. Of course, I can see a bigger party imagining that it is about them. No; and for heaven’s sake, we need to guard ourselves against – (Interruption)-

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much. The information I want to give the House is that if we proceed the way we want to proceed, by looking at numerical strength, it can even turn out that since the entire House is going to cast a vote, a member on the other side of the divide can actually cast a vote for any other member other than members of the leading Opposition political party. We are nominating five and the entire House has a say, at the end of the day, as to who becomes a Member of Parliament to the East African Legislative Assembly. They can even opt to choose from outside all these other Opposition political parties and vote other people and the leading Opposition political party shall be without representation in the Assembly. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: The point I would like to make - (Mr Kiwanda rose_) Hon. Kiwanda, sometimes you disrupt my flow. I want to give a very honest legal opinion. If you disagree with me, that is another matter, but what I am trying to do is to assist this House such that we take a decision that will not be subject to challenge.

Mr Chairman, you should have informed members that as of now, there is an injunction against us to elect our representatives to EALA until we make rules that conform to the Treaty. If we continue to do things that go against the Treaty, we will not move forward. This very argument arose because one of the parties here took Parliament to court. 

My view is that big parties, and that includes the NRM and FDC - the one I belong to - it is not about being magnanimous. (Dr Baryomunsi rose_) The Chair is advising me to finish. It is not about being magnanimous; just get that out of your head. The representation to EALA is a creature of the Treaty. (Interjections) I hear somebody saying that “we know”. If you know, then why are you behaving as if you do not know? I thank you. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the problem with my brother, hon. Katuntu’s interpretation, is that he does not logically conclude it. If the argument he presented affects the parties in Parliament, then of course it also affects the other opinions and other special groups which may not necessarily – (Interjections) -  According to statutory interpretation, it is true what he said, that you first use literal interpretation of words used, unless of course they lead to absurdity. In your case, that is precisely what you are leading us to, absurdity. 

His proposal is that all the political parties in this Parliament should be represented in EALA. That means that NRM, FDC, DP, UPC, JEEMA, CP and each of the Independents. (Interjections) I am now applying logic. (Mr Katuntu rose_) But you are the one who said you should not be interrupted when someone tried to give you information. Let me tell you what I think is reasonable, and what was expected, from a position of knowledge, because I happen to have been involved in the formulation of the Treaty and in the formulation of all these things. 

As I was saying earlier, what we expected was that in East Africa we should have an assembly which roughly, to the extent feasible, represents the opinions in the member states. So, in Uganda now, what we have is a ruling party, the Opposition and we have people that do not belong to any of these two categories. That is why last time we did it this way, and I think we should do it in the same way this time. This is a practical pragmatic way to handle this - we look at the representation in this House for political parties and we have an opening for independents, meaning those who do not subscribe to the two political sides that we have here. This gives an opening to those who are independent of political parties.    

The question, which I think we should have thought about, is the political parties – (Interjections) - Let me finish. You know, hon. Odonga Otto is a colleague in the profession and you know when the silk is up, the non-silk remain down. What is really disturbing my mind is the political parties which are not represented in Parliament; I think they should also have an opening. They should come like Independents would come and be free to participate in the election.  That is important because then we will have traversed the entire political spectrum of Uganda. 

Finally, this question about someone – some Katuntu- (Interjections) - no, not this one - participating in party primaries and getting defeated there and then he comes and offers himself as an independent; yes, that is possible but I do not know whether the rules that govern the question of resignation, for instance in Government, do not apply even here. Under our various constitutions, we have clear provisions on how one becomes a member and how one ceases being a member. If you have conformed to those and ceased being a member, that is alright. However, if you have not ceased being a member and you are still a member of a political party and you participated, then, of course, by these rules you cannot participate there, be defeated and then turn round and say, “I am independent”.  You are independent of political parties? No, you are not -(Interjection)-  I am right on all of them.  Mr Chairman, I will give hon. Otto an opportunity.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, I wanted it to come from the mouth of the Prime Minister because it will help resolve this issue once and for all. You had earlier said that each shade of independents is independent of others, in an earlier submission about an hour ago. Now the clarification I am seeking is, if we are leaving one seat to Independents, what about the political parties like UPC and DP, for example, who are specifically 14 and 10 of a group in this House? –(Interjection)- Whatever the number, but we know that we have a considerable number of DP and UPC here.  Do those people go home with noting and then you provide one position for one person who is independent of the others? Doesn’t it amount to discrimination? 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Otto for giving way. My understanding of the structure of this House is that we have got one Government this side and one Opposition led by one Leader of the Opposition. I think that is the correct reality of the House. There are no two or three oppositions – (Interjection) - I am coming to independents. So, there are three categories - one Government this side, one Opposition that side led by one Leader of the Opposition - there is no leader of the opposition of UPC, or DP or FDC; there is one Leader of the Opposition -
 
MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think there is a very deliberate effort to mislead this House. The right of representation to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) originates from the Treaty as I have told you, specifically Article 50(1). There is nowhere in that Article where they talk about Government or the Opposition. What the Article talks about are political parties represented in the assembly. It does not talk about Government or the Opposition. That is your own creation.  

What the Article talks about are political parties represented in Parliament in their own right. The Uganda People’s Congress is here in its own right, DP is here in its own right; so you cannot now bundle them because they are opposition. You cannot bundle them and say, “You are a single opposition.” That is not envisaged under Article 50 (1), the hon. Adolf Mwesige. 

Is the hon. Adolf Mwesige therefore in order to deliberately mislead this House that the basis of representation is founded on Government and the Opposition and not representation of all political parties as provided for under the Treaty? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is a matter of difference of opinion and interpretation. I would need both sides to call evidence and then I sit as judge to rule who has won. But that may not be necessary because this is a matter of different opinions on this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if I would use the words of my colleague, hon. Ayena, we must warn ourselves of treating individual units far better than groups, which are consolidated. 

My interpretation is that if you are giving a seat to an Independent - because even if Independents are 10 million they are independent of the others - and you mistreat a group that is consolidated, a party that went to be registered and that members elected in this House gets nothing, that is discrimination on the political parties. This is discrimination of the political parties, which are fully constituted, against individuals who are independent of the others. So, we must warn ourselves to avoid someone crying loud that they were left out yet they were more than those independent units. That is the area I thought the Prime Minister could comment about.

MR MUKULA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure in which I seek your due guidance. In pursuit of what hon. Katuntu has very clearly elucidated in Article 50 of the Treaty, I would like to seek a procedural position from you. Kenya has many political parties; are the Members of EALA from Kenya elected based on all the political parties in the Kenya Assembly? Two, Tanzania has got many political parties in the House; are the Members of Parliament in Tanzania elected on the basis of the number of political parties in the House?

Mr Chairman, I could go on and on with all the other members of the Community. I seek your clarification and guidance; the matter in the House is very intricate, in that it is important for us to very clearly debate these issues based on the current prevailing positions of representation in the East African Legislative Assembly. The position that we must have the election carried out based on the numbers of political parties here will be a misrepresentation. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I had cited the Kenyan rules in the hope that it would give some guidance about what has passed some reasonable test in the region and what has not been challenged and is existing now, but it looks like that has not provided proper guidance.

Honourable members, it is a quarter to 9.00 p.m. and by the way we are proceeding now, it is going to be difficult to take any appropriate decision in the subsequent matters that will come.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.46
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.47
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure and handled rules 192 to 195, and rules 139, 141, 146, 152 and passed them with amendments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many rules remain stood over?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, rules 11, 12, 134 and 195 were stood over.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPROT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.49
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed that tomorrow we start in the morning. House adjourned to 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.49 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 March 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)

