

Wednesday, 18 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this afternoon sitting. We are still waiting to hear from the Head of State on how to manage the Coronavirus. I have no advice for you until the national address, which will be later today, has been delivered. 

I have also been informed that there is an emergency Cabinet meeting but I hope that the ministers who have items on the Order Paper shall still be able to come in. Not everybody is required to sit in the Cabinet because there is other work going on here. 

The third issue is that I received a complaint from one of the people who lost money in South Sudan. He said that while the verification exercise was completed, for some reason they are not being paid. 

You recall that the decision to pay them was made here in July 2019. These people have undergone so much stress. Some have lost their property, others have died but somehow the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appears to be happy to continue holding onto the money. Therefore, we shall want an explanation why these people have not been paid. 

3.37
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for raising that matter. I recall the House pronounced itself on the matter that many of our traders were distressed in South Sudan and lost property. Many have not been paid other than a few companies. 

It was unanimously decided by this House - and a list was presented after a motion was moved by hon. Kinyamatama, that about 38 companies have relief from the Government of Uganda. We appropriated monies but up to now, these traders still hover around us saying nothing has been done to them. 

We have heard that there is another special audit that has been conducted. As you may recall, a select committee was constituted by this House. It travelled to South Sudan and came up with different findings. Now, we also hear that there is a lot of ping-pong at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which still prefers to selectively make payments to those few companies that have been paid. 

The findings from the committee and other people were very clear that these companies were replicating names and mutating into different companies and so, denying many Ugandans who have lost through this trade and inconvenience in South Sudan. 

I remember hon. Niwagaba clearly said that one of his traders had lost a truck and had even passed on before the payment was made. 

The Prime Minister made a commitment that they would make sure that all traders who are in distress as a result of loss of their property due to the war in South Sudan would be duly given a bail out. To our dismay, it is very clear that to-date, even when we appropriated the monies, none of them has been paid. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I came back from Arua yesterday evening. However, while I was in Arua, I was approached by three directors whose companies were among those that had been cleared for payments.
What they told me is that time and again, they have come to the Ministry of Finance, planning and Economic Development, in turns, in order to save on transport expenses but that every other time they come, they have had meetings with the PS/ST, Mr Keith Muhakanizi but that he keeps telling them “documents are here; it is true your company has been cleared and you are about to get paid.” 

However, the latest information they now got from the same ministry and from some official is that the whole exercise has been halted and apparently, it looks like the money has been diverted for other things. 

It will be important for Parliament to make a follow up and find out what has happened to the money that had been appropriated by this institution to pay firms that had already been clearly audited. Thank you. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I also thank the colleague for giving way. There is also information to the effect that the big ten companies have already benefited from over Shs 90 billion. Now, they want to take even the remaining amount of money leaving out the rest of the smaller companies without payments. 

These other companies are spread all over the country, including my constituency but people are crying. What is this kind of injustice happening in our country? Why is it that not everybody who deserves to benefit is benefiting? 

The big 10 companies probably have their own people who advocate for them better. That is why they have an upper hand. 

MR WAMANGA WAMAYI: Thank you very much, hon. Nsereko, for giving way. My people in Mbale are small-scale businessmen and they take food to Sudan. They have been feeding the South Sudanese for some time now. Some were even killed from South Sudan. However, I was surprised when, after hon. Bahati presented a list, I got to realise that their names were missing; the list had names of only the big companies; the small-scale businessmen who were supplying their goods to Sudan had been left out yet, they lost. We do not know how he came up with that list. 

We understand that the list contains the big ones as usual. They are the ones who have benefitted from that money; our business men have lost out. We want everybody who supplied goods to Sudan to be paid, including my people from Mbale who fed the South Sudanese. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Members, for the information given. Different stages of verification have been conducted not only by Parliament but also by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and other entities, including the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

All companies that were presented to Parliament, on the basis of which Parliament agreed that they appropriate money to enable Government with a certain limit of funds in order to help out dire situation that these companies were facing, have been disregarded. 

We come here to grant justice to all countrymen who contribute in form of taxes – (Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for giving way. I can hear some people talking about our brothers who lost their property in South Sudan. Madam Speaker, it has become a song, since 2003 when Ugandans lost their property in Tanzania. More than 1000 – even those who had bought land with their cows and other property had them confiscated by Tanzanians. Government was informed. They even went and verified everything and they said, everyone is going to be compensated but it has not happened up to now. Shouldn’t those Ugandans be considered in the same way the Government is looking at these others? Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, like you said, there was an outbreak of war that definitely affected trade between Uganda and South Sudan. Many companies that were trading from Uganda were heavily affected and many lost property that they had mortgaged with banks.

Madam Speaker, there are vivid examples. In countries that have suffered the effects of coronavirus, the first intervention has been for business persons. In the United States, small and big businesses have been given leverage. Banks have been told not to intervene –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that the impact of the coronavirus on the economy will be discussed on Thursday. Concentrate on South Sudan.

MR NSEREKO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Our prayer is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes back here – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I was part of the team that went to South Sudan to sort out this issue. A colleague said that the team came back with different information. No, we did not bring different information. We brought what was required. We went to see whether it was right to add on the list – the report was presented in the House and it was passed. That is why you see claimants asking for money. If we had not presented the report, they would not be claiming.

We brought the report and the Government of South Sudan looked at the claimants; I think they were 34. I remember hon. Nsereko – when we were down here – led the business people that were complaining and we looked at all the documents and we presented them there. We presented the report here and the minister said they were going to pay those people. Therefore, the question would be, why are those people not paid up to now? This is what we agreed.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. I wanted to tell you that I concur with what you did. I did not say that we disregarded your report. The prayer I would like to make is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development abides by the resolution of Parliament as a basis for the appropriation of the Shs 70 billion so that it pays these people pro rata and not selectively. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is disappointing that this House spent a lot of time and energy to follow up this matter. The committee went to South Sudan, came back, wrote a report, we debated and resolved it and it has taken almost nine months. After our resolution, the PS/ST decided to have another verification, which was concluded. Despite that other verification, they have still not paid the money.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, this issue was discussed recently in Cabinet and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was directed to handle it, having heard the report of the second verification. Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not around, I undertake to inform him.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come tomorrow and tell us when he is going to pay these people. These Ugandans deserve to get their money and be kept out of misery.

On the ones of Tanzania – that is a very serious issue. However, I do not know whether we have discussed it here and resolved it. (Laughter) I think you need to revive it formally by a motion so that this House can join you in pressing that claim.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming the following delegations: we have a delegation of 43 students from Old Kampala Secondary School. They are very smart. They are represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students of Ndiwulira Memorial College. They are on this side and are also very smart. They are represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Seninde. There is another delegation of 12 students from KSK Foundation. There they are. I have not been told which gombolola they come from but they are from Kampala and are represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, there was one matter of national concern. Hon. Muzanira, you have two minutes.

2.51
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance concerning the welfare of female inmates and suspects in police custody and police cells in this country. When they built most police cells countrywide, they did not think that women would commit mistakes. They have no provisions for female suspects under detention. The police just improvise by turning police uniports into cells for women. The same applies to most prisons in the country.

These uniports have no washrooms and the suspects use the bucket system and have poor ventilation. These suspects are detained with juveniles and others have young children. They are congested and lack basic necessities.

Madam Speaker, it is reported that district police commanders only receive Shs 600,000 per quota for operations, which is too little to cater for basic necessities, especially of the women. This money cannot help the police to buy soap for inmates and cannot even facilitate them to buy fuel to go and arrest suspects.

The risk of spread of contagious diseases such as rubella and now COVID-19 is high. I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs is in this House to inform the people of Uganda about when they are going to construct cells for female inmates and suspects and the measures they will put in place to cater for the unique welfare of these inmates and the officers who keep law and order in this country. 

The condition of the houses for the police is terrible. In some police stations, you find three families with children sharing one uniport without a pit latrine nearby. My prayer is that Government makes it a priority to improve the housing infrastructure for policemen and policewomen in Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Muzanira. First, I think we would like to know what has happened to the programme that had been started to construct houses for men and women of the police force. Sometimes, when I am flying, I do not see any action there. The buildings are incomplete and I do not know why.

The second is that some time back, we received a report here. I do not know whether it was from our committee or somewhere else that the bucket system had been substantially eradicated. I am saying we received a report in this House. The impression was that the bucket system was being eradicated but it seems nothing has changed. 

2.56
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, it is only when you land in police cells that you get to appreciate the statement being made by my sister.

I have experienced life in prisons and police cells. What my sister is telling you is the truth. Let no minister whatsoever, come here to deceive us that they have done away with the bucket system. The bucket system is still being used up to now.

The hygiene in those cells is quite wanting. You can even stay in a cell for more than 12 hours, without having an opportunity to urinate. You will literally urinate on the same Floor you are sleeping and sitting on. The situation in prison is terrible.

One time, a minister here despised a recommendation that prison cells and detention centres be improved. Least did this minister know that one day, he might land there. Not until he landed there, having been the Vice President in this country, he found the situation was very deplorable to the extent that he asked the Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Services whether improvement could be done for him. The Commissioner General said “Sir, you remember when you were in authority, you did not regard this. You said it was useless and that people who come here must be left to stay under hard conditions. Now today, you are here crying.”

Madam Speaker, the situation in prisons and police stations are very bad. I would like to, therefore, request that the relevant committee of this Parliament be given some time to visit some of these institutions so that they can update us on the situations on the ground as they said. I hope that they will not be denied access.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said we received a report here, which now appears not to have been accurate. Before we call the minister, I want to instruct the Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs to carry out an audit of the sanitary facilities in the places of detention and prisons. However, in the meantime, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and respond to the complaints and tell us what to do. 

For the committee, since we are going into the budget, ask specifically what provisions have been made in this financial year.

2.58
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO	(Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, you do not need to go very far to realise the reality.

Old Kampala Police Station accommodates 650 officers with their wives and children but there is one toilet. That is for the police barracks. One toilet, two shower areas for the ladies and two shower areas of the gentlemen. They have to queue from 4 o’clock. The same police station has only one facility for the ladies yet it accommodates over 300 people every day including a minimum of about 50 ladies. So, you can imagine. 

Jinja Road Police Station is just a stone throw from us. If these urban police stations cannot have these facilities, you can then imagine what is in Arua.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are talking about two things; one is facility for people who have been incarcerated and those who work at the police stations.
	
2.59
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to confirm that the Committee on Human Rights tabled a report before this House indicating that the bucket system was being phased out in the system. At that time, that information was correct but since then, I do not know what happened. It is, therefore, right that the committee should go back or the Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs should go back and find out why the process did not continue. Otherwise, by the time we tabled that report, the information was true because we went around the country and confirmed that the bucket system was being phased out. Thank you.

3.00
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our fellow police officers and prison warders have a big problem that we need to look at more seriously although I am not saying we are not serious. The Government should respond to some of these issues that we have been raising. 

The reason is that these people who are overcrowded – in the uniport, you can find two families with their children. When one goes to work, the other takes advantage of the wife of another person. As a result, they have been killing one another. They are misusing the guns because they are frustrated.

In addition, the money they get is very little; just about Shs 350,000, which cannot not enable them to afford building their own houses. As a result, these people are misusing the guns they have to kill us and each other due to frustration. Madam Speaker, something must be done to ensure that these workers who are supposed to protect us are also protected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.02
MR MOSES	KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have to confess that I have a lifetime experience of prison. I went to Luzira twice.

Even when there is running water, water is rationed. Around about 3.00 or 4.00 p.m., the water is disconnected and there is nothing until the following morning. So, whoever goes to the toilet, everything remains on top until water comes back the following day, which is when it can go.

The other issue is that these facilities do not provide inmates with toilet tissues. Madam Speaker, I was there one year ago. It was unfortunate though but it is an experience that we can share.

Hon. Nyakecho is right now in Luzira. When she comes back, she will give some update. However, for some of us who have been there, water is rationed. When I tried one day to speak to the authorities, they told me they do not have money to clear the water bills. So, they rationed it such that they can fit within the budget. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is more work for the Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs. Now, you know what to ask during the budget sitting.

3.03
MS LUCY	AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also appreciate the directive you have made to the Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs.

My worry is that every time we have such committee going out to do work, there is a general clean-up. I have ever gone under the Office of the Leader of the Opposition to visit some of the prisons but when you go, they are relatively smart. 

Much as we have allowed the committee to go and do its work, I would like to appeal that we should fast-track the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT). If we work on OPCAT, we will have a committee that will access all the detention centres even without permission.

Right now we need to seek for permission from either the prisons Commissioner to access these places and by the time you are granted they would have cleared and cleaned some of these things. So, we will not get first-hand information about some of the issues that are happening in our prisons and in the police cells. As Parliament, we need to fast-track the opt cuts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of credence is important but the audit we want is; are the facilities there? Even if it is dirty but is it there? Do the women have facilities?

3.05
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, around 2006, there was a steering committee put in place by the leadership of the Uganda Police Force to conduct a review of the entire force but to date, the recommendations of that committee have not been implemented.

What we are talking about is just a small piece of the entire unit but there is a problem. That report should be brought to this House so that we see whether it is implementable.

The problem is not just about the welfare of the inmates; even our police officers and yet they are doing a great job. When on the streets of Kampala, you will find our officers struggling to direct traffic even at 10.00 p.m. It is critical that we look at the welfare of the entire force. We need to see what was contained in that report.

I know that it was being chaired by AIGP Julius Shalita and deputised by CP Joseph Mugisa. We need that report; otherwise we shall be coming here every day. Today, we are talking about accommodation, tomorrow sanitation, the next day salary, the other day it shall be uniforms of the female police officers and we shall have problems.


Madam Speaker, what is the Ministry of Internal Affairs doing to submit this report to the House and we debate it?

THE SPEAKER: Was it supposed to come here?

MR AOGON: Maybe those are the details that we need to dig out but that report is needed to help us. We need to use it. Money was put there.

THE SPEAKER: We need to find out how it was commissioned and to whom were they reporting. We can find that out from the minister but I do not know whether it is automatically coming here.

3.07
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the idea of having the committee go to the prisons to check on the situation of the inmates and the police cells. I add my voice by saying that they should also interest themselves in the health of the inmates. 

Two months ago, I went to Gulu Prisons to check on one of my voters; the man is HIV positive but they are not receiving anti-retroviral drugs and they are terrible. Amidst all these situations we have talked about, consider a person who is sick.
They leave them without any treatment and until they are badly off is when they are taken to the hospital to die. Those who are supposed to be on ARVs and those with diabetes suffer more than what we expect.

Secondly, the labour they give prisoners; officers always take these people to work either in construction or in people’s gardens but what do they gain and how long do they work?
They pick them from morning up to evening when they are exhausted; where do these officers take this money at the end of the day? I implore the committee to dig further to find out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Ninth Parliament, this House discussed and reviewed the payment for the inmates but I do not know whether what we resolved has been implemented. This House considered that matter and stepped up the same. The committee should again look at that.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on the matter and have referred it to the committee which should go and investigate and bring us a report and then we can debate. Are we proceeding well to continue to discuss your ruling on the matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a topical issue and what the Members are raising are issues that we think the committee must handle; not just for the amount of money but also how it is being used.

3.10
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime in 2017/2018, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs did that very job and presented a report about the deplorable state of facilities in the prisons.

What we need to do is a serious needs assessment, which should be reflected in the budget process because we will discuss these matters here and make recommendations that are not implemented.
If a serious needs assessment is done, we shall appropriate for it. It is not only for people who are in cells or prisoners but even the servicemen are living in conditions that are not -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, we need the minister to inform us why the housing which had started has not been completed because it was going to boost accommodation off the police officers.

What is the next programme for the housing of the police? The former is not moving; what is the future for the Uganda Police Force?  Thereafter, he will have to come back and tell us how they plan to support people who are incarcerated but in addition to that, we shall want the audit about the facilities.

3.12
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The function of visiting jails, places of detention and police custodies is vested in the Uganda Human Rights Commission. What we need to do – the Uganda Human Rights Commission from time to time visits these facilities and makes their reports to Parliament.

As Parliament and particularly the committee, we need to do an audit on how much has changed and I venture to say that a lot has changed. Prisons, places of detention have become so congested - (Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I remember sometime back, you moved around various prisons and came to this House and reported. We talked about a forensic audit because some of the reasons prisons are congested is that there are so many prisoners who have not gone to court for so many years; who have not been heard.

We must have an audit as you observed when you visited those places. We have so many inmates who would be out but because of maybe laxity, they have not been heard. If we try to make a forensic audit in as far as our prisons are concerned, then the decongestion can be done.

THE SPEAKER: It is because people do not do what we agree on but we had asked the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General to examine the various categories of prisoners, their age, etc. I am always talking about the prerogative of mercy and the fact that the committee is dead, no one has taken action. 
Hon. Eragu, please conclude.

MS ERAGU: These facilities are there but in some prisons, they are not there. It is the management there that is also a problem and so many other things; so, one would also want to recommend. What happened to the chain link system that was put in place to decongest these places of detention? 

I thought I would give that information that the Uganda Human Rights Commission reports need to be look at. On the facilities, this committee has to go and see how much these detention places have been stressed because definitely, they are over-stressed because of the very many people and very little action being taken in our jails. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.15
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to contribute to this very important issue. Basic rights are really fundamental. Prisons, especially the ones upcountry, are so congested that you cannot believe.

I would like to contribute that this committee takes in more perspectives. For example, in the case of Butebo, where I have a police station per sub-county, that also impacts on the resources. Could there be a review of this policy of establishing a police station per sub-county –?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are now moving out of the subject. We are now talking about budgeting issues. We were dealing with the facilities for the inmates and facilities for the police.

MS AMEEDE: Yes, Madam Speaker; we were dealing with the issue of facilities but also the working conditions of the policemen –

THE SPEAKER: No, that one can come in the budget, please. You can discuss that during the budget. (Laughter)

MS AMEEDE: Kindly give me an opportunity. There is a police station that has been in existence for 20 years but they do not have toilets and they temporarily hold people. The other issue that feeds into congestion is the justice system. I would like the committee to interest itself; why has community service sentencing not taken root to help us to decongest?

Some of these issues in the prisons are really petty crimes that people are remanded for. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems people are now turning this into a general debate. The audit we have asked for is what you are talking about; audit of the latrines for the staff and audit of the latrines for the inmates. That is what we are talking about. Please conclude, hon. Karungi. 

3.18
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, we have a great challenge. This issue which the honourable member has raised here is very important.

I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we visited all these police posts and detention places. We brought the report here and discussed it. It is surprising that there is nothing that has been worked on. 

It is unfortunate that even in these detention facilities, the PWDs are not provided for. When they are detained, actually they face great challenges like the mothers who have babies. I remember when we went to Gulu, there were some mothers who had children but the situation there was – I am sorry but I do not know how God created me – I felt tears rolling down my cheeks. I could not imagine how those mothers and babies were living. It was too much for me.

It is unfortunate that our people there are suffering. It is good that we are all here; so, I would like to move that – we are the people who appropriate this money. We are the ones in charge. Madam Speaker, we have received the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Internal Affairs but they should attach an addendum and we look for the money.

We should at least start with a certain district and say, this financial year, we are considering Kampala District. We will pass it and look for the money and it is done, instead of coming here to say A, B, C and D and we do not see anything coming out.

Madam Speaker, I am assuring – (Interjection) – Allow me a minute. When you talk to most of the wives of the police officers privately – like hon. Betty has said – what they go through is hell. They do not have a right to – I am sorry to say but their sexual rights are limited. You cannot imagine conjugal rights - (Interjection) - Fine; no problem. You cannot sleep two families in the same unit. It is horrible. Their children start sex early because of what they are exposed to as children.

Therefore, we need to take it very seriously and say that this financial year, let us direct the ministry and we start with Kampala District. Let them bring an addendum to the Ministerial Policy Statement and we start with either Wakiso or Kampala but we should do something about it, not simply speaking and we stop at that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to suggest that now that you have the policy statements, go straight to work. You have heard the issues; go straight to work during this budget. Let us start somewhere. The minister should come by next Thursday.

3.21
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two very important matters of national importance that I feel I should make known to this House.

One; it was last week on 7th March that a very terrible incident happened in one of our sub-counties called Aromo. It is a sub-county in Lira District where a woman called Ketty Akwero aged 42 and her baby of two and a half years were hacked to death by the uncles because of land wrangles.

Madam Speaker, this incident happened in Aloc A in Odoro Parish. The issue of the land conflict had been going on for a long time. The case was reported to the police, which did not take any action at all. The clan leaders did not even help her and it resulted into this very terrible death, where the woman and baby were hacked to death and the brother was speared and is still in hospital.

Another very serious one is soon happening in Walela in one of the areas called Lacan Dano, where a lady called Among Mila’s house has already been demolished. Police is not acting. The case was reported in March last year. Up to February this year, police had not yet forwarded the case to the Resident State Attorney. This is what is happening in Lira.

Another incident which is brewing and may cause death any time concerns a lady called Esther Awoko, also in Aloc A in Odoro Parish – in the same Aromo Sub-county, where the clan has grabbed land that belonged to her. They are now waiting for one another. Anytime, they will again hack themselves to death.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter that I call upon the minister responsible to take action; first of all, to go and talk to the people there but also to give us a clear report on these incidents where the 42-year old lady and her baby were hacked to death. Let him give us this report because there is no clear report yet.

Secondly, on 14 March 2020, business in Lira District almost came to a standstill when two Fuso tracks that were ferrying cattle dealers and passengers caught fire and both of them burnt down. The incident took place at a police check point whereupon traffic officers had stopped them before confiscating the key for the first truck.

Therefore, when they stopped the second truck, it kind of overtook the first and wanted to park. As it overtook, it rubbed itself onto some waragi and petro jerrycans igniting the fire. It is very bad that people lost lives; many cattle and merchandise also got burnt.

Yesterday one of the victims that got burnt, Mr Idem Jimmy, aged 36 years, was buried in Aromo Sub Country. Up to now, the population does not know of any report pertaining to this. Again, last year, a Fuso truck carrying petrol burned in front of Lira District Police Headquarters and several motorcycles got burnt. Up to tomorrow, there is no report and people have not been compensated.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon the minister responsible to give a clear report to this House and to the population regarding what the traffic officers are doing and what caused the death of these youth. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs should first of all examine the state of lawlessness in Aromo Sub County as recounted by hon. Joy Atima and also give an update on the cause of the fires at the police post and in the places, which the honourable member has named.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE STATUS OF ESTABLISHMENT OF AREA LICENSING BOARDS UNDER THE ENGULI ACT AND MODALITIES FOR THE REGULATION OF THE MANUFACTURE OF JAGGERY

3.27
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Trade) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement to Parliament on concerns regarding area licensing boards under the Enguli Manufacture and Licensing Act, Cap 86. 

On 20 February 2020, I presented a paper in Parliament on some issues of national concern on the status of the Enguli Manufacture and Licencing Act, Cap 86 provisions on regulating the alcohol sector.

The issue in question were; whether the licencing authority is for the establishment of the alcohol manufacturing industry, and whether one can be given a licence to manufacture Enguli -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those were issues not - the minister was answering things we did not ask. We had asked specifically about whether the area licensing boards, which are supposed to licence jaggery are there. That is what we asked and not about the liquor. That is when we told her that she was answering the wrong questions and that she should come back to answer the questions that we had asked.

MR WERIKHE: Obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We gave you the questions yesterday. Why are you people avoiding answering that question? This is from January by the way. Why are you refusing to answer the question about the operation of section 13 of the Enguli Act, which is affecting the sugarcane farmers? I have been asking this question since January. 

Now you are going into liquor yet it is a different Act. No one is talking about liquor; we are asking about jaggery.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, if you had allowed me to go through the statement then -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you are reading is what we rejected. (Laughter) That is what we rejected 10 days ago. Go straight to answering questions pertaining to section 13 of the Enguli Manufacture and Licencing Act. That is what we want to hear of.

MR WERIKHE: Obliged, Madam Speaker. I beg that we bring the specific response to section 13 – (Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this is very important. I know that the minister is aware of what we asked and he has been trying to say that he is about to provide the real answer if only he is given time. If the minister is telling the truth, it means that in his statement there is a mention on jaggery; it could be in the conclusion because - (Interjections) – he said he was about to get the real answer. So, let him confirm to us that the question and the issue that was raised about jaggery is part of his presentation.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, in the statement, there is a paragraph regarding the modalities of regulating jaggery. That is to answer my colleague’s concern. However, as directed, I beg that we come back to comprehensively respond to that particular section 13.

3.31
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am worried; the phrase “coming back” has become the order of the day. Every time there is an issue, somebody brings something different then when he is challenged, they will say they beg to come back the following day. The other day somebody intentionally brought something contrary to what we had asked for then later said, “I will come back tomorrow.”

Therefore, Madam Speaker, through your office, we need to have an end to the phrase “coming back” so that we get to know the right information because people are suffering. While we still buy time here, people in villages are suffering. It is high time we felt the pain that those people are going through.
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AND OVERSIGHT VISITS ON OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)
3.33
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I was supposed to present a report but I was put to order using the relevant Rule of Procedure because the substantive minister was absent. When I look at the Frontbench, the situation has not changed; I do not know whether I can be allowed to proceed with my matter.

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer it for now. Go to item five; I do not know whether it is the same ministry.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

 

3.34
Ms agnes ameede (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am here to present the report on the conflict on land of the Apaa Community.

Before I present the report, let me lay on the Table the following:
    a) The signed report
    b) The minutes
    c) The verbatim recording of the committee proceedings, and
    d) The CD containing the 1,958 series of Colonial Maps of Kitgum, Pakwach, Gulu and Acholi West.

I beg to present the report. Madam Speaker, you will recall that on 23 January 2019, hon. Lucy Akello, Member of Parliament for Amuru raised a matter of urgent national importance regarding the inhuman rampant evictions and torture that was occasioned on the people of Apaa.

The honourable member made reference to a group of men dressed in uniform that resembled the Uganda People’s Defence Forces uniform and others who wore civilian clothes, who had crossed the Nile with boats. They caused havoc, tortured people, looted property and captured some people as well.

She further stated that the only health centre namely, Apaa Health Centre II had been closed – 

The Speaker: Sorry, honourable chairperson. This matter involves two ministries. I think it is important that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities are here to listen to this report. Can we defer it? By the way, are they still in Entebbe?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Yes, Madam Speaker. The other colleagues are still in Entebbe.

The Speaker: You could inform them that we require somebody from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and another from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. They have more than one minister. Let us stand over it for about an hour.

Ms AmeEde: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

The Speaker: There is even no Chief Whip today – Please, you do not run the Order Paper. This is not a market.

I will ask the Clerk to liaise with the Office of the Prime Minister to ensure that those ministers come and we listen to these reports.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE SUGAR BILL, 2019 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.40
The Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (Trade) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all appreciate and thank the House for having considered the Sugar Bill. We considered it and all the sections were passed except one, which referred to zoning.

Government requested the House for further consultations, which were made. The final outcome of these consultations has not been made.

Therefore, since the Bill is the document of the House, I think that as Government, we are in your hands.

The Speaker: Can I invite the chairperson of the committee to give us their report? 

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, as the minister has just elaborated, this is a matter of the House. As a committee, we have no proposed amendments. It is for the Government to make a move. If they do not have it, let us pass the Bill. 

If anything must be changed in future, they shall come for amendments as the institution is created, since we are creating an institution in the name of the Board. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, since there are no changes to the position on return, do we need to do a first, second and third reading?

Okay. This House had considered the Bill very carefully, enacted it and sent it for assent. It was returned but this House finds no reason to interfere with the position taken previously. 

We would like to now confirm that the Sugar Bill, as passed, is still the law of this House and we should inform the President that we have returned it in the form that it came. 

Therefore, the Sugar Bill is over and it should be implemented. Under what rule do you rise, honourable member?

Ms joy atim: Madam Speaker, I cannot quote the rule but it is a point of procedure on the issue, which I presented on this Floor of Parliament.

It was on 29 January 2020 that I brought a petition by the persons affected by the construction of Karuma-Lira Highway. You referred the petition to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. Today is 18 March 2020 but the committee has not contacted the persons and there is nothing on the ground.

I remember going to the Clerk to Parliament who said she was going to extract it. I also remember interacting with the chairperson of the committee and he said he has no information per se.

Madam Speaker, could your chair prevail on this because the members and affected persons are waiting for what action Parliament is going to take on this particular issue? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on issues of this type, I would have been happier if you came to me earlier so that I can establish the position but now you ambush me here and you want an answer. 

However, I do not have the answers in my head all the time. I think it is just courteous to come and tell me what matters are there so that I check on them before I come to the House or instruct but now there is a bit of a problem. The Clerk should establish what is happening and reach me then I will be able to inform the honourable member. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS
Qn. 86/04/10

MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): To ask the Minister of Education and Sports the following:
“
Government sponsored Secondary Schools in Kikuube District namely; Buhimba Secondary School, Kabwoya Senior Secondary School, Bugambe Secondary School, Kyangwali Secondary School and Munteme Fatima College face a number of challenges including poor infrastructure, inadequate staffing, absence of girl’s hostels, office blocks and staff rooms, poor sanitary facilities, inadequate computer laboratories with the available one being inadequately equipped.

In addition, Kyangwali Sub-County in Kikuube District has only one government secondary school which is in Kyangwali Refugee settlement camp. The school can barely accommodate the high number of refugees and nationals in the area.  Accessibility to the school also poses a problem given the vast size of the sub-county; which in turn negatively affects attendance and retention of students in school.

Why is the existing Government secondary schools in Kikuube District are poorly facilitated and understaffed?”

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John C Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the education challenges in Kikuube District. Kikuube District is one of the refugee hosting districts whose social services are pressured by the refugee influx.

On realising the absence of a government secondary school and pressure on Government to deliver secondary education services, the Government, in Financial Year 2017/2018, took over Kyangwali Secondary School by grant aiding the school. Government pays for teachers, the staff and also provides capitation grants to the learners. This was also in line with the Government policy of establishing a Government secondary school in sub counties without.

The ministry appreciates the challenges faced by secondary schools across the country including in districts like Kikuube, where students have to trek long distances to access schools.

Under the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project, which is going to be effective beginning 2020/2021, we have a grant of USD $60 million to cater for provision of schools in the l3 refugee hosting districts. Subcounties like Kyangwali will, therefore, receive support for either expansion of the existing school or construction of another secondary school to address overcrowding.

As soon as all our subcounties have schools, the ministry will also review all these peculiar challenges in other parts of the country and address them accordingly. 

The Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program (UGIFT) has consolidated the education development budget in the districts to allow local governments to address rehabilitation and construction needs for both primary and secondary schools prioritising the most pressing ones like sanitation. 

Madam Speaker, the funding to the sector is inadequate to address all these infrastructure challenges amidst many emerging issues.

The sector, therefore, continues to source for funding from within Government, developing partners and the private sector as well. We are currently recruiting more teachers and priority will be given to these areas, when placement begins. 

I submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is there a supplementary question? Where is the honourable member? He is not here. Okay go to hon. Rwabushaija’s question then. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

Qn. 62/03/01

MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): To ask the Minister of Public Service the following:
“
In the budget for FY 2018/19, Parliament appropriated money for salary enhancement for teachers in post primary sub sector; these included teachers in secondary schools, teachers’ colleges and tertiary institutions.

How far has the ministry gone in harmonizing the teachers’ salaries?”

DR JOHN C MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the question on salary enhancement is for the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it not for you? Okay. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought the minister also had another question. The other day hon. Mukitale raised an issue regarding the curriculum; why they have removed the Buganda and Toro Kingdom from the history. He promised to bring a report yesterday and he did not bring it. I thought today would be part of that response, since he did not yesterday. This is because it is not only limited to those but there are Nilo-hamites and so on. 

On Saturday, we went to bury hon. Norah’s mum and it was a very pertinent issue. It was also raised by the Prime Minister of Bunyoro Kingdom. I think the minister should bring a comprehensive response on why he has decided not to teach Ugandans the history about their country; their origin. 

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that we are supposed to make a presentation here about the implementation of the lower secondary curriculum and I have all the answers but remember you gave me two weeks and we are prepared to present next week. 

THE SPEAKER: I will crosscheck from the Clerk of the time we gave.   

3.51
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before the minister comes in to give us a detailed progress about the lower curriculum, there was also a question that was raised and it is very important; that now the curriculum has been brought down and the schools are in preparations to ensure that the new curriculum is adopted. 

However, the most challenging element, Madam Speaker, among others, is that they made Kiswahili compulsory and here in Kampala, many schools do not have Swahili teachers. How about in the villages? 

I request the minister handles that as a matter of urgency because we are suffering. We are in schools but we do not have Swahili teachers, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let the minister bring the position and then we can discuss within that context. 

Honourable members, I have received information that the ministers will not come back and the rest of the business on the Order Paper requires the ministers to be here. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I rise on is in relation to response by ministers to issues raised. 

Madam Speaker, I was looking at the Order Paper and saw the response that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is supposed to respond on. 

Over three months ago, I raised a question that required the response of the minister of defense and the question was in relation to when Government intends to open up lakes Kyoga and Kwania for public use. The minister of defense indicated on the Floor of this House that it is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that is supposed to respond to this issue. 

Unfortunately, to date, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has not presented any response to this effect. Failure to respond by the ministry or Government is actually affecting my work to the extent that if possible we might have to evoke our Rules of Procedure specifically rule 221, which talks about contempt of Parliament. The ministry of agriculture has continuously failed to give meaningful response to these questions.

Madam Speaker, for now, my humble appeal is that we need to reinstate that question for their response and if they continue failing to respond, then probably, Madam Speaker, the honours will be yours to evoke this Rule of Procedure. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: As I was saying, my difficulty is that the ministers are actually not here, because we would have called on them to -

Honourable members, it is becoming a habit for members to come here with their phones and when they ring, they amplify them through this microphone and the feeling is not good in our ears. I have heard from this side and somewhere there.

My difficulty now is that these people are not available, because we could have taken them on if they were here. So let us take it up tomorrow and demand that they respond.

MR OKELLO ANTHNONY: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR NAMBESHE: The minister of education is aware of the plight of the students, who are in Bulambuli who were relocated from Bududa. They have no schools in Bulambuli and I thought it would be important for him when he is preparing a statement -

THE SPEAKER: Did you raise that issue?

MR NAMBESHE: It was raised but we thought the Prime Minister would make a response on it. However, since it is under his docket, he could come with that same report on the curriculum and also prepare a statement on the plight of these students that are now at home.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister has heard. You are required to come back to us on the issue raised about the children who are displaced, who are not receiving their education now.

There is one other matter, which I think we could handle because the minister of education is here. Hon. Eragu, can we handle item 24, because at least the minister of education is here? It is a motion.

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My papers are in the office, if I was given five minutes, I would come and handle the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us adjourn the House to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 3.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 March 2020 at 2.00p.m.)










