Wednesday, 18 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we will adjust the Order Paper to include other items that have necessitated coming in today. One of them is to swear in a new Member of Parliament. The other one is to allow the Minister of Education to lay on the Table two statutory instruments.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1. Mr Aggrey Awori 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I will start with some sad news. Our sister, the Deputy Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, lost a brother, Stephen Kadaga. He died yesterday at Mengo Hospital and burial will take place at Mbulamuti, Kamuli District, tomorrow. Those who would want to go should register at the reception so that we can arrange for transport. Can we observe a moment of silence?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to take this opportunity to welcome the new ex-officio Member of Parliament, hon. Aggrey Awori, and congratulate him upon his appointment as a Minister in the Government of Uganda. (Applause)

We have been with hon. Aggrey Awori in as far as governance of the country is concerned, particularly since 1994/95 when he was one of the Members of the Constituent Assembly and therefore was party to those who formulated the Constitution of Uganda that is currently being used by the country. 

I know that when we made that Constitution, we provided for political systems and at the time this was made we had the Movement system which went on and under which we elected the Sixth and Seventh Parliaments. But in the same Constitution we had provided for a multi-party system. Hon. Aggrey Awori, you have come when that particular provision has been invoked and this current Parliament is under a multi-party system and the configuration in the House has changed as a result and that is why you see that there are Members on both sides of the House. But this time we have resolved that the multi-party system should succeed. 

We have had attempts at a multi-party system twice: just immediately after independence but it did not work; then after the 1980 elections but it also did not work. We may know why it failed but we are learning from those past mistakes so that we ensure that this time, the multi-party system succeeds. 

And one of the ways of making it a success is to understand the essence of parties. The essence of parties is not to create enmity among individuals who support different parties but to appreciate the different policies under which the country will be run. It is like having you presented with a menu; one brings you kawunga or ugali and another brings matooke or muwogo/cassava or kigomba. The fact that one has presented a menu should not bring anger to those who do not want it but just appreciate it. And I have always appealed to the leaders of parties to show examples to the led so that they are not misguided and they fight in the villages. 

Parties are not here because of colours. Currently, we have a colour in this Chamber but it has nothing to do with what we do although it belongs to one party or the other. There was a time when people wanted to change the colours of the carpets and seats but somebody joked and said, “What are you going to do with the Parliamentary Gardens?” (Laughter) These are small details that should not affect our relationship. Tonight, this side may take you; tomorrow you may ride in the same vehicle with the other side to a function. That should not bother you. So, you have come when we are mature - I think we are mature. Those on this side and on that side, please contribute to the success of the multiparty system in this Parliament and the Parliament to come, be it the Ninth, Tenth or Eleventh so that we do not have what we experienced in the past. You are most welcome! (Applause)

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, on behalf of government, I would like to congratulate hon. Aggrey Awori on joining the Front Bench! (Applause) 

When he was a Member of Parliament, he was very articulate and analytical. He had a tendency to ambush me. (Laughter) But he would give me ten minutes’ notice as we were entering Parliament and say, “I am going to attack you on this matter.” So I had a few minutes in which to prepare myself; so, I was always disaster-prepared. Welcome hon. Aggrey Awori! (Applause)

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We on the Opposition side would like to welcome hon. Aggrey Awori even though we are somewhat unhappy that he has gone over to the other side but we are hoping that hon. Aggrey Awori, whom we have known for a long time, will continue with his resourceful criticism; that the collective responsibility will not take away the analytical spirit in him, the urge to see the democratisation process in this country get to better levels. We are hoping he will be the firm Aggrey Awori. I can see the former Chief Whip smiling. I know she is going to pass the whipping seriously so that probably he does not. But seriously, we want to say to hon. Aggrey Awori, you are welcome but our generation needs men and women who can stand by their word, and we hope that when you sit on the other side, this time you will still stick to the words that you used to present and the ideological arguments you used to present. 

The one thing that we want to put to you is that, as you are going to be in charge of ICT, the electoral process in this country is heavily challenged and sometimes we think that elections are won in the tally room. We hope that you who are going to be in charge of ICT in this country, will ensure that we have a free and fair electoral process which is not just won in the tally room using ICT. We want to welcome you again.

3.06
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am rising to join other colleagues to welcome hon. Aggrey Awori to this Parliament and to wish him successful deliberations in Parliament and success in his new appointment. 

You will remember that when we broke off for the Christmas recess, I had indicated to this House that the people of Kasese were seriously and anxiously awaiting the report of the ministerial committee that was handling the issue of the cultivators and the cattle keepers. You will remember that the Minister of Internal Affairs promised that this report would be out in two weeks and by the two weeks period we went for recess.

The reason I am again raising this matter on this Floor is that my people are farmers and with farming you cannot do it without land. And those who have participated in this issue will recall that there is a portion of land which was caveated, no pastoralist is supposed to access it and no farmer is supposed to access it. 

There are three seasons that have so far elapsed. My people are not participating in farming and this is their source of livelihood. Their children cannot access higher education due to the fact that our education system is getting expensive every other day but they entirely depend on proceeds from cotton and proceeds from maize, which they can no longer cultivate. 

My people are cattle keepers; they can no longer graze because they have very little land on which to graze their animals and therefore their animals are not getting access to pasture. Arising from that, the persons who were befitting from the use of this particular land are already coming up and demonstrating and by yesterday a group of the Banyabindi cattle keepers and cultivators were put behind bars for temporarily encroaching on government land in the irrigation scheme. They had no alternative, Mr Speaker. 

What I want to know from the minister is: is this report not coming out so that we can see a way forward for my people? Are they not Ugandans like others? The President is going out to preach about nationalism and he gave us a new commandment saying that you must love your country above all, and the second part of it is that you must treat all other Ugandans justly. I believe my people are not being treated fairly, Mr Speaker, because of the fact that this report is not coming out and the fact that they are not accessing the land from which they feed their families. I want to know from the minister how soon this report will come out so that my people can at least settle once and for all. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I remember this was an undertaking which was made but apparently it was not fulfilled. So, can I ask the minister to make that statement maybe next week on Tuesday so that you address the issue? It was an undertaking and it is on record that the statement be made. Can we have it on Tuesday, please?

3.10
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that Cabinet handled, where I was the chairman of the Cabinet committee on the resettlement of the Basongora, our work was completed. We have resettled Basongora on government land which was available in Kasese and if Parliament needs that report, definitely together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, we can put it together, bring it and report to Parliament.

I came from Kasese last week. It is not true that nobody has cultivated. There are farms all over. People have cultivated broadly.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we do not have to go into those details. What I said is that there was an undertaking and that there would be a statement and a report made by the minister. The report was not made. Therefore, I am saying, make it on Tuesday. (Mr Piro Santos rose_) No, unless you saw me, I cannot allow you to come after my communication. Maybe you should try tomorrow. 

But as for your case, yes, you saw me; this is about UPE in your district but you did not tell me about the other one. So as regards UPE, I advised that you see the Minister of Education who will have his PS and other technical staff so that the matter can be sorted out. It will be faster than just making it on record here. 

3.12
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember I discussed with you about what the world read this morning on the front page of The Monitor newspaper about a fresh claim by the owner of this plane, which crashed into Lake Victoria. I think it is a matter of international concern now that the owner of this plane -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, as you will remember, maybe you were not in the House yesterday but the issue of the plane crash in Entebbe was raised and I advised the person who raised it that he was asking a wrong minister to make a statement on it. I told you that plane accidents are under an agency known as civil aviation. If an accident happens, civil aviation makes a report. But since the civil aviation agency does not come to Parliament, the answerable minister is the Minister of Works who is in charge of civil aviation. Therefore, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication should come and give us a report and not the Minister of Internal Affairs. So, let me now help you to ask the Minister of Works to make an official statement on that incident.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2009

3.14
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Private Members Bill entitled, “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009” be read for the first time. 

Accompanying the Bill is the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Bill stands committed to an appropriate committee of Parliament and as earlier indicated, Bills should not stay with the committees for more than 45 days from the date they are committed there. I am saying this because, as I told you, we have 17 Bills with the committees and we are due to start the budget process next month and then mid May we prorogue to prepare for the new session. So I urge the committees concerned with these Bills to please expedite the process. Should the committee fail because of this or the other, they should report to us saying, “This Bill was committed to us; we have considered it but because of one reason, we cannot make a decision” and the House will make a decision for you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

3.16
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008 be read for the first time, and this comes with the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to our appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS BILL, 2008

3.17
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that The Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008 be read for the first time and it is accompanied with the Certificates of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and it will be noted that on the first day he was sworn in, he started business in fullness -(Laughter)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES BILL, 2008

3.18
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that The Electronic Signatures Bill, 2008 be read for a first time and the Bill comes with the Certificates of Financial Implications. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your indulgence to lay on the Table two statutory instruments, which are not on the Order Paper because –

THE SPEAKER: No, I adjusted. I allowed you to do so.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Much obliged. Mr Speaker, Section 26 of the BVET Act, 2008 empowers the Ministry of Education and Sports to establish by statutory instruments examination boards for specialized training courses. Pursuant to the said powers, the minister has established:

1.	Statutory Instrument No.8 in respect of the Uganda Allied Health Examinations Board Regulations and Statutory No.9 in respect of the Business and Technical Examination Board Regulations.

The two were published in the gazette on 27 February 2009, pursuant to Section 26 of the said law. I beg to lay them before this august House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the two instruments be examined by the appropriate committee of Parliament. Hon. Members, I note also that the Minister of Finance had sent the supplementary estimate for 2008/09 but they are not here and they are a bit urgent. If the minister has prepared to lay this on the Table, he should do so, so that the committee can start working on these estimates, but if he is not, then that will be tomorrow – apparently they are not ready.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember that yesterday this motion was moved; the minister justified the reason for the Bill and the committee also read this report with certain recommendations. We adjourned so that we enable you study the two, the ministers justification and the committees report, so that you can participate in the debate on the motion for the second reading. But if there are no submissions, I put the question.

3.21
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you may excuse me because I have to welcome these honourable members in the public gallery. We have a delegation of 36 women groups from Kooki Chiefdom of Kamuswaga Kabumbuli, represented by hon. Magulumaali. This group is led by Sebyala Dickson, Minister of Culture Heritage and Tourism, Ssaza of Kooki. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are most welcome to Parliament. (Applause)
 
MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start with the fact that the definition of mortgage in the Bill is quite narrow because it is mostly focusing on land. Where I come from, especially in relation to the money lenders who are also subject to this Bill, mortgage extends to include things like a house, a car - someone can even put - in my area there are people who even put in animals like cows and goats, the list is endless. Some people are talking of chicken and fridges –(Interjections)- Oh my God, I can see there are people here who eat pork a lot; they are talking of “past leaders”.

Therefore, like the committee has indicated, we need to find a way within which we can define “mortgage” and not only narrow it to land. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I thought I should give this clarification. We could pre-empt the debate related to issues of chattels. There is a separate law on chattels; how you can mortgage chattels and how you can redeem them and so on and so forth. There is a comprehensive amendment on that law before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and they will be coming here with that separate law. There is also the hire purchase, and so many related laws. But this is specifically on fixed assets - land. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If they want to do a comprehensive law, why do they bring segments of laws? Why didn’t they make the Mortgage Bill together with the chattels, and with maybe the leasing? We could make them together and they move together. Why do you want segments – later you will say that we are delaying to pass laws! 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I participated in the reform exercise on these commercial related laws. The first concept is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing. It was actually to have what was at that time referred to as secured transactions law, all encompassing. But at a later stage, many consultants involved in the work found out that the concepts were actually intrinsically different. This is why we separated most of these items and had separate laws. 

However, at the end of the exercise, we shall have a compendium of laws on a particular subject. Like now as I speak, there is a compendium of laws on commercial related laws and civil procedure related laws and criminal procedure related laws. Those compendiums are packages of laws that can be found with the Uganda Law Reform Commission at a very small price which you can afford; so please access them. So this is for information that sometimes it is better to have separate laws which can be compiled together for ease of reference. 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, there has been a chattel of transfers – I have always had different arrangements other than these real properties which are the subject in this mortgage. If it is a comprehensive one, and you have heard the honourable member talking of goats, cassava – you mean somebody can bring you a basket of dry beans as security for a loan? I think let us wait; should it be necessary, we will see how we will do it. But we should separate the two. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second issue I want to deal with is that of mortgaging matrimonial homes. What has amused me is that the committee on page 5 says that given the various forms of marriages existing in Uganda, it will prove rather difficult for the mortgagee to establish/prove a mortgager’s marital status and his or her rightful spouse. Cases of fraud and impersonation are feared especially if a couple claims to be customarily married. 

I think nowadays even customary marriage is recognised and given a certificate at the sub-county level. So if the fear of the committee is that you cannot prove that somebody is customarily married, then your fears should be allayed because each sub-county has a certificate of marriage for customary marriages. If you fear that people can impersonate, then that can be one of the essential requirements, to come with a marriage certificate. So, I do not think that should be a contest because then it would seem like the committee assumes that in customary marriages, people can easily impersonate, yet in Uganda, the majority of marriages are customary marriages. 

The other issue is the one the committee raised on land – it deals with customary mortgage on page 6. They say, “It is ideal that mortgage transactions are conducted where registered land/property is a subject or presented as collateral security. Whereas this is a requirement, customary land, which is unregistered is at present a subject of commercial transaction; a number of banking/financial institutions have been reported to deal in mortgage financing in respect to customary land. A case in point is Centenary Rural Development Bank and other micro-finance institutions that operate in the rural country side where land is mainly customarily held. The committee further expresses concern that families occupying customary land may not be protected once such land becomes a subject of mortgage.”

Mr Speaker, I would agree with the committee on this subject and I would want us to deal with this subject in a more conscious way, because we the women would mostly fall prey to this because customary owned land, like in Northern Uganda where land is customarily held, it is very difficult to subject it as one of the assets to be mortgaged. At the moment, there is this committee that is registering customary land; I do not know whether it is established in all the sub-counties but in some sub-counties in the country they are registering customary land. Unless we target those which are registered through the land committee of the sub-county, then we can look at this provision. But leaving it open subjects it to abuse. 

Those are the areas I wanted to raise and at a later date, I would bring in some amendments to the committee’s amendments in relation to the matrimonial mortgage. Thank you.

3.33
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think if this law is done very well, it will go ahead to cure many problems. I have a few concerns.

The first one is that currently, when someone goes to a bank to get a loan, one is given heaps of forms to sign, and in the process one committees oneself without knowing that one is going to be hanged. I would have been very happy if this law had some standard prescribed regulation in place, so that anyone who wants to mortgage their property can use them, other than having hidden conditions.

Mr Speaker, women are complaining about the matrimonial homes, but even we men are in problems. A woman can mortgage you without your knowledge! I think we should not look at this as a problem for only women, but as a problem for all of us. Men could be assumed to be in a better position yet we are the ones at disadvantage. 

We need to properly define a matrimonial home. Supposing a man has four homes in four different towns. I may stay in Kampala with my wife, but also have a home in Teso and in Lira. Supposing I want to get money from the bank and I go to Lira to get one of my properties to mortgage, yet one of my wives stays there. Will it be treated as a matrimonial home? I think we should distinguish what is meant by a matrimonial home, otherwise men or women may have a problem when it comes to mortgages. This may also complicate matters, because a person mortgages property in order to get more money and increase on his/her property in the process. 

Mr Speaker, still on definitions, I want to bring in something more on definitions. There is something appearing as “lease,” but it is not being defined, should we follow the definitions as given by the dictionary or not? What I am trying to bring up here is that this law should prescribe applicable rates. I am saying rates because you may go to one bank and it has a certain rate on fees, you go to another one and it has other rate. I think the minister should prescribe some amount as a percentage of something specific. Short of that, this law will cure nothing because it will put up the some procedures to be followed when mortgaging property to a commercial bank or wherever. 

In conclusion, as much as the Attorney-General said that they are bringing another law to cure the problem, I think it would be ideal that the commercial laws that are related are brought as one block and we deal with them once. Otherwise, one of them may prescribe something, and another one prescribes another that contradicts the former. I would plead with the Ministry of Justice that in future, let all commercial laws be put together. Thank you.

3.38
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although this Bill tends to be favourable generally, there are particular sections that I am not comfortable with, particularly clause 7(3)(c) which introduces in dependency on matters to do with determination of the mortgager’s and mortgagee’s rights. The dependants are not defined in the Bill, they are not mentioned as those required when a mortgage transaction is entered into, and yet when it comes to enforcement, particularly when it comes to mortgages on customary land, they are invoked as people whose interest must be catered for. 

I think it would be the onus of the mortgagees to have in mind the number of dependants and who they are in respect to customary land, and know may actually be affected when they are enforcing their rights. It would be important that we restrict the parties to the mortgage to those already mentioned in the previous clauses and get rid of dependants, more especially in the African setting where the number may be unlimited.

Also, look at clause 12 of the Bill which tends to largely favour the mortgagee. The motive mentioned therein – clause 19(3) talks of a prescribed notice, but the whole Bill does not show the format the notice may take, and I have looked through the powers given to the minister – they could have been made eventually in the statutory instrument. But it would have been important that provisions as to notice – because this is where the problem is; the notices by the mortgagees to the mortgagers is always a centre of controversy. If the notice is, for example in a newspaper that is not wide in circulation, how would the mortgager know? So other than leaving it to the statutory instrument, I would be more comfortable if the prescribed form of the notice was put in the Act and specifically mentioned the forms of notice that should be given.

Then, I also find it a bit uncomfortable when other parties, particularly court are given power to vary the terms of the mortgage that has been executed between two willing parties. This may in future bring too much litigation to the advantage of some people who are in practice. So I am uncomfortable with allowing court to interfere with the terms already executed between the parties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It seems we have exhausted the list of those who want to make contributions. So, can I ask the minister or the owner of the motion to make final remarks?

3.42
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank those who have spoken and for the others for positively looking at the Bill. 

Hon. Betty Amongi raised the issue of a definition of a “mortgage” as being narrow. I think that was well-answered by the Deputy Attorney-General; there is another law coming to handle that. 

You raised the issue of the matrimonial home and the proof of customary marriage and that was also well answered. 

Your fear of the abuse of the unregistered customary land by one of the parties, either the husband or the wife; I would want to look at your proposed amendment, because the purpose of the law is to see how we can serve all the interests of all the parties. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi did appreciate this Bill. I agree with you, when it comes to dealing with banks, you and I have that experience. Sometimes you are more anxious to get the money and you do not care about what you sign. Sometimes, it happens also in marriage, you may be too anxious to get your partner and you may not really bother about doing your due diligence. It is true even in other documents which are printed in very small letters like hire purchase agreements. Even with air travel agreements; those of you who have travelled, behind your ticket there is something there which protects or which is supposed to protect you. Many of you do not read it when you get air ticket forms and so on. You may come to discover many things. 

You are interested in just flying but you are not very keen to read what happens to your baggage. When it is lost, what money do you get? There was a very interesting discussion on BBC yesterday about how 20 million pieces of luggage are being lost now, and out of that only one or two million are recovered. Most of those who lose this luggage lose over US $1,000 but the companies are paying hardly US $150 or ten percent of that. That is part of the weaknesses of the consumers and how they can protect themselves. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I agree with you; this should be contained in the regulations. If you can come with some ideas, whether in this matter or another, we could put something more stringent in the regulations when the minister comes to make the regulations. Let us have some standard forms and even see the charges. Is it practical to come in with the minister’s power to make those regulations?

You mentioned something about matrimonial homes. Men also need to be protected. I think the definition of the matrimonial home is not “matrimonial homes” but “matrimonial home”. You and I may have property in Kampala, one in Lira, another in Otuke and you keep on moving to those properties with your wife and children. The issue comes up now - which is the matrimonial home? That is very interesting, and Moslems have about four.

THE SPEAKER: It must be the principal of matrimonial home.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Exactly! So, that one is very interesting. Well, in marriage you may have four wives but each of those wives, I think even under the Moslem law, is entitled to her home. I do not know, but hon. Katuntu should know better than me. They are very strict. You do not put the Moslem women under the same roof, even though in different rooms, sometimes which other religions do. They are entitled to their rights and therefore their matrimonial home is known under the Moslem marriage, which is going to come here.

Hon. Niwagaba raised technical issues. He raised the issue of dependants, the service of notices and the power of the court. The power of court has been agreed on and radically reduced, if you look at that clause that is dealing with the power of court. We know that this is a contract and we did not really want courts to come and reopen the whole mortgage contract. It was agreed between the bankers and the ministry that we use the word, “review” and in this respect the Governor Bank of Uganda was very instrumental in looking at this amendment.

We want courts to protect the type of people you are mentioning who are very anxious to get money but they do not read the details. When it comes to repayment, the banks start quoting all the provisions which actually may not be in these people’s favour. Therefore, the courts will have the power not necessarily to reopen the whole thing but to review. If you can prove fraud, you can prove that there were some unquestionable acts which were done and so on, courts will look at all those based on evidence and it may be in your favour.

I think these are the issues that were raised. I thank you for supporting the Bill. I believe the Bill will go a long way in dealing with the issues of adding value to land so that we can use land for purposes of development. You know very well that no single individual has that type of money, which he can use for major development. The best security that the banks want is a fixed asset - land. When you put your land to good use and the bank takes it as security, then you can use it for many other developments - estate development, industries and so on. I thank you for your support.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, I think you have noted the point which the minister has mentioned. Normally in law, we call this standard form contracts. These are very tricky as he has said. Many transactions are concluded with what they call standard contracts and people normally do not read them. Many people say, “Since it is standard, which is good for hon. Kyanjo, it is good for hon. Alaso, it is good for me”, and you never care.

I think we should develop a practice of reading through these standard contracts before we append our signatures. Otherwise, sometimes certain clauses are placed there and the letters are small. Because the thing is standard, you say, “I think it is okay” and that is why we get problems. I think we should develop the practice of reading.

Hon. Members, the minister has concluded. The motion is that the Bill entitled “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, under clause 2 in the interpretation clause, I would like to amend the definition of “mortgage” by deleting the words “or partly in Uganda and partly elsewhere” which appear in the second and third line of the definition. 

Justification: For ease of enforceability because the Bill covers land or any estate in Uganda and not elsewhere.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, I think the intention of that amendment is mainly to focus on Uganda but I could own property with my wife outside Uganda and I think she can as well mortgage that house and the spouse needs to know before that house is mortgaged. I think the amendment would be a little bit –(Interjections)  

THE CHAIRMAN: There is an objection to the proposed amendment. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)I know you have one but let us dispose of this first. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: I think the issue is really a matter of legislation. Does this Parliament have power to legislate for property outside Uganda? It is a question of sovereignty. If the honourable minister, who I know has lived in Germany for many years, has property in Germany then he should mortgage it there and get us the documents then the laws will govern. The problem is with the enforceability. So, the issue is sovereignty and enforceability. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the issue is clear: enforceability. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Chairman, as we go ahead, we shall get many issues that are not properly interpreted or they may be interpreted but not there. I would propose that we stand over clause 2 and go on because I have some issues to raise like “lease”. We could come back to this clause after finishing the other clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think it is a fair suggestion. As we proceed with the Bill, we may also make other adjustments to the amendments in interpretation that will affect clause 2. Instead of concluding on clause 2 now, we conclude clause 2 when we have cleared all other clauses. I think it is fair. Let us put off clause 2 for the time being.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we replace sub-clause (2) with the following proposal: “For the purposes of sub-clause (1)-

a) 	An intending mortgagee shall take reasonable steps to ascertain whether an intending mortgagor is married and whether or not the property to be mortgaged is a matrimonial home; 

b) 	An intending mortgagor shall make full disclosure to the intending mortgagee as to his or her marital status and whether or not the property to be mortgaged comprises the matrimonial home.”  

Justification: To create an obligation on the intending mortgagor to disclose marital status and whether or not the property is a matrimonial home.

THE CHAIRMAN: Who is going to meet the expenses of the investigation by the mortgagee? Who is going to bear the expenses of carrying out investigations? First of all, the mortgagor has made his declaration. Is it the declaration that you are going to investigate or you carry out independent investigations, go to this village to find out?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think it should be the responsibility of the person who is mortgaging his property to confirm that she or he is married. There are different types of marriages: there is religious marriage, customary marriage and there is co-habiting marriage. It will be very difficult to define who is married or not, and I do not think this is necessary. I want to propose that the mortgagor should come up to demystify to the mortgagee if he or she lied that they are not married yet he or she is married.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the cover on this one should be a requirement of a statutory declaration because I think the bank wants to be covered. There should be a requirement of a statutory declaration, that is, a declaration made under oath. Once that is there, to ask the bank to verify will be an expense on the part of the mortgagor because the bank cannot find its resources other than from the mortgagor himself. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In any contract, you have got obligations on both sides of the contracting parties. If you are the mortgagee, one of the obligations you have is due diligence before you enter into a contract. We cannot sit here and legislate for the due diligence of the mortgagee. If the law has forbidden a matrimonial home to be mortgaged, it is your responsibility as a mortgagee to find out if the property being mortgaged is a matrimonial home or not.  

Two, they talk about the obligations on the part of the mortgagor. Yes, it is true you must disclose but do you have to put it in the law. What is the sanction for non disclosure? That is what I would like to know from the chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO: If you read from clause 4, “duty to disclose”, that is where it is derived from. You have a mortgagee and a mortgagor who shall honestly and in good faith - we have passed that one already - disclose all relevant information relating to the mortgage. It goes on to say, “A mortgagor or a mortgagee who refuses … commits an offence and shall be liable.” 

With respect to the matrimonial home, this was agreed actually with the bankers, if you look at the original provision in sub clause (5). I would like you to read the original provision because this is amended by replacing. 

If you look at it, what came from the government side was for purposes of sub-clause (1). It is the responsibility of a mortgagee to take reasonable steps to ascertain whether the applicant or mortgagor has a spouse or spouses. Omara Atubo goes to the bank and he says, “I want to borrow money and the matrimonial home is the security”. I tell the bank that I am not married - maybe a widower - and here it says it is up to the bank to take reasonable steps. That responsibility was on the bank but what was now agreed was a balancing act between the mortgager and the mortgagee. That is why we came up with this amendment saying an intending mortgagee, that is the bank, shall take reasonable steps to ascertain - the due diligence you are talking of – whether an intending mortgagor is married and whether or not the property to be mortgaged is a matrimonial home. 

On the borrower’s side, he shall make full disclosure. It is a reciprocal act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then to solve this problem, why don’t you advise spouses to secure their interests on a matrimonial home by sensitising them to put caveats on matrimonial homes? A caveat will be notice to anybody dealing with that property that there is another interest. Otherwise, this kind of thing cannot work. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: I would like to inform you that there are two other laws which are taking care of this. One of them is the Land Act, which mentions this and it says you cannot sell. The second one is the law on marriage and divorce; it deals with that. The matrimonial home is being protected in all this and the law is converging to make sure that it is protected.

I think this provision just calls for strengthening the protection of the matrimonial home. Not everybody can put a caveat. A caveat means that the home has a title but we are talking of a mortgage of a matrimonial home including a mortgage on customary land.

THE CHAIRMAN: But why does somebody go to get a mortgage? It must be business.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Evidence has shown that people mortgage matrimonial homes without the other partner’s knowledge, and that is why we are protecting them.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you are upholding the submission by hon. Nandala-Mafabi who said that you bring these laws together so that they are seen in one volume.

MR ATUBO: Yes, it is protecting especially the women who are the vulnerable group. I think this provision should be allowed to go. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the position of the committee, and this amendment should be upheld because we are looking at issues of vulnerability. When the amendment to the Land Act was debated, I know that it was again to safeguard vulnerable women and vulnerable children and this House did adopt that position. We are on record and we have a precedent of protecting vulnerable people. 

I think even in this Mortgage Bill, we should be seen to be protecting our women who are not capable of going through all those lengthy legal procedures. At least as long as this is covered in the Act, they have a starting point. I want to insist that members help us and uphold this position. 

I also know that while my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has suggested that we bring all the other laws, it is going to take time between now and the enactment of the family law, the Domestic Relations Bill and other related Bills. So many people will have mortgaged houses where their children and their wives are living. Mr Chairman, I implore you to help.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me help you on this. This provision of the mortgagee taking this and the other is deceptive to the person that it intends to protect. If a problem comes, the mortgagee will say “I took every measure, went to the villages, and asked this and the other and finally confirmed it was okay”; what are you going to say? What steps must we take to make sure that he has taken due diligence? He says “I went and investigated and this is what they told me”; you are shattered. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, to expound on the point you are trying to make, the committee is dealing more with sub-clause (2) but even under sub-clause (1), it does not definitively protect the women. Under (a) it says that any document or form used in applying for the mortgage is signed by or there is evidence from the document that it has been assented to by the mortgager and any spouse. Mark the word “any”. 

When you go to (b), it says, “… any document or form used to grant the mortgage is signed by or there is evidence … and any spouse.” If you put “any spouse” in a situation where you have a man who has more than one wife, he can collude with one and that one signs. Unless you make it explicit, but if you put “any” in that particular one, there is a problem -(Interjections)- I have not finished hon. Minister –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: It says, “living in that matrimonial home”. Please!

MS AMONGI: What if you say “any” and the man shifts that one to that home and they start living in it for one month. If Nandala, for instance has said he has one home in Lira, one in Mbale, one in Mbarara and then because he wants to mortgage, he will look for a favourite wife somewhere and moves to that area and then the person will have been living there. I think we need to find a definite marriage certificate as a definite proof for this particular provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: What happens if the man chases away the wife, he gets another person, comes to the house, lives there and signs. We are trying to help you, hon. Minister. What you could do is this: it will be an obligation on the part of the mortgagor to file a declaration stating certain facts, and this declaration should be witnessed by the local authority of the village or parish. It should be that kind of thing, so that the bank says, “Well, the local chief of the area where this house is situated confirmed this and we believed it.”

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I need to get some clarification on what a matrimonial home is. I am asking this because these days some people have what they call country homes where they stay over the weekends and return to their other homes in Kampala at the beginning of the week. So, which of the two is a matrimonial home? (Laughter)

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, even if the borrowee makes a statutory declaration, it cannot protect the family because if that declaration is eventually found to be false, there may be repercussions to the borrowee with the family still being at risk. What this clause is trying to protect is only the matrimonial home.

Reference was made to the Land Act; it was said that in that Act, there are restrictions to mortgaging, pledging and transfer of property but Section 39 of this Act does not specifically refer to the matrimonial home. The practice has been that if one wants to get rid of his family or wife, then he either sells or mortgages the home and eventually the family remains at the mercy of the mortgagee. I think this clause seeks to protect the family. The statutory declaration will only attract repercussions onto the mortgagor. The family that this clause intends to protect will remain at risk. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, we are acting as if we are dealing with a society of untrustworthy people. The principle of the law, I think, is to put assurances in place to the effect that the mortgagee and the mortgagor do not blunder during the contract time.

When I go to the bank, it knows the extent to which it can go to avoid danger. If the law states that a matrimonial home will not be mortgaged and the bank goes a head to enter into a contract in respect of such a home and the money is eaten, the wife of such a husband will be there to challenge. Whether she signed, or consented or not is a different issue; she will be there to challenge it and the law will prove beyond reasonable doubt that that is the man’s wife whether he loves her or not.

Let us not detail the laws too much. They will become difficult to enforce in the end. Let us put broader concepts in this law so that it is easy to enforce. These difficult details will turn around and we will be the same people to come here and complain that banks are not accepting.

THE CHAIRMAN: What you can do is to say that where the security is the matrimonial home, let the application for securing that mortgage be signed by the two or the four as the case may be.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether you have looked at sub-clause (b) because you talked about a statutory declaration and so on. Sub-clause (b) reads: “The mortgagee shall be deemed to have discharged the duty under sub clause (2) if the mortgagee obtains a marriage certificate issued in accordance with the laws of Uganda and in the absence of which, a statutory declaration from the spouse or spouses of the mortgagee as proof of marriage.” So the statutory declaration you are talking about is included in here –(Interjections)– it is proposed. So, you have to read the whole of clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you read what is being amended, and the amendment?

MR ATUBO: Yes, I know that it was not there, but we are trying to improve by replacing the existing sub clause (2) with this one.

If you look at clause 5(2) on page 9 in the original Bill, you will realise that it reads as follows: “For purposes of sub-section (1), it is the responsibility of the mortgagee to take reasonable steps to ascertain whether the applicant for a mortgage has a spouse or spouses.” It was as brief as that. However, after the hearing in the committee was done, this is what we came out with. 

Some of these clauses were also agreed upon by the women and banks. We are just replacing the whole of sub section (2) with the new one. That is a balanced position that was agreed upon by the bankers together with the Governor of Bank of Uganda. So, I move that we take it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I do not know, but I see problems. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I realise that we are more or less debating family law and not commercial law. Let us take the reality. Supposing you are the mortgager, what sort of reasonable steps are the committee and the minister envisaging that you should take to ascertain if you are married or not other than having to see your marriage certificate or a statutory declaration? Are you talking about getting evidence of the people who attended your wedding? I am asking this because you are talking about the bank taking reasonable steps. If say I hand in my marriage certificate, is that enough?

The problem here is that this sort of debate may end up in courts of law. What we are raising now on whether there will be reasonable steps taken and what the law will envisage and so on may end up in courts of law. The efficacy of any law is its compliance and easy enforceability. Some of these sections will be very difficult to enforce. Practically, which bank will go to the villages to do a research on the person applying for the mortgage? 

Since this is a commercial law, we can have these other protections in some other laws. If you are talking about registered land that has a matrimonial home on it, we can even have a statutory caveat on it. These are the sort of things we would be talking about other than saying that the bank should investigate to establish whether the mortgagee is married or not; it does not make any commercial sense.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the clearest way, which will be easy,  since you are saying that the protection is scattered in many laws, is to put in that relevant law where the protection is a clause to say that on marriage, a spouse shall be entitled to be on the register of the matrimonial home. Because once he or she is entitled and registered there, anybody looking at the certificate will know that this property has two interests, that of the husband and that of the other spouse. That way, it will be easy.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am forced to seek this clarification following your advice. First of all, I am wondering whether we should be anticipating those laws. I am wondering whether the business of Parliament should get into anticipation. What we have now is this Mortgage Bill. It is the one right in front of us.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are not anticipating. The minister himself said that the protection is not only in this Bill but that there are other scattered laws including the Land Act and others where the protection can be found. I am saying that to help you, why don’t you, in those scattered laws, say that on marriage, the spouse shall be entitled?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The second issue I want to put to the House is that if I am the one borrowing money, I am very interested in proving that I am authentic so I will have to help the bank in every way to get this information which it requires. Most importantly, I do not see the harm it does to this House to protect the vulnerable citizens in this country in this particular law. Why should we let the Mortgage Bill go past us when we have not done our duty as people’s representatives?

We talk about going to local authorities and getting the LCs, but it is on record that many men who are bad mannered have colluded with local authorities to sell land where the family resides. If it were not for the protection which is afforded to women in the amendment in the Land Act, I am sure that the situation would even be worse. So, it does this House no harm to provide for that protection under the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Alaso, these suggestions are intended to help the very rural person you are talking about. If we succeed to have their interest registered on the title and you go to the bank to borrow and secure the loan with that title, they will look at it and they will find Alaso and Ssekandi and others there. So, they will not only deal with Alaso but they will have to ask Ssekandi about it. So, this is more protection than the protection which is being carried by this amendment.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, based on your argument and knowing that people have old titles at the moment, what are you trying to say? Are you trying to suggest that people should go and revise their titles taking into consideration the interests of people with whom they probably share that property and yet it is not officially recorded on the titles? 

I am a member of this committee, and by the way, the banks were also in agreement with this. It is upon the banks to determine how deep they have to dig in establishing facts relating to a property that is being mortgaged. So, if the bank thinks that by merely probing the mortgagee they are satisfied that this property is owned by one person or there is no interest that the children or the wife have in this property that it is not a matrimonial home for example, then they can go ahead to advance or give the loan as it were.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am surprised, hon. Amuriat, that you are saying that the banks and the borrower are in the same position. The banks are in a stronger position because in most cases, it is the borrower who will lose the property. So, they are not in the same position. These are the banks that are using the standard form. They know but you do not know. 

What we are trying to do is to protect the other people who do not go to the bank, that is, the wife and the children. We think that this can be done if they are on the title. Even if they do not go to the bank, the bank will see that this title carries two or more interests and so it will ask, “Where are the other people? We want to see them.”

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, the matter of using land titles does not treat this mischief unless we are going to put it in the law that land titles may include the names of people who are interested. That is really going back to the argument that hon. Alaso advanced when she said that we seem to be making laws in anticipation. We seem to be anticipating a law that does not exist.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the law is such that if you have an interest in the property, you get registered there, or before you get registered, you put a caveat so that for any transfer or any change, notice must be given to you so that you go and put your claim. Perhaps we skip this one and then we go to others as we sleep on it.  

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, you are making a very good argument but you are forgetting that we have a lot of untitled land. If you see what we are suggesting to insert, it is talking of legal documents which can be ascertained.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you are talking about mortgage with untitled land? Is that what you are going to do? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in our report we made it very clear; it is happening. Even now, that is why we are putting steps where this can be ascertained with legal documents acceptable in Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: But we should accept that we are modern and if we are modern, we have to do things in a modern way. (Laughter)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, it is just a small point. I thank you for your guidance on this point but I would really plead with you in two respects. 

One, the ideal position is for a matrimonial home to be registered in the name of husband and wife. If I recall well, that could have been the lost amendment of hon. Matembe. You remember that amendment which should have come in the Land Act some years ago and somehow it disappeared somewhere? That is the ideal situation, and that is what some married people are doing. We are possibly not looking at what is not present at the moment. What we are looking at is the existing position so that married women especially, are protected from unscrupulous partners who seek to mortgage the property, not pay and the property is bought. Possibly this is one of the ways of getting rid of the property.

Hon. Katuntu asked: how do you go to the extent of proving this provision? How do you implement it? Can’t it be abused? All I can say is that any diligent lender, say a bank, will at the first point of contact, when you say you have property and you go with the title and show it to the banker, look at it and ask you whether it is a matrimonial home. When you say it is and show the marriage documents and statutory declaration, any diligent bank will not stop there. They will go to the ground and maybe even send a valuer. Before you say, “This is my matrimonial home in Mukono, I want to borrow Shs 100 million”, the bank will have to say, “Yes, you have this matrimonial home in Mukono, you have given us the marriage certificate, the spouse may not be there, you have the statutory declaration but we have to go and look at the land, take photographs, value it and see how much we can give you out of this.” This is part of the due diligence that we are talking about. So, definitely the first step we are taking is to protect. Mr Chairman, I think you should really look at this.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I stop there.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I can assure you we have done a lot of due diligence on this provision and that was the best we could come up with. You know the First Reading of this Bill was two years ago and it is part of this provision which delayed us. The committee knows. With the banks, women and all sorts of people, this is the compromised position we agreed on. 

It is not a negative provision but a positive one that can add to the stability of the family because that is what we are looking at. We are looking at the stability of the family, that is, the husband, wife and children. I urge you to support this provision as it is good for you, except for those possibly who support other things in the institution.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This amendment came after a long period of discussion. I want to inform you that I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure. We came up with this after a very long discussion. At first we wanted to consider the land where you derive your livelihood, like the one in the Land Act, but we said that would go too far because we want to undertake business. What we should protect is only the matrimonial home, and we do this because it protects both the bankers and the family, that is, the wife and children.

Some men can claim to be married and even forge a certificate saying that they are married when actually they just bought the certificate. So we would like to find out whether truly that home is the matrimonial home or not. Therefore, that clause is very important for the benefit of the women, vulnerable children and even the banker. I would like to thank the minister for supporting us, the women. Mr Chairman, please support what we are telling you. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are not saying that people’s contributions are not important. We are only saying that it is ineffective. There are better and more efficient ways of achieving what you want by what you decided on after a long debate. Should I put the question or is it still up for debate? Why don’t we stand it over and proceed with others? We do not want to be seen to hurry when actually some loopholes have been indicated. These debates are well intentioned.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I think this debate is becoming controversial and I would wish to plead that we stand over this to give us time to consult. The lawyers need to convince us and the women need to be convinced as well. I think on this matter, let us not only focus on women. Things have changed. What you think men can do, women can probably do in a smarter way. So I think we should not be lopsided. I plead with you to give us time to consult. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I agree; it is not only women because when a man moves into a house built by a woman, it becomes a matrimonial home. I think it would be a good practice for us, when we are dealing with these kinds of laws, to show that the law is for us rather than one group against the other. Do you agree that we stand over this provision? If we do, it would mean that we go to clause 7.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, how do you propose that we resolve this? Are you asking us to work with the minister at some point? How do we proceed? 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is true that the committee has presented and according to hon. Baba Diri, it was after a long time. However, some of us were not there. We have seen what you have recommended and think it can be improved. However, because people think that they need consultation, when they make the consultations on this they will present the committee’s report, the recommendations, present their views and find out the best way of solving this problem. If we agree - which is also well intentioned - to stand over this, I think the clauses we would stand over would go up to clause 6 because we were on clause 4, and clause 7 deals with a different matter but those are dealing with the same subject. I do not know what you think.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, you can take an animal to the water but you cannot force it to drink, so I think all that we can do now is to stand over. No problem. Things will cool down and then we shall see it tomorrow, but I do not think that we shall really change much.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am lost in both ways and I do not know how to cool down on this matter. Where are we going to merge the various opinions? Are you going back to talk to the committee chairman so that this is re-drafted to capture what has come up in the House? Are we going to come back to the House with diverse opinions? Which way?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Bill is out of the committee; it is with the whole Parliament. Members of Parliament who are interested in this will know how and who to consult and they will come back after this.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have some issues which were not tackled, for example the issue of describing a matrimonial home. Take a scenario, I am here Minister of State for ICT and happen to be given a government home and my wife comes and we stay together. So, practically both of us have no physical matrimonial home where we are staying.  

So if the bank wants to ascertain that there is a woman in the house against which I want to get a loan and they find there is nobody. If they go ahead and give the loan and the poor woman wakes up the next day when the husband does not have a job anymore and goes back to the village only to find the home is gone. 

THE CHAIRMAN: These are the arguments but since it seems that we have agreed that we stand over these up to six so that we deal with seven. These are arguments that will come after due consultations with all stakeholders we shall be able to access.   

Clause 7

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 7 is dealing with the mortgages of customary land but what is perturbing me is that one, it is leaving the creation and operation of mortgages purely on customary law. Clause 7 reads, “The creation and operation of mortgages on customary land shall subject to this section continue to be in accordance with the customary law applicable.” 

My thinking was that since we have a Land Act, and this Land Act has a decentralized system where there is a land committee at sub-county level, which is supposed to have Register of titles for customary land, we make it that it should operate in accordance with the Land Act. 

If we say customary law is applicable to that land, it will become so ambiguous and the customs are too spread and so many. But since we have a law that is dealing with customary land under the Land Act, why can’t we make it - because those who want to register land at the sub-county level would be seen as serious people who want to use their customary land for commercial interests. It becomes difficult to determine the interest of those who have not registered it. So my plea is that we make it in tandem with the Land Act, which is applicable to customary land and not to customary law applicable to the land. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, there is no problem with this. Whether you refer to the Land Act or what, because even the Land Act recognises the customary land but the meaning of this one is that that customary law has something say as to how you mortgage land; that is what it is saying. 

The Customary Law recognises customary land; the Constitution also recognises customary holding; here what it is telling you in this first paragraph is what the customary law has to say about this. The customary law in Lango may be different from the one in Abim. So, that is why I will say Abim people, this land is being mortgaged, what is the customary law here? 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, maybe I have to be educated by older people. I do not know of any customary law, for example in Lango that deals with mortgaging customary land. Actually for –

THE CHAIRMAN: But you told us about mortgaging beans and goats in your area.

MS BETTY AMONGI: No, the beans, goats and cows are not customary land. Those are individual assets of people. But on customary land, I have not seen the practice, for example in Lango where there is a law on mortgaging under customary norms and values.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Amongi, since they have customary law on mortgaging goats, you think they should not have customary law to mortgage customary land? 

MR KATUNTU: Can I seek clarification and then the minister can answer both? Of course it is right that customary law is largely unwritten or un-codified and it just goes to practices and norms of a particular society. I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee or the honourable minister whether they really received any evidence of any custom anywhere in this country where mortgaging of land is allowed and how that custom has been operating anywhere before they introduce this one; and once we start codifying it then it ceases to be customary law and becomes codified law. So, how does this mortgage law which is now codified manage a customary practice of mortgaging land and it continues to be a custom? 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, in law because customary law is not written; is not codified in most cases, you prove it as fact. That is the practice of proving customary law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am lost. I know customary land is the land we have there in our villages, which is more or less communal land and whatever. Either it was given to my father by my grandfather and he also gave me or I bought mine. How do you mortgage; what do you use to mortgage that customary land?

THE CHAIRMAN: If you read the Constitution and read the articles dealing with the land boards, which were created throughout the districts, one of the functions and one of the rights of persons occupying customary land is that he can secure a title on customary land. But that does not mean to say it ceases to be. But the District Land Board has those powers. You apply to them and once the elders in your customary locality say, yes it is your land; you are given your title.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, once unregistered land has been brought under the Act as lawyers say, then it ceases to be customary land. It is now land registered under the Act governed by the Registration of Titles Act. Once land is under the Act with a title, with proprietors, how can you say this is customary land when it is governed under the Registration of Titles Act?

THE CHAIRMAN: Under the current law, yes it is possible for the people in the community, even one village where customary land prevails, for them to be registered for that particular land under the Land Act. And it does not - 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, it is very clear from section 5 of the Land Act that the fact that one gets a certificate of customary ownership, that land loses its tenancy of being a customary land. Sub-section (1) reads, “Any person, family or community holding land under customary tenure on former public land may acquire a certificate of customary ownership in respect of that land in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 

(2) A certificate for customary ownership shall be in the prescribed form ….”

The fact that one gets a certificate of customary ownership that means that land ceases to be customary.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Article 237 (3) of the Constitution is very clear and it says that, “Land in Uganda shall be owned in accordance with the following land tenure systems: customary; freehold; mailo; and leasehold.” 

In the Land Act, the definition of customary land is very clear there and basically it is unregistered. It is governed by the custom where the land is located but also the law allows you to start registering customary land. And that customary land has a certificate which is called customary title and it does not cease. 

But the law also allows you in the Constitution Article 237 - this is the Constitution, which you people made - it also says, “Land under customary tenure may be converted to freehold land ownership by registration.” So you can, and people now are doing it by registering customary land after some time.

But let me add this, I think the basic question which honourable members are asking is: how do you mortgage customary land? The provision we have is simply recognising because even in the report there, if you take the report, it is already recognising and it mentions one bank called CERUDEB, Centenary Bank, which I know, even in my own place has allowed people to mortgage unregistered customary land and that is why the law is saying the creation and operation of mortgages. You create a mortgage on customary land and say, “Shall, subject to this section, continue to be …” - because it is already happening.

This Mortgage Bill was made with this in mind. What do we do? CERUDEB as a bank dealing with the rural people, 80 percent of the land in Uganda is unregistered. Are you going to say you do not use unregistered land to create wealth? 

And how is it done? Very simple: you go to any area around Mbale, or around Gulu and then you talk to the bank and say, “I want to borrow money. This is my half acre of customary land.” The bank will ask you a simple question, “Are you the owner?” And you say, “Yes.” Who can testify that you are the owner? You call the local council. If you are a member of a family you call your wife or your husband and they confirm that this is your unregistered customary land.

And the bank goes further. It even measures and takes measurements and says this is how long, how wide, it draws its location and the local council signs. You sign the document and say, “My customary land based in village A, in parish B, in the Gombolola C, is owned by me and I want to mortgage it to CERUDEB, duly witnessed by the following”, and the value is given. Normally these are small moneys; it is half a million and so forth. So this is already being done and you sign for it -(Interjections)- so if you are not aware, this is really the information you should be -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to supplement the minister’s statement and I think yours. The holding of customary land under customary law is both recognised under the Constitution and under the Land Act. If you may wish to read, it is good hon. Nyombi cited section 4 of the Act, but he read it in isolation of the other relevant provisions.

If you want the full text on the holding of customary land under customary law, after reading that provision of the Constitution, you read from Section 3 of the Land Act, to Section 7. For instance Section 4 says, “Incidents of forms of tenure:
(1) Customary tenure is a form of tenure:
a)	Applicable to a specific area of land and a specific description or class of persons; 
b)	Subject to section 27, governed by rules generally accepted as binding and authoritative by the class of persons to which it applies;
c)	Applicable to any persons acquiring land in that area in accordance with those rules;
d)	Subject to section 28 of this Act, characterized by local customary regulation.”  

And when you look at Section 28, the only exception in how you apply this provision where there are women’s rights, children’s rights and so forth.

In addition to his submission, I would like to reiterate what the minister is saying. We need to put it on the market. What actually happens is what value is attached. The mortgagee is not foolish, if he feels that giving money to a person giving security of customary land ownership is useless, he/she will not do it. But why do we deny the right of putting that property on the market? Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: There is a question I asked the minister and the chairman of the committee to tell us the evidence they had during their meetings with the stakeholders - whether they got any evidence relating to customary mortgaging of the land. That is what we want, whether you had witnesses. Because customary tenure all over this country is not individualistic, it is community ownership; tribal ownership, clan ownership and family ownership and the individuals have what we call user rights and not propriety rights. 

We are going into another debate and the reason why some of us have been supportive of customary ownership of land is because it is a sort of security to the vulnerable people. That is why we are saying much as we have gone commercial we need to protect our people. The only thing our people have is land and nothing else. 

So if we just rush to get this land, put it on the market for purposes of mortgaging, when the customs of our people – that is why where I come from, for example, I have got no right to alienate that land on which I even built my house, because it is clan land. It is for purposes of protection of the land. I think this particular clause calls for further debate and further consultation before we get our most vulnerable people at the mercy of sharks. 

MR ATUBO: I think hon. Katuntu has forgotten to look at the modern development in customary ownership. It is very unfortunate that you do not seem to recognise that a lot of land under customary system is now owned by individuals in absolute terms. I own customary land myself in pieces which is unregistered -(Interjections)- just hold on. 

The problem is that people still think that customary land is the one owned by the whole tribe, clan, family and so forth, but he is forgetting that a substantial bit of land now is moving away from that clan and family to individuals and therefore you cannot just say you have no right. 

In fact most of the customary land which you are talking of which is unregistered is around urban centres. This is customary land around Namakwekwe etcetera and you won it absolutely without even having to bother with your clan and so forth. This is a fact.

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, we know that land especially around the urban areas, the peri-urban areas is becoming individually owned and not customary. But for customary land, we still have communal land or even families and it is not yet individuals and this is to protect the vulnerable people. Otherwise if we allow registration - for us we discourage people from going to register customary land because it will be very easy to mortgage it and lose it. It is very important for us to know that the peri-urban land is no longer customary land. It is the urban land for individuals, which is normally leased out but not customary.

THE CHAIRMAN: If I may ask you, I am not familiar with this term. In your customary setting, is it preventable for your unit, be it a tribe or village to say, “Our son has grown now and I think he wants to develop himself to take care of his family and so forth so on our customary land we give him kibanja but this kibanja is customary; it must be succeeded by a person from your clan?” Does it prevent you from giving me my customary holding for me to own and take care of my family?

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, normally that is done but not for sale and that is how even then in the peri-urban we are losing this kind of customary land tenure system because land has been allocated to individuals and they decided to either dispose of it or they go on using it. So is this law protecting it. We must also know the essence of customary land tenure system; it is to protect the vulnerable people and also to make sure that we still have land and to help indigenous people to still stay together and remain in the surface of Uganda. Otherwise if we now lease hold this land, then we are not going to have plans of staying together. We are going to have land disposed of to people with money and then the vulnerable people remain without land at all. 

It is still important that we do not go registering this customary land. For us in Acholi we say people must not register their land. If it is given to a boy of a family, that boy must know that that land is also for his children and not individually own it.

MR ATUBO: If this customary land is owned by a family or families, no bank is going to allow you to mortgage that customary land without the consent of the totality of all those members; if it is owned by a clan of 200,000 people, no bank is going to allow you to mortgage that land without those 200,000 people agreeing. But if that customary land which is peri-urban and registered, is owned by Omara Atubo alone, it will just lead to - that is why –(Interruptions)- please, give me time because we are now debating something else.

MR KYANJO:  Mr Chairman, it honestly looks like we are already driving into the red zone. It is my sincere prayer that we stand over the whole Bill for a while to enable us make thorough consultations; it looks like we may endanger ourselves in the quest to solve a problem. I observe that all of us can be honest to say that we did not do a lot of homework on this law. I think it is important to go back and do some thorough work. That is my honest prayer, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but hon. Members, I think we are dealing with customary land and I think the Attorney-General or somebody read something for you. I think you should go and read this Section 7 of the Land Act, which provides thus: 

“Procedures for application for certificate of customary ownership: 
(1) The chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for ensuring that the procedures to be followed by the committee as set out in this section and any other procedures that may be prescribed are complied with.  

(2) Where an application has been submitted to the committee, a notice in the prescribed form shall be published and posted in a prominent place in the parish and on the land, which is subject of the application –
(a) Specifying the location and approximate area of the land;
(b) Requiring all persons who claim any interest in the land or in any adjacent land which may be affected by the application, including the respect of an urgency land, claims as to the boundaries of that land, to attend a meeting of the committee at a specified time and put forward their claims ….”

The intention of reading this section is to show that it is possible to have a certificate of customary land; it does not cease to be customary; it is a certificate, which is provided for under this law. I think this debate should not be conducted in the direction that will suggest that the Mortgage Bill has come to take away customary land or to seize it. Therefore, the debate should be sober while we listen to each other. I think we should take time; do some consultations so that we are not accused of using the Mortgage Bill to take away certain rights.  

So I really do not know whether we should continue with the debate or we defer it to tomorrow. It is important that this Bill is cleared and in clearing it we should not hurt the interests of our people. 

So, hon. Minister, with the kind of reactions that I have seen and the various interests coming in, let us give Members time this evening - we can continue with this debate tomorrow. Otherwise, I had expected to complete this Bill today because it has only 48 clauses. Although we are not making much progress, I think tomorrow we can do as much as we can. And maybe, can we start at 2.00 p.m.? Okay, the House is – no, I am not a Speaker at this stage –(Laughter)  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.09
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” and has stood over clauses 2, 5, 6 and 7, and passed clauses 3 and 4. We are hoping to make some good progress tomorrow. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.10
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on The Mortgage Bill, 2007. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have come to the end of today’s business. We have been handling a very sensitive matter, the Mortgage Bill. It is time for us to go and make consultations on the various issues that have been raised during the debate so that when we come back tomorrow, we can reach a consensus that will enable us move ahead. With that the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.  

(The House rose at 5.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 March 2009, at 2.00 p.m.)
