Thursday, 19 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for being able to keep time. I must say that I have not caught you by surprise because yesterday due to the importance of the Bill we are handling, we agreed that we should start the proceedings at 2.00 p.m. prompt instead of 2.30 p.m. That was the agreement and I was only keeping our agreement. That is why I came earlier than we usually do. 

In the gallery, we have children from a school whose particulars I have not yet been given but when they are brought, I will tell you the school. All the same, I want to welcome you to the Parliament of Uganda. 

I have been advised by the chaplain of the Anglican community here that there will be a service in the Members’ Lounge at 5.30 p.m. and the chief celebrant will be Bishop Gidudu, the newly appointed Bishop of North Mbale. So you are advised to go there at that time and thank God for whatever He has given us.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: This is supposed to be dealt with by the Minister of Finance, but apparently he is not here. Let us go to the next item. The next item is the Mortgage Bill, which we were dealing with yesterday. A lot of it was deferred but now members are still not ready. I cannot pretend to say that I am conducting a Committee Stage when the members who have interest in this are not here. I wonder what the minister has to say.

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, you remember you deferred clauses 6 and 7 on the matrimonial home and the mortgaging of customary land. You advised us to go and sleep over it. Those who are very vocal are not here. I think they have slept over it and possibly they have become wiser and that is why they are not here. So I propose that we proceed. If they have over slept, then why do we bother? They were here when you said we would start at 2 O’clock and you advised them to go and consult. I remember you used the phrase, “Sleep over it and we deal with it tomorrow”. So if people over sleep, I think others who have woken up early should be allowed to proceed with business. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, we can do that, but I met Prof. Kakooza of the Law Reform Commission this afternoon and I told him that we had a problem. He seemed to have suggested to me that they have some ideas about this matter similar to what is happening in Tanzania. This was in the afternoon. He promised to send me something. You know Prof. Kakooza was here all day; he just left for the office. So we can say, “well, they have not come”, but at the end of the day we may pass a law that may cause problems. 

MR ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. I do not know whether Prof. Kakooza told you that the Law Reform Commission produced a study report on the reform of the laws relating to mortgage transactions; it is here in my hand. This study forms the basis of the Mortgage Bill. Actually, I must commend the Uganda Law Reform Commission because they have carried out so many studies on so many laws and they have been very helpful. Even the chattels which we have been talking about have been drawn from that study. 

They have carried out a study on hire purchase. I think they have carried out over 20 or 30 studies. So, actually Prof. Kakooza is the author of this, and his signature is here. We did not depart very much from this write-up. So if he is now coming to throw out the discussion on the Bill, I must say they were represented in the committee and I do not know whether he has something different.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. I only told you that I met him and he told me that. So what do we do hon. Members? Would it be fair for us to carry out the committee stage when some people are evidently missing? Should we suspend? It is not a question of hurrying the Bill.

MR ATUBO: It is not a question of hurrying it, Mr Speaker, but you have been very serious. You told us that we have 17 pending Bills and we hardly have time up to about 15th of May. Surely, the people of Uganda cannot be held back by a few people who are not in the House, especially since you said it yesterday. The Bill was read for the first time, it was read for the second time and it was fully debated and it is at the Committee Stage. However, I do not mind you adjourning briefly.

THE SPEAKER: I think what I should do, in order to be fair to you so that eventually this law is subjected to the scrutiny of Members of Parliament, is to suspend the proceedings for 20 minutes so that we get to the normal time. Normally we start at half past but we came a bit earlier than the usual time. So for fairness’ sake and for benefit of doubt, let us suspend the proceedings for 20 minutes. Proceedings suspended.

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.19 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.39 p.m., the Speaker presiding_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at the beginning I informed you that the Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy will hold a service at 5.30 p.m. and Bishop Gidudu Patrick will be the chief celebrant. 

Also, all Members are invited to a workshop on the proposed National Health Insurance Scheme tomorrow, 20th March, at 10 a.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. You are encouraged to attend.

The students who I introduced to you are students and teachers from St. Noah Mawagali, Buikwe North, Mukono District. You are welcome. (Applause)

Now we continue with the debate on the Mortgage Bill. Yesterday we were at the committee stage and so let us continue with the Committee Stage.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am really sorry but the Order Paper I have for Thursday, 19 March has got item 3 and I want to know its fate.
 
THE SPEAKER: Which item?

MS NANKABIRWA: Item 3: presentation of papers on supplementary expenditure for 2008/2009. I have been summoned to come here and stand in for the minister who is engaged with the President in PRT.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can lay the papers on the Table.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Hon. Members, whereas clause 2, sub-clause (a) and (b) of Article 156 of the Constitution allows that in respect of any financial year, if it is found that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or the need has arisen for a purpose of which no amount has been appropriated, or that any money has been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose which amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.  

Now, therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a total supplementary expenditure of Shs 119,936,884,972 under Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2008/2009. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the document be examined by the Committee on Budget, which should promptly report to the House for necessary action. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007 

Clause 7

THE CHAIRMAN: We had reached clause 7, so let us go on. We shall come back to the two.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when we left yesterday, I think we were dealing with what we call customary land. I recall the minister was trying to explain that if you register customary land, it ceases to be customary land.

We know that one person cannot form a custom. A custom is for a certain group of persons. If there is a mistake in one law, we cannot go by it. 

We want to say that if we want to move, I think we may have to delete clause 7 because customary land means land which is communally owned by a certain custom. Now, the moment there is a registered interest, it becomes individual land or a group of persons’ land, and that is the one which can be mortgaged in that form.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I think before we even think of deleting clause 7 on the mortgaging of customary land, we must legally be sure that customary land is purely communal; that is not correct. 

My considered opinion is drawn from Section 3, Section 9, Section 22 and Section 27 of the Land Act. For the benefit of those who do not have the Land Act, let me read it to you. 
“The incidents of tenure: 
Customary tenure is a form of tenure- 
3(e) Applying local customer regulation and management to individual and household ownership” It goes further to say, “providing for communal ownership”; and 
(g) In which parcels of land may be recognized as sub-divisions belonging to a person, a family or a traditional institution.” 

All it means is that under the law, it is not true that customary land is purely communal. Indeed the law recognizes individual household, communal and individual person, a family and a traditional institution. 

Indeed under Section 9 of the Land Act, which allows customary tenure to be converted to free hold says, “Any person, family, community or association holding land under customary tenure.” So, the law is very clear on that. 

Section 22 of the Land Act says, “Individual holding of land created out of communal land.” So, it even allows land held communally to be given to individuals and it says that land held communally is occupied and used by individuals and families. The community can give an individual a sub-division of his. You have 100 acres of land owned by a community of 50 people; somebody says, “Give me my piece of land”, and the community will sit and say, “He has two acres as an individual”.

Finally, under Section 29 which deals with rights of women, children and persons with disability regarding customary land, any decisions taken in respect of land held under customary tenure whether individually or communally. So even land, which is held individually under customary tenure, has that protection. I have gone to this great length to convince my colleague on the other side of the argument that indeed customary tenure does not restrict itself to only the community. In fact, individual, family, household and traditional institutions are all recognized as individual customary owners. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the minister has read the provisions of the Land Act Sections 3, 9, 22 and 27. And the word being used consistently in all those provisions is “held”, it is not “owned”. If the law envisaged ownership, it would have used the word “owning”. Does the minister see any difference of land being held and land being owned? Because under customary ownership, you do not have ownership, you only have usury rights. That is why the law uses the word “held”. Your right is as far as you can use that land but not ownership. And therefore using and abusing disposing of, you fall back to the community and rules and customs of that community.

MS KWEBIHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to address this issue of customary land from the point of view that we have many different customs in Uganda. Where I come from, customary land can be used by the family in groups or even individuals and each person gets his own portion. And therefore according to our custom in the district where I come from, this customary land can be mortgaged because it is divided according – if you have many wives, each wife may have her portion and her matrimonial home on that piece of land with her children, and another wife gets hers. Even the children get their portion. So if each person has a portion, then it is not the same like the other customary land in some parts of Uganda where people own it together. I think it would be a disadvantage to people not to mortgage the land because if you cannot use the land to get money for your family and for your people, what use is the land? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi is suggesting that we should revisit the laws governing this subject. We could include the Constitution itself, we could conclude the Land Act because hon. Katuntu says the term should be “held” – one can hold freehold interest in the land, or you could say, “I own”. And the Constitution under Chapter 237(3) says land in Uganda shall be owned in accordance with the following land tenure system and among the tenure system mentioned they start with customary. 

So, it is possible to own land under customary law. It is possible as we saw yesterday that even one can have a certificate for customary land and this can be issued to one. But I think there is nothing wrong to say that the law is unfair or needs to be reviewed. But that is a different approach. But as of now the law as it stands, it seems that customary land can be owned.

The other point you have to ask really is that, now are we saying people living on customary land should be denied facilities of mortgages? And as you see, you would see most parts of the country where they do not have, for instance, leasehold system, freehold system under customary land system. Are we suggesting that we forget about these people from developing by getting loans from the banks? This is another question which you have to approach. But I think hon. Mafabi, what you can state is a motion to revisit provisions of the Constitution and other operating laws, otherwise in the position as it is, one can own land under the customary tenure system.

Let us hear the Attorney-General and then hon. Katuntu.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to emphasize your advice on the ownership vis-à-vis holding of customary land. And that there are also some other provisions which reinforce the concept of ownership by individuals under customary land holding. For instance, Section 8 of the Land Act. The marginal note is incidents of certificate of customary ownership. It reads: “A certificate of customary ownership shall be taken to confirm and is conclusive evidence of the customary rights and interests specified in it. The land to which the certificate refers shall continue to be occupied, used, regulated, and any transactions in respect of the land undertaken and any third party rights over the land exercised in accordance with customary law.” 

It goes further to provide even for the mortgaging of customary land. Under (2) which says, “A certificate of customary ownership shall confer on the holder of the certificate the right of the holder to undertake subject to the conditions, restrictions and limitations contained in the certificate subject to sub-section (1), any transactions in respect of that land which may include but shall not be limited to (c) mortgaging or pledging the land or a part of it where a certificate of customary ownership does not restrict it.” 

And in (7) of that Section it says, “A certificate of customary ownership shall be recognised by financial institutions, bodies and authorities, as a valid certificate for purposes of evidence of title.” 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, I think you cited the Constitution quite correctly. The Constitution talks about ownership and does not talk about holding. And when we talk about ownership of land customarily, then it means the whole group under the custom. That is what it means in my own interpretation of that section. So when it comes to individual interests, which the minister was talking about, the law deliberately uses the word “holding” to distinguish it from “owning” provided for under the Constitution. This shows you that there is a difference between owning and holding. 

And secondly, the section the Attorney-General read, first of all, has a rider, where a certificate of ownership does not restrict it. If you are issuing a customary owner a certificate of customary ownership on communal land, naturally you would restrict it. I want to ask the minister, it is 12 years down the road since this Land Act came into force, has the ministry issued these certificates or have they found it difficult to implement this particular provision? If they have found it difficult to implement it, how do we now drag some other law to provide for something which is already problematic? So when you look at the law –

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu, while you are submitting, would you also like to take into account the constitutional provision under Article 237(3) a provision named (b): “Land under customary tenure may be converted to freehold land ownership by registration.”

MR KATUNTU: Yes, Mr Chairman, I agree with you entirely. Once you convert customary land into freehold then the rules of freehold apply and therefore it becomes a different tenure. It has been brought under the Act. It falls under the Registration of Titles Act and all the rules of titled land because what has been converted is the tenure system of that land; it is no longer customary land but a freehold. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But would you like to advise whether people living on customary land, especially in the North, should forget about getting mortgages? Is that what you are saying?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, let us talk about the law first and then we shall graduate to see whether that law can allow that situation. Most of the land - as you have said - and indeed the Land Act defines what communal land is. There is no way a law envisages a tribe, a clan or a sub-clan to mortgage its land. It is not possible. And I asked the minister yesterday and the chairman of the committee during the proceedings –

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu is it possible for the community to say, “We want to run a business so let us get a mortgage to assist us?” If they do that would they not have used customary land to secure a mortgage? 

MR KATUNTU: I hope the Chair is just asking for purposes of clarification and not a debate, or disagreeing with me in my debate. We are talking about commerce. Mortgaging is a contract. I want anybody to give me his experience, the Minister of Lands and the chairman of the committee, where a bank has contracted with this tribe called Basoga. Give me just one experience where this bank, DFCU, has contracted with a clan called Baisemulawa and then we can proceed with looking at how we can get rules to govern that contractual relationship. 

Let us not enact a law for its own sake. The efficacy of any law is its compliance and applicability. This is recipe for disaster for one reason: you will have one conman in a clan who will eventually use this, goes to a bank and tomorrow you will find a community up in arms. It has happened before. So, really if we are talking about commerce, let us see what exactly happens in the commercial world because we are not enacting a law for purposes of academics. We are not.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This debate of the Mortgage Bill comes at a time when there is a lot of attempted fraudulent registration of customary land individualised for exclusive use. 

I would like to caution that the Land Act provides for the mechanism to register land through communal associations. It is only after having communal associations that you can convert this land, if you wish, into freehold. That is when you can change the tenure. The starting point should be a communal association because whereas it provides for user rights, the exclusive ownership rights are not provided for in customary land holding.  

I, therefore, request that we separate the user rights which are given to individuals, families and households, from the ownership rights. If the Parliament allows the already attempted fraudulent registration of customary land, we are going to have a problem. I thank you.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Under the Land Act, the words “ownership” and “holding” are used interchangeably. First of all, under Section 2, the position you spelled out, Mr Chairman, from the Constitution, is reiterated that ownership refers to customary freehold, mailo and leasehold. But if you go to Section 40, sub-section 6 of the Land Act, it says, “…any citizen holding land under freehold and mailo tenure…” So the term “ownership” and “holding” are used interchangeably.  

Sub-section 3 makes it very clear that even when you are referring to freehold or mailo, it can be referred to as holding land.  Holding is not restricted to customary land; it also refers to mailo land and freehold.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: I want to support the interpretation of hon. Nyombi on this point of holding and ownership and to draw your attention to Section 4 of the Land Act just to make my colleague hon. Katuntu appreciate this point that the words “holding” and “ownership” are actually used interchangeably. 

If you look at Section 4 of the Land Act, the title of the clause of the section is “Certificate of customary ownership”. And then what is the language in the body of the clause? It says, “… any person, family or community holding land under customary tenure or former public land may acquire a certificate of customary ownership in respect of that land in accordance with this Act.”  

Furthermore, I want to take hon. Katuntu and others back to Section 3 of the Land Act. Section 3 of the Land Act, sub-clause 1(e) says, “… applying for customary regulation and management to individual and household ownership.” So if you are saying that it is only “held,” the interpretation clause is saying, “individual ownership”. 

It goes further on in (g) to say, “… in which pieces of land may be recognised as sub-divisions belonging…” The word belonging in ordinary English means belongs to somebody or that somebody owns it; belonging to a person or a family. 

So I think I would restrict myself from splitting hairs on some of these “held” this and that. Let us go to the substance of the legislation.

MR KATUNTU: The Constitution is very clear. It is the supreme law of this country and any law which is inconsistent with it is null and void to the extent of the inconsistence. Can hon. Nyombi and the hon. Minister give me any instance within the Constitution where “ownership” and “held” are used interchangeably?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to plead with government to do the most decent thing, that is, to have this particular section 7 deleted, mindful of the fact that landholding under customary land tenure is applicable to the peasantry of this country and not the elite; the peasantry that may not know or understand how to handle a loan; the peasantry therefore that could easily lose their land including their burial grounds to banks.  

The minister has made reference to Section 3 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Amuriat, you are not a peasant; you are not in that category. You come from an area where land is customary, are you suggesting that in your life you should never own land in your name? Or if you hold it, where will you hold it? Elsewhere?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, as an elite what I would do would be to turn my land tenure into freehold. I can afford to do that. I could then acquire a loan. I would know how to manage the loan. I would know how to pay it back and I would certainly not lose that piece of land. I am addressing myself -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, by doing that won’t you be endangering the peasantry of their life? I am asking this because you are saying that customary land is for peasants. So, if you come with your money, buy and turn it into free hold, will you not have harmed the peasants in your area?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am referring to land that perhaps belongs to me. If I so wished I would have the freedom to turn it into a freehold. 

Anyway that aside, I would like to call the attention of the House to Section 3(h) of the Land Act, which the minister has just referred to. This section is usually referred to while interpreting customary tenure in line with sub section l of the interpretation clause.

Under sub-clause (h), incidence of form of tenure, which is owned in perpetuity; something that is owned from generation to generation; when you talk about a property being owned in perpetuity, it means that the owners should not be deprived of that property in whatever circumstances. So, when you subject such a piece of land to a mortgage, there is a possibility of that land being lost; such land ceases to fall under this definition; it being owned in perpetuity –(Interjections)– yes, but I would like to appeal to Members not to use the law to deprive people of their valuable property.

My view is that the Land (Amendment) Bill is being imported into this Mortgage Bill; this is very dangerous. As we legislate, we should not only look at ourselves but we should also legislate for the poor and rich people of this country and so we have to be mindful. So I would like to propose that government does the most decent thing –

THE CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Member, would you also like to address us on the certificate issued under Section 6 of the Land Act, which reads thus: “Procedure for application for a certificate of customary ownership…” What would happen to a person who had obtained such a certificate? Would you also say that such a person should not take a mortgage?

MR AMURIAT: Well, I think we also need to look at the procedure that a person has to go through in acquiring such a certificate. I am saying this because from what I know all interests are taken care of; it is not just done locally –

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, let us work on the assumption that a procedure has been followed and a customary certificate of ownership has been issued to engineer Amuriat. What will happen?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, that also has got its dangers; I have reservations on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: But now really what do we do? Okay, there is a proposal that we delete Section 7 from the Mortgage Bill. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

AN. HON. MEMBER: No, no!

THE CHAIRMAN: Would you like us to resolve this by show of hands? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!
            
(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay: abstentions are 9, those against are 18 and those in favour are 24. When you add up, the total votes are 51. So, if there were no other provisions those in favour would have it, but the problem we have is that we do not have quorum. No, I have already said that those in favour are 24, those against are 18 while the abstentions are 9. So, shall I declare the results?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR ATUBO: Procedure, Mr Chairman. Rule 21 of our Rules of Procedure talks about quorum and it says: “The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote. The quorum prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question.” The rules talk about one-third and we are not –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, we have an attendance book and this may be used as a reference in regard to this matter.

Secondly, I would like to say that I sat here for the whole afternoon yesterday. This house has already passed some sections of this Bill and there was no quorum; what do we want to do to the House of Parliament?

THE CHAIRMAN: The issue of quorum has been developing; there was a time when sittings whether to debate or do anything, required a quorum and if the issue of quorum was raised the Speaker or the Chair would be constrained to ascertain that there was a quorum. Subsequently, the Constitution was amended so that we have different quorum depending on the subject we are voting for and that quorum should be ascertained at a time a decision is being made. 

There are quorums for the plenary and there are quorums for the committees, including this committee. Therefore, we have to ascertain when we are coming to a decision and it has only become apparent that maybe the quorum is not there. When we added up the abstentions, the ayes and the noes, as I said, it is 51. This means we have no quorum and therefore we may not proceed. 

What I was going to ask the clerk or the minister is to move a motion for the House to resume. But if there were no issue of quorum, the ayes had carried it but the quorum has been raised and I am constrained by the law. I am asking the clerk to read a motion for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.25
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Chairman, as you have ruled, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank those who came as agreed yesterday, at 2 p.m. and those who came late and for the contribution you have made to the debate during the Committee Stage. But as it has transpired, the number that is seated here is 51 and since the business was at the Committee Stage to continue with the various clauses in the Bill, and apparently even if it was not this Bill, we cannot pronounce ourselves on another Bill which may not have any controversy. I think the best thing for me to do is to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. Maybe you will have reconciled your views on the matter and then we move forward amicably. 

But as I told you, there is a service for Anglicans in the Lounge at 5.30 p.m. and I appeal to all of you to go and attend. Tomorrow there is a workshop on health insurance at 10.00 a.m. in the conference hall and I appeal to you to attend. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday.

(The House rose at 3.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2.30 p.m.)


