Thursday, 11th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued).

MR. NYAKATURA (Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for this opportunity.  We are debating the Constituent Assembly Bill with intention of establishing, the Constituent Assembly to debate a new Constitution. For the new Constitution to be understood, acceptable and defendable by the people of Uganda, it must be debated, promulgated and enacted by a Constituent Assembly that is also acceptable to the people.  If it is true that the people of Uganda demand that we have a Constituent Assembly, a part from this Council, then it is in order that we give way to that Assembly to debate promulgate and enact a new Constitution.  The Minister of Constitutional Affairs has not convinced us, neither has the Constitution Commission in their report convinced us that the people of Uganda have demanded this.  But perhaps for the mere sake, of saying let us not be blackmailed by the First Deputy Prime Minister who said, if we do not accept this, we are selfish, then we may have to accept it.  For the mere sake and not for anything else.  The Constitution hat we have to enact must be such that it does not indicate to the people of Uganda that there has been any intrigue at all in making it.  That nobody attempted to cheat the people of Uganda.  Then when it is made, it will have to be defended by the people themselves.  For that matter, the Constituent Assembly, therefore, if the people have said they must have it, it must be composed of directly elected people in order to be truly representative of the people.  That is if the people demand and that they do not think that people existing here are no more enjoying their confidence.  Secondly, we are in the transition period, trying to move from Government of a liberation Movement called NRM. NRM is composed of the historical who form a political wind, and NRA a Military wing. These are the people supposed to be handling over to the civilian population.  We are trying to move from Military rule to a civilian rule; and I think it is just fair that NRM, (that is NRA plus the political wing of the historical members) be present during the discussions so that they see exactly what the people want to have as form of governance and they also become party to decisions.  

So, that eventually if they have perhaps enjoyed power and become greedy somehow, they do not turn around and say no, we are not satisfied with what the people wanted to be able to establish permanent good governance.  So, they should be there and for that purpose I say elected people plus five Members of NRA and five Members of the Historicals.  So, we shall have ten Members representing NRM as it were and no more nominations if we are going for direct elections, no more nominations.  These ten NRA/NRM people are going to lighten the handing over process, that is why we are accepting NRA and NRM, and after all, they are the ones holding power, and they have given reasons for having held power temporarily in order to normalise things and now they are trying to get us a Constitution. Therefore, they should be there; no more nominations.  With regard to parties, I say parties should now go out very strongly and campaign and get their people in that Constituent Assembly, as many as possible. With regard to women, I say it is debatable whether these concessions being given to women are in their favour or merely tending to under develop the women, if it is not an intrigue of men to under-develop women; women should think seriously about this.  The eventual result of these concessions is merely to suppress women.

MRS. MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor, that had it not been for the Movement to take and affirmative action to include us, we would not be here, and we still need time for that, while some of us are ready to compete on county level and which will be fair and accepted to all, we still suffer culturally.  We are disadvantaged culturally and, therefore, we need time, and therefore, the Member should know that this affirmative action.  If the Movement has stayed for eight years and it needs more time, how much more the women’s participation.  Thank you.

MR. NYAKATURA: Mr. Chairman, I leave that to women.  But some of these terminologies are merely manipulative, and if they do not understand, it’s their problem.  But eventually, they will realise that they have been indoctrinated to believe that they must perpetually depend on men and become subjects of men so it is up to them.  But, as far as I am concerned, I am not recommending any concessions because, I believe that our women have now gained adequate intellectual capacity to participate in this forum without having any concessions, and I believe already Ugandans have shown example of being able to elect their fit women to come and represent them; already we have some here.  

So, if women - okay, it is up to them, but as far as I am concerned, some women and Youths are already here on their own merit and anybody representing any people, who does not take care of Youths or women or children or anybody within their constituencies, is incapable of leading those people; so if we are going to have area representatives let them do the job and if they cannot do it, then let them resign or be removed from the forum of which they are representatives.  So, on Trade Unions, in other countries, Trade Unions campaign so much as to ensure that they are fully represented in Parliament, if they have no capacity to influence a few people to come here and talk for them as their voice, then they may as well not be represented.  My composition on the Constituent Assembly, therefore, is elected representatives if we must have a Constituency Assembly plus NRM represented by 10 people of which five are tentatively Historicals and five from the Army, so that they over see or witness the handing over process which begins with this Constituent Assembly, then I wish to run through a few things, the chairman must be elected from among the delegates and the quorum should be two thirds, because that is a minimum number that will pass any resolution. The official language must be English in which language the draft Constitution has been written.  

So, it must be understood by the person deliberating it.  The Motion for a division is very vital.  When you have not understood each other, you have not reached a consensus and somebody has raised a Motion for a division, if you talk of 50 people being necessary, then you are failing the 49 people who may have, you know, got up to support the Motion.  And 49 people, if you go by this formula of representation of 80,000 people per electoral area, it means 3.92 million people, Ugandans being occluded from participation.  Therefore, we shall be disregarding an equivalent of a quarter of the population of Uganda.  Therefore, I recommend 10 people and those will be merely to indicate that there is a disagreement which must be solved by the real counting of the people.  In the past, and I have been here for the last 13 years; in the past we depended on five people only, and it worked very well.  The referendum; we are not the people to talk about the referendum.  Referendum is consequence of failure to reach a consensus in the Constituent Assembly.  The Commission must be approved by NRC, the Electoral Commission, should be nominated by Government, but debated and approved by NRC.  The campaign language should be a language the people understand for the benefit of the candidate, so we should not determine the language in which the candidates should talk; and proposed joint campaigning is primitive, very backward, very primitive, you cannot bundle people who are going to campaign convince people to elect them and you control them as if you going to share the votes; this is wrong.  Let everybody indicate his capacity to work by campaigning more effectively and more vigorously.  So, that is one way of measuring the quality of the candidate.  Sometimes we have saboteurs in the electoral process, particularly election officials; they may not adequately announce stations where you are going to register, where registers are going to be displayed or where, even the actual vote will take place.  So, there must be adequate publicity, at least the candidates must be informed one week before, so that they are able to lead the people who are going to vote for them. 

Lastly, and not least, some people in Kenya have been known to have voted more than once, by using ink supposed to be indelible ink, which is not indelible and I think at voting sessions, the agents of candidates must themselves confirm that the ink is actually indelible.  That is a simple thing, but it caused people to lose where they should have won.  I wish lastly to reiterate what I said, that for the Constitution to be understood, acceptable and defendable by the people, the Constitution must be devoid of any manipulations or intrigues, nothing of the nature.  It must be as cleanly done as possible.  Thank you very much.

MR. LADDY (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also rise up to add my voice, to those hon. Members who have already supported this Bill. Mr. Chairman, a lot has been said, but being a representative of the people, I have also to add my voice, to this Bill.  The Bill is one of the most important Bills that we have ever debated in this House, therefore, it is important that we give it the necessary respect and also debate it with full intentions without interests, Mr. Chairman.

The objective of this Bill has been clearly stated by the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs and also the preamble clearly define being the desire of the Government - people - power to participate, establish and promulgate their Constitution.  

Therefore here, I request Government that whoever comes, whoever is pro-NRM or not, request the Government to continue implementing this Bill.  Permit me also to extend my gratitude to the NRM Government in general and Members of this House in particular, there is a lot which has been done when we are together the Members of this House have really tried to maintain peace, we should also thank the Historical who went in the bush and fought the regimes which were dictatorial and also I extend my gratitude to all Members of the RCs in the villages who have done the necessary to see that, peace is really brought to this nation.  I also want to extend my gratitude to the people of North and Eastern Uganda who have made sure that the war is over.  We would not be talking about the Constitutional making if the North and North Eastern Uganda were still at war.  I also want to thank the NRM Government and this whole House also to have reasonably rehabilitated the infrastructure, if this infrastructure were bad especially, truck roads and others, we would not be talking about going for election or making a Constitution.  So, my gratitude also goes to the Government. I also want to, extend my gratitude to the Government to have, at least controlled inflation.  Yesterday but one, we had that petrol has at least controlled inflation.  Yesterday but one, we had that petrol has at least tried to drop for the first time in the history of Uganda, I want to extend my gratitude to the Government to have laid firm foundation and prepared a ground for political stability.  I think it is through this political stability that this draft Constitution that is the executive of the arm of the Government I do not know how he will come back in the office, and pretend to serve the Government when he has no mandate.  I consulted my people and my people have two views, there are those people in the villages, those ones support the Bill, then there are the civilized people who are in Kampala whom I consulted, I think these fellows with Odoki, they are the same, they have the same reasoning as far those fellows in the village do support NRM, these fellows here in Kampala again have a different opinion about NRM.  So, when I conducted people in the village, they support the NRM and propose according to the NRM proposals, but these ones in Kampala say I reject everything, Army should not be there, Historicals should not be there, NOTU should not be there, women should not be there, and then NRM should also go for election.  Now, when I go back to the people at home, they say, okay, we agree there should be a Constituent Assembly established, but the following people should be there, the women, the propose at least 39 places delegates to represent women because of their majority and also because of their being disadvantage in other aspects.  They also propose that NRC Members should not stand because out-lived their usefulness, if the Government can throw them away, why should they again stick here, that they want to represent the Government?  The do not have their usefulness any more, they also go and seek fresh mandate.  In order to have a nationally accepted and respected National Constitution, the Members of Bunyole also say, the Government should at least try to remove hand in the Constitutional making.  The Chairman should be elected by the Constituent Assembly, and democracy should be seen to prevail, otherwise, if Government gets any small interest, and then that Constitution Bill means to be a Government Constitution. About the 42 delegates, Members I represent say, the President has got a right to appoint the 15 Members, but the 15 Members should be on the regional basis, that East 3 Buganda 3, Central 3, Northern 3, and then East 3. They are asking for order, they say this House should continue maintaining the order which is prevailing in this country, arbitrary orders from the top are likely to cause - to stop development, so they are requesting that we should really debate this Bill, support it, pass it, and we look forward to see that there is order in the future.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want the House to throw its mind to the problems we are facing and the solutions that we should provide.  This is a critical time in our history and we need to be very, very careful in whatever we are doing.  Ideally, I intend to take various positions and then expose certain ideas to the Members so that we can come to a rational decision.  His Excellency the President when addressing the soldiers recently did say that this House, because of the way it is constituted, is not an ideal House to deal with the Constitution.   He may have had a point, the reasons are there that first the way we are composed majority of us we were indirectly elected through Constituent electoral colleges.  Secondly, the good number of us we are here because of history.  Thirdly, a good number of us we are nominated by the President in his wisdom or on advice of the Cabinet.  Fourthly, there is the Army representation.  Maybe, ideally, the President had a point to say that this is not the House that should debate the Constitution.  So, ideally, the best thing we could do for this nation following those reasons would be for all us to go back and I mean all of us from the top to the bottom.  We should all go back; a President, the MPs or the - all of us should go back get elected come here and constitute an assembly which then debate the constitution.  I am saying, is that really what the intention of government is?  Looking at the Bill, it does not seem to be the intention of government, because ideally, if it were that case we would not have Schedule 1 of this Bill.  

I would like to refer you to schedule 1 and Members of the House and we look at Schedule 1 and who is there? It is on page 19. We say because of having nominated Members and having all of us who have come in any other way except the ideal back I have stated, we should go back. 

Yet Schedule 1 tends also to contradict that ideal. I wonder whether my hon. sisters in the House would trade 38 Members have for age, would they? They are not willing to do that.  I wonder also. Except for the National Resistance Army that stays with the same numbers, the others do not.  Now I am saying, if we are to go back on the ideal situation then Schedule 1 becomes redundant.   Is that what we want as Members, and have we failed to perform?  If we have not failed to perform, should we then stay here and constitute ourselves into a new House that we debate the Constitution?  We are told that that is not what the people want and I am wondering which people! The hon. Sibo yesterday did go through the people and the statistics are there to show that it is very difficult to know to justifiably say that a significant number of Ugandans did actually say that they want a new Constituent Assembly to debate this Constitution.  There were the sample, a self selected sample - those of you who have done statistics who actually did send in memorandum on which the commission made Table 2 in the papers that you have.  Given that, what do we do then?  I am trying to see and propose the theory of the second best as those you who are students of economics know.  The theory of the second best is not the best.  I would be for the ideal and I would have preferred the ideal and the ideal that we all go back and come back, we have a new House and have a new caretaker government to move us through the transition period up to the end. (Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that some of us are not willing to go back? We came from the bush and we are not willing to go back there.  (Laughter)  The hon. Member is saying some of us came here by electoral colleges, others by nomination and others by historical circumstances and he is saying all of us should go back and come back again.  I am informing that some of us are not willing to go back where we came from to arrive here we want to go via another means and that is to be elected.  Thank you.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I thank the hon. Minister of Education and for the education he has given me.  I am actually not suggesting that he goes back to the bush, I am saying he goes back to a Constituency and gets elected and seeks a fresh mandate without using the gun. I am sure he accepts that having used one method he is now going to use the other one.  The other one that I am proposing to him is that he goes and gets elected by the people and comes here and forms a transition government.

So if we say, if we go by the theory of the second best and if Schedule 1 is not conducive to what we want because if you say nominations are bad, nominations at any time would be bad, whether they were done five years ago or were going to be done next months.  They would still be bad.  So given that way, what do we do?  And the theory to be putting forward is not - I am suggesting since the Constituent Assembly is going to be for the short time and since we are saying that the NRC has got to continue in existence and since we do not seem to be keen to go for a transitional government which would be formed after the elections then I am saying the next, saving is actually very little since the NRC is going to stay, and since the fulfillment of certain people whom we want are going to be there, the army is already here.  There are 38 ladies instead of 8.  The youth are already with us. The trade union is in the process of coming.  So, represent interest that we would otherwise, have had in Schedule 1 are already in this House.  I am saying retain the House and do something else.  Retain the House and reinforce it.  We have been arguing in this House that the more people are that involved in Constitution making the better.  I have heard that argument several times here.  In fact, it was the argument used to justify why ladies should have a special representation, why the youth should have a special representation, why the trade unions should have a special representation?  I am saying, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Yes, I am going to wind up.  Let the House stay and we will reinforce the House by directly elected persons, all of them without any further nominations.  Because the nominated people are already here in this House.  Now how many should we have?  If we retain the numbers of the counties - because we do not want to go in the process of demarcating new Constituencies for the short period because it is an expensive business.  We use counties, we reinforce them in a such a way.  We end up with another 300 people approximately plus the present House.  We will have a House of 500 will draw up a programme which would enable us to work in working groups or session and report plenary so that we finish in less than two months in order to save the money. 

I would now like to touch some few items that are of concern very quickly. The election of the Chairman.  The election of the Chairman - this House - the new constituted House should elect its own chairman.  It is proper.  I think these people know as many of Ugandans who would qualify to be a Chairman.  Let us not burden the President with that work.  

Secondly, let the chairman - the directly chairman would be elected here. Secondly, the representation of parties do not need to come in this case.  I am saying the parties will go out and campaign, come with the members.  Those who will win they will have members in the Constituent Assembly. Those who fail too bad for them.  They can also still send memorandum through their representatives because they person who comes here will be representing them.

Thirdly, there a use of referendum.  I am saying, it is premature now to go for the referendum because that is a Constitution issue anyway.  So let us wait for the constitution and debate it then and in any case if there is going to be a referendum then you open up those who want parties and those who would - those who want multi-party and those who want one party are allowed equal opportunity to expose and talk and discuss and then with equal time the verdict would be the people.  But if you are not going to do that, then let us wait for Constituent Assembly to do so.

Lastly, I would like to touch on the issue of the Commissioners.  The Commissioners unless they are going to be elected or appointed up to the consultation with various people, I think it would be good. In fact, if you want an input of the parties that those Commissioners are appointed after the consultation with the various interests group including the parties.  That is the only area where the parties can feature besides being in the campaign.  

I have made my proposition in an amendment that I have already given to you and to the Clerk and I hope they will coming.  But I am saying if we need to have a compromise, if we need to reconcile, let us use what we have and use it very, very carefully so that we have a constitution which nobody is going to point a finger on, which will stand the test of time. I am suggesting that because various members will see the irony of saying you do not want nominees and then provide for Schedule 1. That you do not want - you want people to discuss freely and then hard them on a duty parade which this one is going to be.  If you want democracy, if you want that freedom allow attitude; listen to everybody’s point of view and then let the people decide, Mr. Chairman.  Those are my suggestions.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON (Maruzi County, Apac): Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving the opportunity to express my views on this vital issue for a new Constitution for the State of Uganda.  I would like to debate this my beginning with submission that my opinion the submission which were given to the Constitutional Commission by the various organizations were faulty.  And I will debate the documents in that context.  Sir, they were faulty because the RC I were asked to submit papers, then RC II officials were asked to submit papers, then RC III, RC IV and RC V. We know that the people did not directly elect these bodies.  So, if the RC II officials have already submitted a paper, on whose behalf is it? And if the RC III have submitted a paper? Likewise, on whose behalf is it when the RC V is submitting a paper?  That is a great difference in submissions and will ultimately affect the final result.

Sir, the originals of the Constitution lie in fact that a human being is not -(Interruption)

MR. RUTAROH:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Chairman.  The hon. Member on the Floor is saying that RC II up to V were not directly elected by the people and, therefore, do not qualify to give in any memorandum.  On whose behalf is he himself talking since he was not directly elected? (Hear, hear!)

MR. ADODKO NEKYON:  I think that is an extravagant piece of nonsense.  (Laughter) Because I was not the one who asked to debate this Constitution here today. It was introduced by the Minister and I represent Maruzi County.  So, I am speaking on behalf of the people of Maruzi because there is no other person who is capable of speaking on their behalf in this House.  (Laughter) Sir, the origins of the Constitution in human beings lies in fact that a human being is not trustworthy in the management of public affairs.  A French philosopher called Lutho wrote a book called Social Contract, which says that, the government of a country is done by contract between those who govern and those who are governed.  This is the basis of writing a Constitution; to establish that contract in writing.  In Britain, we had the Margaret Thatcher which was a settlement of the conflict between the King Charles I, and the Parliament after a long dispute of power. So, the King was forced to sign a Great Charter.  Ultimately, he was executed because he did not follow the Constitution. But still, most of the British Constitution was left and written up to today but they honour everything which is agreed to be constitutional and this is how they are able to continue the smooth gap but we do not honour even what is written down on paper.

In Uganda so we had long history on Constituent developed.  In Buganda Kingdom we had a well established Constitution, with King, with Prime Minister, with Ministers, with various counties and sub-counties by name even the county chief had names - titles.  In Bunyoro Kitala, we had the Kind, the Bamuloga Prime Minister, his Deputy as a commoner and everything was well established but not written.  So, we over the years have gone ahead of other African States, in fact that we had very beautiful Constitutions already conceived among us.  So, we are not behind other countries of Africa.

In saying this, I want that the arrangements which we had in Uganda were finally adopted by Capt. Lugard to Nigeria and it worked there very well.  So, I want to say this because many times we are talking about heading the first time brought about the Constitution.  The Constitution that we had in 1962 started in 1994 with the first Buganda Agreement.  So the development of the districts and provinces started from that time.  When we went to London in 1962 we only concentrated on other matters but the districts had already been established and they had their constitution already written in the form of various legislations.  Even the Buganda Agreement of 1953, which came as a result of deportation of Mutesa II to London, was merely brought in the new Constitution of 1962 but it had already been in existence.  This point I want to make very, very clear. So, in London we concentrated on division and separation of powers between the Central Government and the Local Government and between the Legislature, the Executive and the judiciary and the establishment of new institutions chartered the Auditor General’s department and so on and so forth.  We did not concentrate on the issues that we are now debating there.

I want to draw your attention of the most important fact that we are trying to keep aside in our Debate.  We in 1962 decided to establish a new state called the Republic of Uganda by Agreement in London.  This state was being created by joining various independent states of Buganda, Busoga, Bugisu, Ankole that the British found here.  The British had agreement with each one of these states before.  So, they decided before leave here they should have a joint covenant agreement bringing all the states together to form a new state.  It is this agreement which we call the 1962 Constitution and that agreement which we are now trying to replace today and tomorrow through a Constituent Assembly or through this NRC.  This is crucial because if trouble tomorrow occurs it will not occur between you, and me, as a man from Buganda or with Museveni from Ankole, but it occurs between the original states.  We have seen this in Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia and in Soviet Union.  When troubles occur displeases will come along the all lines or along the wounds and those wounds which we must try to avoid when establishing this Constitution. The masses of Uganda agree to the establishment of a new Constitution? My answer, is no, Sir.  We have not had the referendum to ask the people of Uganda whether they want a new Constitution or not.  So, we are assuming that they had decided that we have a new constitution and although we are talking about other referendums, we are not talking about referendum to ask people whether they want a new Constitution or not.  That is an issue that we will carry to the Constituent Assembly.  And now when we go to -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that constitutionally speaking, since this august House, NEC enacted Uganda Constitutional Commission Statute 5 of 1988 that although is legal enough for a state because it has power to legislate to continue to amend any Constitution as by law established.

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue, please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  I thank you, Mr. Chairman for that information but we are not amending the Constitution of 1962.  We are throwing away all the former constitutions and bringing in a new one.  There is no such a law, Sir, which provides for that kind of removal of a Constitution. Therefore, I am saying, since we are going to have delegates coming here -(Interjection)- I am fed up.  So -(Interjection)- I am democratic but everybody is free to speak.

AN HON. MEMBER: I rise on a point of information.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON: No, Sir, I am not interested. (Laughter) 

MRS. MIRIA MATEMBE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to use unparliamentary language such as ‘nonsense’ when an hon. Member is standing here to debate? 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he has not used that.

MRS. MATEMBE:  She said it.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no.  Proceed, please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON: So, I am continuing to say that since we are replacing an agreement which is reached by different states, who will be speaking for instance for Buganda? Everybody who will be elected from Buganda will come as an individual and they may conflict during the Constitution Debates.  Who will therefore represent the interests of state of Buganda?  That must be taken into consideration.  Unless they are coming as a common delegation; because for me I think our problem is that we distrust each other, we do not know each other and we always fear each other.  So, I want the Baganda to talk to the Langi, to the Bagisu, to the Basoga and to the Banyoro. (Applause) Therefore, when we talk about special interests, which is provided for in section 76, we see trade unions, religious leaders, youths, army, parties.  Sir, if we are going to revise an agreement among states and then bring small units of the states to be endowed in such a major issue, a state to send representatives to that conference, whether they are youths or women or whatever you call them, whether fishermen, let them go there and represent that state.  This is my view and I want to say, when we talk about youths, the youths are the majority of the people of Uganda.  They will be majority voters.  They are free to stand in each constituency.  Therefore, what you are saying here is that they have got the power to vote twice and to stand twice in order to be equal to the people of Uganda. I have already said I am fed up. I want to finish.  (Laughter) I want to finish my debate. Please, I am sorry; I respect women but let me continue with my debate. (Laughter)

MRS. WANDIRA KIZIBWE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to lie to the House by telling us that youths are free to stand in his constituency when he said he is the only person capable of representing those people? (Laughter)

MR. ADOKO NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, I ask you to give me five additional minutes because I have been disturbed unnecessarily.  I am the only man here representing Maruzi, it is obvious.  There is no other Maruzi man here. (Laughter) The youth are the majority.  They are now being asked to stand twice and to vote twice in order to be equal.  If that is not nonsense, I do not know what it is.  This applies equally to the women. The women’s decade ended in 1985 and that was meant to rouse them, to make them aware that they are a force in the world but today, they should be a force and indeed they are a force.  The first woman to be elected to this House was many, many years ago. Recently in Kenya, women stood and won election on their own.  Here in every election, from 1958, 1961, 1962, 1980, the majority of voters have been women. So, why do we now say women, they are the majority, should again form a different constituency and vote separately?  Where is sense? Where is justice? Women; this is in your interest, if you think it is in your interest to eat twice in order -(Laughter) - Please, I have already rejected.  It will not be fair. I am sorry and I respect –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Yes, because they are disturbing me.  What do I do? (Laughter)  Sir, the implication here is that there are special issues in the draft constitution that will not be able to pass unless women are specially represented there.  But then how did those issues find their way to the draft Constitution? Because we know there only two women there.  How? What are those special issues? Even if you send one woman per district, they will still be a very small minority.  So, they cannot force through their special issues.  So the basis for their coming in is null and void.  Sir, the purpose of our bringing women here specially in the last five years, was to make them aware that they can stand on their own and compete with men equally.  If they have not been able to acquire a constituency by now in these five years, then they will not be able to do so even 50 years.  (Laughter) 

I believe that the army should remain out because the army should be neutral.  I believe that you cannot save a coup by bringing the army in the constitution making. Coups are not staged because of corruption, because of mismanagement of society, because of nepotism in appointments of public officers, because of various reasons; not because of Constitutions.  In any case, coups are not necessarily bad.  There are times when the government fails to run smoothly and sees things go to the dogs.  (Hear, hear!) 

So, we want the Constitution to relay whatever happens.   If you have NRA involved now, the next body will say this was NRA Constitution.  I beg the army to understand these views because it is in the interest of our nation forever and ever.  (Laughter) I believe that the issue of a referendum which has been talked about, they did not even mention seriously; it was not in the principle guidelines by the inside issue. Somebody is trying to make it a major issue but the proposal merely says that - some people have suggested that the final accepting of the Constitution will be done by referendum and that certain major issues like the parties, federalism or militarism should be referred to but it really says that it is the Constituent Assembly which will decide whether to refer this matter to a referendum or not.  Not us, for goodness sake.  It is not stated in this book that we can decide on a referendum; it is not anywhere in the Constituent Assembly.  This happened in London in 1962.  We disagreed on the issue of the lost counties.  Five counties had been acquired by Buganda and British from Bunyoro.  One of them Rugonza was then split into two; Bulemezi and Singo, they became then six.  But we agreed that a referendum would be held in three of them.  It was the Constituent Assembly in London, which agreed to the referendum not Parliament that has remained here.  So if you are to hold a referendum, let us go to the Constituent Assembly and let them decide on what issues they want to take to the people directly not us.  Sir, finally, I want to say the solution to all these problems here is that you dissolve this House next week.  (Laughter) We dissolve NRC because it has outlived its usefulness.  Secondly, it will save money to have one election in two years and one House to debate the Constitution and thereafter revert into a provisional Parliament with an interim government consisting all parties with seats divided according to votes they will obtain in the next election, which should be about September this year.  So that we know who is strong in the villages; we have heard that there are no parties, that so and so is very popular.  Let us go to the people in September on party basis, then the people will tell us by the number of people they will return here to debate the Constitution and to act as an interim Parliament and then the referendum on parties will have been finalised. Why do we want to debate the referendum separate of parties? Are we afraid of the parties? Has the constitutional process turned into nothing by the elimination of parties? If the parties are the minority, then why do you eliminate them? Let them remain there, let NRM stand as a party win each and every election for 50 years but the parties must remain there.  Then there will be no conflict. (Applause) But the moment you begin talking about eliminating your own earlier groups, then you are looking for trouble. (Laughter) ‘Do not trouble trouble until trouble troubles you’. (Laughter) 

We do not want dictatorship even of the majority.  We do not want in the case of minority, we do not want dictatorship of the majority.  So, those who claim to have majority in the countryside, let them leave the minority alone and there will be peace in our country.  There will be stability, progress and everything.  Nominations: In 1962, we did not nominate anybody to go to London.  Only the parts we were given because the reasons have been already given in this book. You can read it; reasons why parties should be there.  They are the people who are going to run the Constitution.  It is there abiding.  In any case, all the troubles you have in the army usually relate on political groups outside the army.  So, these are people who must be committed.  But since I have already proposed the dissolution of the House and the holding of fresh elections for everybody, then I am not bothered about the representatives of ax political parties. As for the nomination by the President, we did not - the Prime Minister then did not nominate anybody. Now 30 years later when people are more informed in Uganda, you now say the President must nominate 15 people.  We have the State, which is going to discuss its own future, which State is the President.  Is there a state in Uganda called President with 15 people?  He will have more representatives than Lango, than Bugisu, than Bunyoro-Kitala.  One man! which will not truly take part as a state in 1962 the formation of the Republic of Uganda.  I refuse to accept to the proposal and I will never. (Applause)  

The Chairman must be elected by the Constituent Assembly and must be responsible to it.  I have on many occasions on the Floor of this House opposed the idea that the President should ever sit in that Chair and preside over this Assembly and I oppose the idea that you Sir, should also come unelected and preside over the Assembly.  I have done this here and I repeat it here today.  I have said, I can vote for you but I will not elect you Chairman.  (Applause) Campaigning in the country must be open.  I am not going to take part in a campaign where people are driven like prisoners in the Upper Prison to campaign. Who is afraid? Are you afraid that people will hear what you are saying?  Why do you want to drag Nekyon with you in the bush where you are going to address your rally?  Go alone and I go alone.  Let people ask me questions and I answer alone freely from 6.00 o’clock to 6.00 o’clock in the evening. (Laughter) Sir, finally, I want to say that the constituencies, which you have established, are going to be a source of trouble.  Since the NRM came to power, we have created many new districts and Sir, is it by coincidence that nearly all the districts have been created in the south of the country except Pallisa.  All the districts are around this direction.  Why? And every district is created with counties and these counties are constituencies. So you can rig elections by creating districts because after crating a district, then you create two or three counties in a particular area.  If that is not corrected, then we know that we are going to say openly that north and north-east have been cheated and elections have been rigged in advance.  I say this in good faith because if population was the basis of creating new districts, then Busiro would have been split into districts with a huge population.  Olamu County in Lango would have been broken up into districts.  If area was the criterion, then Karamoja which is bigger than the whole of eastern region, would have had a lot of districts.  But not a single district has been created in the region of Karamoja.  Like Kiboga, some of them have got 280,000 people: a whole district! This is rigging in advance. 

So, I want to appeal to you Members of this House, that if we are to survive as a nation, we must remove suspicion amongst ourselves.  We must do things above board. So let us carry the whole country with us if we want stability and progress.  When Buganda boycotted the 1961 elections, we had to agree to go back to repeat an election in 1962; one year later because we wanted to take Buganda with us so as to have some kind of peace as one nation.  We had to agree to repeat the elections, because you cannot ignore even a small part of the country.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for this House to sit here and debate bills and pass certain bills which bind us, all of us like the one which created the new districts and then one of us standing up and says it is rigging of elections in advance?

HON. MEMBERS: It was a resolution.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Sorry, it was a resolution.  And it was a resolution by the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his views of rigging elections.  Let him proceed.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON: Ntungamo District has not been brought to this House at all.  It has not been brought here and it is in existence and in any case, I am free to debate or re-debate any bill even if it was passed 500 years ago.  There is nothing, which prevents me from re-opening a debate on any legislation of this country.  For God and my Country.  (Laughter)

DR. ADONIA TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency the President on his election as Chairman of the Preferential Trade Area. This is a clear sign that His Excellency the President has a very good international image and that Uganda as a country has also got a very good international image.  (Applause) Our domestic image is not so good. One of the causes of this poor domestic image is the escalating frequency of the most daring broad day highway robberies involving ambushing public and private vehicles especially between Masaka and Fort Portal; along that stretch.  I would like to use this opportunity to ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to step up his vigilance on this particular route and on any other route where there may be this problem.  Mr. Chairman, I want now turn to the Bill. First of all, I want to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for being true to his word and giving us copies of the new draft Constitution. (Applause) 

I would also like to recognise that deliberately, the Prime Minister made sure that the copies of the new constitutions were not put in our pigeonholes.  He gave them to us through the sergeant-at-arms.   (Laughter)  

I want to add my voice to the voice of the hon. Adoko Nekyon by being very emphatic on stating the fact that this constitutional draft which we have been given and processes through which they have passed have already been rigged.  So, we are dealing with a situation in which the constitutional process has been rigged as I am going to point out.  I have now read the report and I have read the draft Constitution.  Although the bill has many good points, there is one thing which is clear; that some of the most controversial points and recommendations in the bill are not the views of the people of Uganda as alleged by the hon. Minister when he was presenting this bill.  Especially, the hon. Minister pointed out that the fact of the NRC not being competent to debate this bill was the view of the people of Uganda. But from the report this is not correct.  The statistics have been given -(Interjection)- well I do not want to use the word lies.  That would be unparliamentary.  There is nothing wrong in the Minister telling us that this is the view of the government.  It is a respectable view and we go with him.  He does not have to use the name of the people when actually there is no proof, statistical proof to indicate that these are the views of the people.  It is a good view by government and we respect it.  From the report, there is no proposal that the President will nominate 15 people.  That is a government view and we respect it.  But we should not put it in the mouths of the people when they have not said so.  That is rigging the people or rigging the views of the people.  (Interruptions) 

MRS. MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I want to give in this House is your protection, because these days, I sense some sort of -(Interjections)- you see, it is what I am talking about.  So, the information I want to give is that this hon. House passed a law establishing the Uganda Constitutional Commission and empowering it to go and cover the whole country and seek people’s views, and the Commission did do that, and it sought people’s views. And it came out with people’s views and it made these reports and submitted to the Minister, on the basis of the report, the Minister made a bill.  And on the basis of the people’s views, the draft was made.  So, I find it very difficult when hon. Members stand here and say whose views because, I can assure you that however much any NRC Member has consulted in his constituency, nobody has consulted the magnitude of the people that the Commission did consult.  Nobody can challenge that.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. 

DR. TIBERONDWA: One of the reasons, Mr. Chairman, why we wanted the report of the Commission was that we may be able to see the indicative figures and where the figures were not indicated, we did not know where these facts come from. Another thing that is in the bill is that the chairman of the Constituent Assembly should not be a party leader or a member of the party executive. I have not seen that one in the report of the Commission.  Again this is an aspect of rigging. The report we have, points out that there should be 38 of them.  These are not indicated.  The report talks about religious bodies, but these are not indicated.  The report talks about the disabled, and these are not indicated.  So, we are discussing the views of the government and not the views of the people. Some of these recommendations are very good and I want to appeal to the Minister not to be shy.  Let him stand up and represent the government honestly.  When we raise these points, he does not raise up even on a point of information.  He sits down comfortably. (Laughter) During the collection of information the district administrators, the cadres and even in some cases members of the Constitutional Commission went round teaching people all over the country that multi-parties are bad and the Movement is good.  That was done all over the country and after that, NRM diehards went back and asked these people, are multi-parties bad or good? (Laughter) Naturally, the answer was “bad.” 

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, the information I would like to give the hon. Member is that the Commission was able to reach about four of the islands that I represent.  I have visited the other islands where they never reached and to each group that I have put together and asked whether they would wish to have the party system running this country.  I have heard a violent ‘No,’ we do not want to hear of these.

MR. SERWANG LWANGA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Mayengo from Kyamuswa that the Commission reaches sub-counties and there are four sub-counties in the constituency he represents. So, the Commission could not go to every village.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like you to protect me so that i can continue.  Although some of these areas were rigged, we should try and save the little that we have.  For example, the Constitution recommends decentralization, we have not passed a law on decentralisation and yet it is being implemented.  We are talking about RC V Chairman to be head of a district when we have not even adopted the RC system to run this country. (Interruption)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, it is important I think to help the hon. Member holding the Floor to develop his argument on a proper foundation.  I would like to inform him that decentralization is due to be implemented as soon as the Bill has been presented to this House.  The part which the hon. Member called decentralization is the administration aspect which is the day-to-day business of any government otherwise any decentralization, any legal decentralization I will present the Bill here, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for that information but I would like to advise him that in future he should not ask His Excellency the President to inaugurate programmes like decentralisation which have not yet been legalised. To make our President inaugurate illegal entities is an insult to the highest office of this country. 

I want to talk about monarchy.  Sometime back while questions 63 to 77 in the Constitutional Commission questionnaire were asking about monarchy, the Army Council sat in Gulu and decided to return cultural sites to Buganda and other Kingdoms and we do not know now as hon. Nekyon has pointed out to whom these cultural sites are going to be returned.  Is it Rakai, is it Masaka, where? (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Army Council did not decide to return, what the Army Council decided was that it was not opposed to negotiations for the return.  (Laughter) 

MRS. MPANGA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the cultural sites they are talking about belong to us and other - (Interruption) 

HON. MEMBERS: You and who? 

MRS. MPANGA: We, the Baganda who put them up.  (Laughter) And other people like the Banyankole, they have also formed, they are going to get theirs, the Toro people will also get their sites, the Langi if they have a cultural site they are welcome to go and negotiate but I do not know about. The Agakhan has already got his.  Why should we, who are indigenous here be deprived when other people get theirs? (Applause) 

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Point of information from the hon. Minister.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  I hope, Mr. Chairman, you will be able to give me time to complete my contribution. 

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and my Colleagues of the House that this is the Army Resolution, which was adopted in Gulu, “That the Army Council sitting in Gulu on this 3rd Day of April, 1992 discussed the return of traditional sites to the concerned traditional groups’.  Now, therefore, the National Resistance Army Council resolved and it is hereby resolved that it has no objection to relevant national authority entering into discussions with the concerned traditional group with a view to their eventual return or any other mutually acceptable appropriate arrangements concerning those sites.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I am definitely not opposed to the return of these sites.  What I am questioning is the hurry to enter into this very complicated thing without deciding who is going to receive these things -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I will go to another point.  What I am trying to develop is that the government should not go ahead and take pre-emptive steps on matters that are clearly constitutional when we are already in the middle of the constitutional debate.  (Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that in 1985 when Mzee Tito Okello seized power hon. Tiberondwa was abroad and he kept abroad. Towards the end of they year the NRA liberated the area in Bushenyi where his ancestral sites are and some of them had been occupied by our people. Hon. Tiberondwa approached us when we were in charge of that area and we handed back his cultural sites -(Laughter)- including his official residence in Bushenyi town and we did not deem that then neither did hon. Tiberondwa do deem it as something done in a hurry. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, the reason why it was not difficult for me to have my own cultural sites in Igara county is that Igara county was a kingdom and I am the only person I also visited my county Igara and I found out that there was no problem in the county. (Laughter)  So, I want to bring out one particular proposal that hon. Members may want to consider.  When the Constitutional Commission was being formed interest political groups were not consulted and that is why, for example, a political party to which I belong, the Uganda Peoples Congress, refused to submit views to the Constitutional Commission because it was not consulted when this Commission was being formed.  

I, therefore, want to propose that this Commission we are talking about in Clause 20 in which it is proposed that we have a Commissioner and two Deputy Commissioners for this Constituent Assembly, I want to propose that this becomes a Commission composed of say six people who can be appointed in consultation with political groups.  If you do this, you will be able to avoid the disagreements and the challenges that might come from political parties. The two commissioners being proposed, the Commissioner and his Deputies, those can be ordinary executive officers to service the Commission as a secretariat.

I have looked at the three documents, the current Constitutional documents, I have also looked at the 1962 Constitution that the hon. Nekyon was referring to and the 1967 one.  I have also studied they way these things are being drafted, surely the present document with due respect to the Constitutional Commission, is written like a manifesto, like an agenda or like a manifesto of NRM.  Like Agenda 21 - (Laughter)- except that Agenda 21 contains more substance.  I do not want to go into details of this thing but I would like to suggest that the Constitutional Document that we have looked into.  I want to propose a dramatic idea like hon. Nekyon’s that may be we put the three documents to a referendum but I think that can take us back.  I want us to go forward and because it will not help us to dig into the graveyard otherwise we may be strangled by the spirits of the dead.  We want to go forward.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up. Try to wind up please.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, in winding up, my own view was that we should have a directly elected Constituent Assembly.  That is the view as presented by the Government.  But as we go along, we need to come some steps forward and other people to come steps backwards so that we can strike a compromise.  Some people in my own county propose the formula that has been brought forward by hon. Butagira that the National Resistance Council remains intact that that we elect fresh people who can be added on to this one.  This to me, it seems a reasonable compromise for national unity.  However, I have one quarrel with it.  If we do that this present House is composed of 270 people and we will have about 180 directly elected, that will not be fair.  I would like us to have the majority of the Members of the Constituent Assembly directly elected. I, therefore, want to propose if hon. Butagira does not mind that we bring down the number of people to be represented in a constituency from a minimum of 80,000 to 50,000.  That will give us a total of directly elected people of about 300 people slightly more than the number of people in this hon. House.  I think that would be a reasonable compromise to strike the middle line between those who think only the NRC should debate and those who think we should have a directly elected House so that we go forward with all of us up to the and of this interim period and then we hand over this government to the new leaders but, if we are not going to do that, I see no difference between NRC and the whole Executive.  If we are going to dissolve this Parliament, the entire government must go so that we all go, we elect a transitional government that will lead us to the general elections.  If we are not going to do that then we would rather continue working together, the historicals, the nominated, the directly elected for a better Uganda.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr. Amanya Mushega): Mr. Chairman, I would like to make my contribution on the general outlines of this proposed Bill mainly on the role of NRC and the Constituent Assembly on the proposed 50,000 Constituency, on campaigning and finally my views on political parties.

The views I am going to express are mine but based on a number of factors.  The experience one has accumulated as one lives, the activities one has participated in, the reading that has taken place, the number of people that one listens and talks to and the experience Uganda has lived through as we see it and what we have observed during the period of struggle both pre-colonial and after.  We have also met some people and compared views so I will not hide my views under the clock of the people I represent.  I did not come to this House through the window, it was through an open door and we participated in keeping that door open and we shall continue to do so out or inside this House so that democracy in this country prevails.  Therefore, I have no constituency to talk about although I come from the same county as hon. Tiberondwa and I have no regrets or apologies for not having one.

The NRC; while I was listening yesterday, behind me there were some Members who were saying we have derailed them. I was happy to hear today when they were calling upon you to protect them from derailment.  The Baganda have a saying that “Kyenkola banange, sagala bakinkole.”  Before I go to the details -(Interruption)- that when you do something bad to others, you do not want it done unto you.  That is my understanding of it, I am not an expert in Luganda but I try to know as many languages as I can.

I would like to make one small observation and that is the exercise of constitutional building and our traditional society.  Under the traditional African societies I know of, elders were highly respected, they conducted themselves properly, they guided their youth.  In my language they say “Omushiza mukulu ayinduka omu kitanda, tahinduka aha rurimi.” That an old man can turn in the bed but he does not turn his tongue.  In other words what he says today he will support it tomorrow; what he promises you today he fulfils it, and really I am appealing to older Members of this House to listen to my disappointments.  When I was a small boy in a secondary school some Members of this House especially hon. Nekyon and hon. Obwangor were Ministers of this House especially hon. Nekyon and hon. Obwangor were Ministers and we used to admire them immensely as great contributors to the building of this country.  Even in 1967, while I was at Budo and this House was debating the 1967 Constitution, hon. Nekyon was invited to come and address us on the current society arrangement and afterwards I was one of the few students who were invited to come and have tea with him. Throughout his conversation, he spoke with reason and impressed us. In fact, afterwards, he was accused by Mzee; he was then Minister of Defence, that is Felix Onama, for coming to confuse small boys instead of going to debate with old men.  I have mentioned that in the African society elders held the fort, gave guidance and spoke with dignity.  

So, constitutional building is a process, it is not just a Bill and the contribution of our ancestors is critical. So, when some of these people I admire or admired, now that we are near where they were when we were small boys, and obviously I am not a small boy, when they use words like “nonsense and fed up,” I look back and I say “was I right or was I wrong.” So, I appeal to them and I would promise that I will never call old men “nonsense” or “fed up” even when their words do not appeal to the highest sense of understanding. (Applause) 

Hon. Nekyon challenged who these RC’s were representing. Which is correct.  Then he went ahead to quote Russeu, a French Philosopher who must have lived more than two hundred years ago.  He quoted Lugard and the Buganda system that it worked well in Nigeria. Of course, Nigeria, we know it is full riots and coups. But what I would like to say here is to take the good, the merits and demerits of a situation.  If there is something good in the Buganda system of administration we adopt it.  If there is something good Lugard did we adopt it but we must be consistent.  I said an old man could turn in the bed but not turn his tongue.  So, you cannot say that the people of Uganda have no right to give their views then you quote Russeu who never knew where Uganda was in his lifetime to justify the constitution making of this century.  That was a digression because I thought I should give my views on how I have been observing the African societies and maintenance of harmony and when I was a small boy I think it contributed to my brave activities.  When you would find one party using small boys to go and abuse old men of the other party, originally it was that you must respect every old man in the village, whether he is passing by drunk or sober but when I was small the parties taught us that no abusing old men is not bad, it depends on which one.”  “If you are a UPC and you abuse a DP one, that is not too bad.  At the end of it was that once you abuse your uncle your father is in trouble.  Now, I have seen a lot of concern about the role of a Constituent Assembly and the role of the existing National Resistance Council.  My own views are as follows: The two bodies have two distinctions - legal and separate, and even if one Member belongs to both, when he is in one meeting he will perform a different role and when he is in the other he will also perform a different role.  Here I am not talking about the personalities occupying those organs, I am talking about organs objectively.  The role of the National Resistance Council as it is now is to make policies, manage the affairs of state, and pass legislations during the interim period of the NRM.  That is the role we are assigned and that is the role we are performing. The Constituent Assembly role  -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister of Education and Sports that when this NRC was requested to extend its term of office, for a further five years, the main reason advanced - and I have the speech of the then Attorney General - was that, this NRC will be able to enact a new Constitution for this country.  That was one of the main reasons why we actually extended our stay. 

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: I thank hon. Tiberondwa for that information and it does not change my line of reasoning.  Even if the NRC were to become the Constituent Assembly, one day it will sit as a Constituent Assembly and another day it will sit as the National Resistance Council.  Still the two roles of the two organs will be separate and distinct.  

So, the role of a Constituent Assembly, I am not talking about who is going to be in the Constituent Assembly.  He is defined in the statute, he is to debate and enact and promulgate a new Constitution which will govern Uganda after the interim period; even when the Constituent Assembly is going on, the management of Uganda must continue.  I hope that is understandable.  So, even if we continued as a Constituent Assembly, our roles would be separate and distinguishable.

There are those who have expressed the views as if it is an absolute necessity that one must belong to both or both must not exist.  There must be some Members who are anxious to complete the interim period and want to attempt other business.  There must be other people outside this House who are anxious to come in the Constituent Assembly and also form the new government after the interim period and I am sure there are some of us here who may be willing to remain here and run there.  There is no problem about that but let me make one point as a historical Member that the main point we are here or the war started was not to be Members of NRC.  It was to create a conducive atmosphere in Uganda for democracy, national unity and security in order to work for democracy, national unity and security in order to work for the economic material and moral advancement of our country and there are many people who were historicals who are no longer alive and there are many people who are historicals who are not inside this House but they are continuing with the business.  

So, we should not mix up things as if the role of entering here whether through the window or whether through an open door, through by nominations was just to end here, we are not arrivistes, arriviste take their bands off when the journey is complete and that is not the case and I agree with hon. Nekyon when he says the problem that has created coups is not bad constitution, it is the mismanagement of society, either by army men or civilians or quite often a combination of both.  For those, there are two reasons advanced why we should stay here.  One is that supposing you are defeated how do you come back.  What is your worry about the defeat? If you are born, one day you must leave this House, by nature, force or the ballot.  Perhaps we could take a leaf from history.  Churchill was a great war leader, and he lost an election.  He is still renowned more than the person who defeated him in that election.  Bush was  -(Interruption)

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that President Bush lost the elections in November and continued to govern the United States until the new President was sworn in and there is no contradiction between the two.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I can assure you that I will take as many pieces of information as they are available.  I was saying that President Bush who was leading one of the most powerful nations of the world today and was carried shoulder high after the war in the Gulf lost an election and is still a respected former President of the United States.  President Kaunda lost election in Zambia and he had audience with the hon. Tiberondwa when he came to this country; I also had the honour to hoist him at the finals of the East and Central African Challenge Cup.  I believe President Kaunda is better off than Said Barre and Doe combined and that Zambia, despite its problems, is still far better off than Somalia.  So, the question of losing really is not critical. If Members could allow and they do not take it bad, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, he lost an elections during the last elections, I do not think this has made him present the budget any differently.  And some of us have never stood for that type of elections and I do not think our contribution is based on that.  So, the problem is that people who want to be in everything all the time that if something happens without them being in the know, then that thing should not happen at all.  I recall hon. Moses Ali before we expanded the NEC, always his argument was that what is in that political organ, “Wanafanya nini huko?”  The political organ was opened, hon. Moses Ali is a Member and the world continued.  There are some Ministers who are Members of NEC and there are some Members of NEC who are not Ministers but the two organs perform differently, different roles. If you meet as a NEC Member you contribute in NEC you still say what happens and you continue with your role.  

So, I would like to really disabuse Members of this House for us to desist from saying that unless I am in something that something should not take place.  Even some of us have gone to the extent of saying that we were used as ladders.  I can never be used as a ladder unless if you are going to climb up and get something useful for my family.  What I express after, really is not our responsibility.  It is the responsibility of those either who elected us to make a minister’s cabinet.  But here, we are here by right.  His Excellency the President is a Member of NRC Historical, because those who are inside they do not know where he belongs.  It should be documented; he is a Historical Member of this august House.  So, the second argument, Mr. Chairman, is that if this House, does not debate this Bill, therefore, it will be “Bagiyisaamu amaaso.”  It will be marginalised; it will not be respected, what is the problem?  What are we? We think that the world cannot exist without us?  And when we are called to play a role, why do we not do so?  Me, I do not.  This is the case, we are here, as Members of NRC and I want to state it again that if there is anybody who should be complaining, it should be the Army Council and the Historicals. Because on the 27th of January 1986, at Lubiri, Legal Notice No.1 was approved.  And that Notice said that the NRC in its form and as expanded, together with the Army Council, will meet and promulgate a new Constitution.  You say, we have accumulated a lot of experience; this is definitely true, but some of the same Members have been ridiculous to Historicals.  “Hawa niwanani?”  Historicals what are you doing here? Honestly, we must be logical.  If you have accumulated experience in four years that should be recognised, why not recognise somebody who has also accumulated experience of over ten years?  In the same NRC? 

So, I would like to appeal to Members of this august House that the Army Council which was original - because we are saying if we do not pass - hon. Tiberondwa has said we extended in order to pass a new Constitution, that was one of the reasons that the new Constitution was to be promulgated.  The way we extended the period of NRM that should be made clear.  The NRM period was the one extended even if this House dissolved today, NRM will continue until new elections are held. What will be the results of that?  This is what I call - it is a bit an article, to say if you want a new body, then we either all go in it or go home.  And where do you leave Uganda? Because they are some people urging NRM has brought security, its image abroad is good but inside is not so good.  That is a very big, improvement because originally the image abroad and the image inside were also bad.  We say we have improved the image external that is one problem solved.  But where do we leave Uganda if we urge that since we are not going to it, let us get out. The NRM, has been able to grow because of being fore sighted, ability to accommodate, building a consensus and knowing the time, the time to be touch and time to be soft and time to expand and time to have the wisdom to invite the others to join or say it is time for me to pass and for others to continue but the question of deciding  the correct time is critical for development of our country.   We have to continue the process, even if it means others taking off but if we really say let us dissolve tomorrow as hon. Nekyon was calling, if you went home and he has grand children and they say, “grand-pa where are we now?” What would be the answer? Are we nation builders or are we people bent on saying since we did not do it, let nobody else do it.  I believe the Government of Uganda must end in chaos.  If chaos cannot come, we must invite it if it refuses, we create it.  So, the question of the legitimacy of NRC is not in dispute.  I have never doubted my legitimacy to belong to this House and I have never made an apology for it.  So, it is not a question of legitimacy.  It is not even a question of the will of the people. But you as a leader, what do you think? So that when you lead even if - supposing the people say, we do not want to be immunised, and you are a Doctor.  Like Dr. Sibo is around here, what do you do? You say the will of the people must prevail or you also try to explain, explain; explain until you show them the wisdom of your knowledge because the leader has an advantage.  He also has a vintage point, he sees more than the ordinary people see, he has a view of Uganda, while the people in the county I come from, most of them have never been beyond out side the boundaries of Uganda.  

So, when you talk about Karamojja, when you talk about Kaddugala, when you talk about Moroto, who is to guide the other?  Their leader, supposing the majority are wrong, do you follow them and fall in the river or you tell them that the bridge has broken down, please, do not go there.  So, the question of new Constituent Assembly discussing the Bill is not the question of the legitimacy of this House.  It is logical, is it in search of looking for all ways to have a document that is logical, that is acceptable and is respected by all.  And if that means the Historicals to step aside so that Uganda can have peace, we are ready. (Applause) For somebody else to discuss the Constitution of Uganda, or we continue with the business of managing this country so that the new Body coming in, takes over order, like Clinton, took over order from Bush although they were trading insults during the campaign. If we do not rise to that occasion and some of us have been over favoured by history repeating itself several times, while we are still alive.  Next time, it may treat us the way it treated President Bush.  You cannot take history for granted.  In my language they say, “Nikwe bitwire ekinya kikahira ahamutwe gwenju.”  A lizard which lived in a grass thatched house, it always saw smoke, it said, that is the usual thing, but this time the house was on fire, then it said, I am used to smoke, no problem.  The lizard has not recovered from that traumatic experience.  So, Mr. Chairman, let us be able to judge - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, wind up, please.

MR. MARWAS: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I do respect hon. Amanya Mushega highly.  He is one the Historical Members who needs a part on the back.  I wish to inform him that the question of legitimacy on this House did not arise from the Backbenchers but it arose from the Front Bench.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have said I will take as many points of information. So, let us be able to judge the time, have the humility and the wisdom to achieve the best results for our nation. Having distinguished the role of NRC and the role of the Constituent Assembly, let those who want to stay, we stay here, let those who want to run to for both, run for both.  Let those who lose in the other, come back and we continue with the business of managing this society.  At least the majority of us happen to belong to either; it is a question of drawing a timetable.  I will draw from my experience as Minister for Education and help you to draw the Time Table; because in the University somebody maybe doing Biology, Chemistry and Physics. But they organise the Time Table that when he is attending physics, Chemistry does not go on.  It is a question of timetabling! When the NRC is in Session and when the Constituent Assembly is in Session.  Let us not wreck the ball, simply because we may not be able to belong to both. This NRC has not started the process of making the new Constitution.  We are continuing a long, historical process, that began long ago right from the pre-colonial times as exemplified by hon. Nekyon; during the colonial period, during the Bush period and during this interim period.  We are continuing the process.  We have a people who sought unity.  Mwanga, Kabalega, Awichi, Musazi, I have even included my old Friend Obwangor when he crossed the Floor protesting about bad rule.  I almost changed my mind the other day, but I maintained the recognition. (Laughter) And we also have those who have always been on the wrong side of history and of the people.  Both have their heirs and successors.  So, the struggle and culture of unity, tolerance accommodation, consensus is now being reached.  If I may remember those who were here, when I was not, my old Friend hon. Ssemogerere during the Obote II had a Black book and he used to warn, that I am recording you.  I am pleased for the time I met him since 86, I have not heard of a Black book.  Is that not good for Uganda?  One of the Members, I will not name, in 1980 said, and I quote, “engoma tebaganwa,” that you cannot share power. Recently, we were exchanging views and he said; “I have learnt one thing, that politics of exclusion are dangerous, that even if tomorrow we are to win all the seats, we will still accommodate all the others.” Then, why do you want to dissolve the House? How do you accommodate people you have not seen, when you are drowning those you have seen?  So, this spirit of tolerance, Mr. Chairman, has gone on, and we must get ready. So, those who want to dissolve the House, let them do so, but let us separate the distinct roles of the NRC and the Constituent Assembly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.  Wind up, please.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: My second point, Mr. Chairman, while winding up on the third one -(Laughter)- because I have been listening for a time and I mentioned to you I have been reading and studying a lot, there is this 50,000 people business.  While on the surface it looks logical, it could contend danger for our country and I will be brief on that.  Because, if you look at the different census results, some people who have been calculating that if you want to use the 50 thousand formula you will get more people.  Yet people feel that we should have a Constitution that will be acceptable to all.  For example, Northern or Central or let me go to Western region where I come from by birth, has about 4.5 million people and a land area - the land not surface, the land area of 49,000 square kilometres.  Northern region, while it has 3 million people, it has a land mass of Uganda; all having a population of less than 20 per cent of the population.  Central, while it has a population of about 4.8 million, it only has a land area of 37,000 square kilometers.  Now, to me, Mr. Chairman, if we want to build a Constitution that is logical and mind you, we have had history, as hon. Tiberondwa was saying, and I am glad really to see this, of gerrymandering, of irrational Constituencies of trying to cheat people.  Now, if we end up with a population where my brothers and friends from the North are less than 20 per cent of the Constituent Assembly, while controlling the landmass of more than half of the country.  Are we trying to build a consensus? Me, I think we would stick  -(Interruption) 

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I do not think that those of us who are proposing 50,000 defer from what the hon. Prime Minister is proposing.  We are also going with the idea of continuing with county as the basis.  That instead of bringing the population to 80, in other words, what we are saying, is that each county will still have a representative, even if it is very small. If a county has got more than 100,000 people, instead of having at 60, then it will have two.  If it has 150,000, it will have three.  We agree with him entirely.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr. Chairman, while I am always in search of a consensus, sometimes it is impossible; because the North has a huge land area but a scarce population.  So, if you are going to divide counties using the 50,000 formula, the majority of the counties in the North and Karamoja area will not merit.  I am noting my point that -(Interjection)- let me first finish this point then, I will clarify.

MR. NTEGE:  Point of information. Whether it is 50,000 or 80,000 principle remains the same; and I agree with hon. Tiberondwa. The idea is not the number. It is the principle and he has put it rightly that with 50,000 still, each county will be represented.  So, that is 80,000, 100,000, 200,000 you are trying to arrive at number of delegates.  So, I think the Minister should accept that.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Let me continue really finish. You are a Friend, it is alright.  I wanted to say that - let me use an example of Igara County, it has 150,000.  If you 80,000, it will get two Members, if you use 50 it will three and I will do a mathematical calculation and give the figures to Members of this House, to show that some areas of this country will be extremely disadvantaged.  The more you - the figure the more you decentralise and we shall not have consensus. Let me complete an argument and I will take hon. Kanyomozi’s point.  So, we need a Constituency that take into account our history, the suspicions of our people, populations, resources, land and accessibility; so that we do not take population alone. Some areas maybe 10,000 people but with over 100 square 1 kilometres to cover. (Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member that the best way out of such a problem, is to take a range and Mr. Chairman, I have to propose an Amendment to that effect you take a range between 50 and 70, for rural areas, you take into account the terrain the concentration of population and then for those areas which have a high density like urban areas, you take a difference of 70 to 90 in which case, you will have taken those considerations into account.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Amanya, please, try to wind up, please.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: I am winding up on two small points.  One is campaigning.  Mr. Chairman, allow me to say something on this, issue of historicals.  People have been saying, let us have campaigns, the way we want and I have no problem with that, but we have a history.  This country has a history.  I will give three examples.  In 1961-62, I was a small boy who came for holidays and my mother said, let us go to a rally.  I went to that rally and the potential candidate came with a dead squirrel, dressed in green and white and a stick bent like.  He was saying that DP are bent like the stick, DP are like this squirrel.  That was the end of the rally.  Abusing. And whenever the other party organises the rally, this party will come to drum throughout the rally so that they do not hear.  This is what happened.  In 1980, this has a history, what do you want to hide, why do you want to go and say things alone?  Why do you not say in the presence of your opponent?  What are you hiding? That will be my question.  “Onafica nini, watu wa Uganda?” Because some Members come and meet and they say, so and so is uncircumcised, then he runs around to say, that I am. Why? Why? So, the reason that we are proposing this, you can go in the evening and carry out your consultations.  but when it comes to addressing the rally, make an opportunity to address the same people.

Finally, on parties my view is that parties - is there anything wrong philosophically with parties?  I, for one, will never stand for somebody issuing an order banning parties.  I have not historically opposed parties; just as I am not opposed to taking Chloroquine.  But I must take Cholroquine when I have a fever.  What is the history or parties in Uganda?  Not the way parties work in Germany, work in Britain, work in Kenya or work in Zimbabwe? The way they have worked in Uganda? Where did they take us and where are we now?  My only appeal and my support for this Bill is that, we have been fighting over nothing, people have gone out of their way to create lies and insults on their fellow friends in the guise of parties, banana plantations have been cut in the name of parties.  

People, you may recall, have slaughtered pigs from mosques and used mosque windows to roast them; in some parts of Uganda, people have gone to defecate in the Church of other people and others come and do it in other peoples Churches.  This is what Uganda is healing from. Parties created immense injury to the body politic of Uganda; and our people are saying, we have no problem with parties.  Just like if you have a wounded leg, as a Minister of Sports, when somebody is injured in the field, however a good player he is, you give him a period of recovery and the people who can certify that are two.  The doctor and the injured person.  If the doctor says, you are well and the man says, no, my leg is still paining; the doctor must respect the opinion of the patient.  Now, we doctors are saying that the patient has recovered, but the patient is saying, no, the populations of Uganda, the patient is saying no, I am still recovering from the injuries inflicted upon me by the parties. Allow me time to recover, for my wound to heal so that I can go in the race again with the knowledge of the past behind. (Applause) 

Therefore, my opposition to the parties is interim; is that memories are fresh, the wounds have not totally healed and if we go back into the fields, the chances are, you know when you injure a scar, which has not yet healed properly, the would is worse than injuring a fresh body.  But the doctors will speak on that later.  So, we cannot, we, as doctors compel the patient to go back into the field when the patient says, give me time to recover and what Ugandans are asking for, is to recover from the wounds inflicted on them by the way political parties worked here.  Twice in my lifetime, they have caused dismay harmony and terrible separation with my parents, children and wife.   And I want to recover from that.  My children want to recover from it, and my parents want to recover from it.  Let us give Ugandans a period of recovery and when sanity has returned and the wounds are healed, we go back into the field and parties will participate.  If we are still alive, we shall continue.  If we are dead, our children will read our history. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr. D. Pulkol): Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for this opportunity.  I would like right from the outset to say that, the way I see the proposal for a Constituent Assembly is simply a task.  (Laughter) It is honestly to request Members of this House situate the proposal for Constituent Assembly, within the general context of the democratic process that our country is going through.  As the famous speaker, who happens to be my Minister stated that, where we are coming from has been far away; far away because the injury that was caused, and the drama that we used to observe from the stage, they come and play the game, they disagree, they run away.  They used to leave the rest of us here, suffering, bearing the full black implications of whatever songs, the music they were dancing, whatever careless utterances. This was a big shame and some of us, like I have said, this House, said if this is what is called Independence and colonialism was bad, then the way Independence, this Independence, has been given to us, is even worse. “Afazari,” this thing goes away and something better begins, which is neither colonialism nor Independence.  Now, thank God.  Just at the verge of total collapse, when you had a number of warlords, either FUNA, UNLF, or FEDEMU, name it, all shooting themselves to power and you are on the other hand people who had crawled like a tortoise into systems that appeared democratic in the name of political parties, yet selfishly using those organs which looked on the outside to be democratic and yet when you visit inside the party, there is no democracy.  (Laughter) 

All were skills to shoot themselves to power.  Now, here we come t this crossroads, after coming all this way.  We are saying that, let us put national interest at the forefront of this selfish or this personal interest.  Let this be the guiding line that we went through, what we have been through for these seven years not because it was elaborated, it was the ideal, but we were building upon making our people used to make an election where you can loose, you can win, you do not run to exile; you stay. You continue to contribute to a better-managed Uganda.  But the ultimate journey is to take us to that full democratic, national election and this is where we are nearing.  We are about to reach there and in reaching there, we are saying just like we put in place a National Constitution Commission, put by this House with a definite task to deliver, they have come to that.  So, while the rest of us are busy managing the affairs of society, until such a time as the outcome of final Constitution - the democratic elections held, let us have a task force, let us have a body whose main mandate will be nothing but to scrutinize debate and promulgate this Constitution just simply as a special assignment.  While this NRC continues legislating for the country in the interim.  This is what it means.  Now that special assignment, is exactly what this Bill is asking us to put in place that task force.  And we are saying, how shall we arrive to the membership who will come to that of course whether Pulkol will be in that task force or not, that is immaterial.  That is personal to Pulkol -(Applause)- but what is important is to deliver the country forward.  Now, we are saying that where we have come from, our people have gone through some form of elections, routine.  In those elections, there are merits and demerits.  Also, in the system of elections that we have had for the last 30 years, if you would like, ballot box, where people even refused to share one ballot box.  And others are busy finding out which one is heavy and plug the label, after all if it is only a label and put in our own party label or your party colour label.  So, for that reason, refuses to share ballot box with other Ugandans.  It is not a shame.  Now, here we are, which way forward?  Now, in this House I heard people say our man, when Nekyon said, ‘as it was so is now, and ever shall be, world without end’.  I would like us to reconsider that there are those who would like to go to the old way.  When we know that old way so well, and that is why we went where we reached, and we are recovering from that.  So, why not talk something new which is better, at least which as a promise to take Uganda forward. (Applause)  

In that regard, how shall we constitute this Constituent Assembly?  It is exciting to me because as a young I would like to grow, and I would like being in systems that grow, where there is a future.  You know definitely we are going there, but things we just stagnate or want to count steps behind for the sake of it to serve of it to service personal interest, I would not jump into.  What am I seeing in this Bill?  One of the things I am seeing here is that while we are building up towards 1994, where the country will have a national democratic elections, we intend  - it is proposed here to try something which is not necessarily queuing behind a candidate.  At the same time, not somebody being elected because of the party colours or because of the symbol be the handle of the hoe or whatever the symbol maybe. Because you can tie a hoe on a dog, you can tie a hand on a goat, and you can give them to this House.  What we want to vote for are people.  People on the ballot box, if toilet paper, if at least his photograph can be put there, we know, after all, he did not just start to exist yesterday.  He has lived here or she has lived here for all these years.  What else did you have to tell your people in 1989, you simply had to go there for five minutes, and they know you before.  What else do you want to tell them that they do not know?  In any case, even parties have been here for the last 30 years, nobody has burnt them, even now as I speak.  You know, NRM as a Movement has been here for 7 years.  People know, you do not have to tutor anybody.  So, let us be conscious because we are here in the theatre where all these things have taken place.  Now, what I am seeing here is really - what I would like us - it is a build up consolidating on our achievements, moving forward and preparing for the full-term national democratic elections so that we have enough time to perfect whatever systems we shall use.  And why not go with that?  I do not see anything wrong with that kind of growth.  It is a logical growth, and I think we shall deliver this country to a better footing from evil of course that is the only prayer there is, deliver me from evil, but do not lead me to as it were.  

So, in composing the National Assembly in constituting it, what is proposed here is that let us have each county send a member to that House.  And then those who have more in the range of 80,000 and above should be given an opportunity to send a bit more.  But I think lowering it beyond that, you know there is a basic minimum; there is an optimum level that we must arrive at, bringing it to 50,000 in my opinion as David Pulkol, not as a Constituency.  In my opinion this will surely mean that the areas, you know, because you would like also minorities like I come from a minority, to be effectively represented.  Now, when the majority will over dominate the minority? It has a serious consequence as well?  But I would like you to reflect on that.  But otherwise, I seem to be comfortable with what is being proposed here. The other one is special representation.  I have a big quarrel with special representation.  From the point of view of growth, from a point of view that let people elect whom they want to go to that task force for six, seven months, Initially accomplished, wind up and then we move forward.  Now that kind of direct elections is an innovation.  It is a build up from where we are now.  And I think, we should give it an opportunity for people of Uganda 18 years and above to elect directly people to sit in that House. Now, when we begin to suggest people like political parties, imagine again tying us with that dirty history of 1980, that those who were able to participate in 1980 have a quarrel with that.  Because - why should I be a captive of my own history?  More particularly when these political parties have no forum now in terms of even calling their congress to elect these two, two, two, two.  So, who will elect them?  

Now, what other special interest do these political parties have which are separate from the interest of the people of Uganda? What interest even the NRC as an institution, to send 10 representatives to that House?  What other separate interest does this House have which are separate from that of the people of Uganda?  Now, if the people of Uganda have elected directly the people to go to that House, what the hell is this? Are you different from those of the people of Uganda? Now, others are queuing because of these you know, religious leaders want to come in, the national farmers whatever, but where have you all be drawn from anyway? From some other planets Lawyers will queue in, everybody, nurses and others, teachers, everyone.  So, why do you want that special window? Thank god that even this House has no windows, I have heard people talk here about people coming through the window.  Where are the windows? We have the doors. (Laughter) What a shame? 

In this respect, I am really submitting to the Members that let us do away with these other special representation, and instead have the group that has been seriously injured even right before colonialism came here - the women; and we have done so well so far to bring them where we have brought them -(Applause)- and we are participating together.  Let us see how - instead of just talking of a special thing, of special, why do you not allow, maybe the district for example? Or to elect a woman even if they want to elect a man you just have for now - for the purpose of developing Uganda forward, and building that culture, before you can finally say compete on your own.  Why not consolidate on the achievements we have made so far.  Consistence as it were, and put them there as separate Constituencies rather than giving them - is it 8 or 10.  Now, the other one is, of course, in the body politic and theatre of Uganda politics. The Armed Forces have been a party.  Now, what is still commendable are, the people who took the instruments of power in 1986, the NRA, decided not to keep these instruments of power, they invested it to this House.  You can imagine such a thing.  But here it is, we have got it from A, now do it for the purpose of taking Uganda forward. (Applause)  

In this respect, I think it is important that we are together in this process; these are the only two special representations that I am talking about. The mode of special representation must be democratic if possible, well as much as possible. That is why I am saying women if you want to give them a special place, let us create a system, which will bring them democratically.  So, even the armed forces, I am saying, that rather than the army as an institution, I think expand it to include the police, the prisons, the armed forces. (Applause)  And they sit there as a task force together with the rest of the people of Uganda.   That is really my submission.

I am also asking in that the task force called the Constituent Assembly, should ministers also be allowed to contest, for example, like Prime Minister, what a busy office? Suppose he is elected to that House for seven months, his office is already busy as a minister or as a Prime Minister.  Sometimes, not many of us are in this House, not because we do not want to come, but because of duty calls, you are in another part of the world or you are within the country or you are attending another meeting, and that kind of thing.  Now, will we be able to do justice to that task force which is sitting for six, seven months? So, the Minister should come and clarify this issue.  And my proposal is that, as far as possible, if we could be exempted - my personal proposal, as ministers.  Because I am really imagining whether I will be able to do justice, to be honest with myself.  So, I will not stand as - that seems on logical condition.  But, I think guidance should be given, I am giving you my thinking loud. I am suggesting that those who will be elected I think should take leave of their busy offices and concentrate for six, seven months or whatever period we shall give on that assignment. (Applause) 

Another one is, the candidates meeting programme, what an innovation it is.  Particularly again knowing where we have come from, I happen to be in one of the political rallies in Karamoja tending towards December, November there, in 1980.  As a student, standing there behind within everybody else, and the campaign begun, you Karimojong, this green colour stands for plenty of grass for your cows. (Laughter) This white colour stands for plenty of milk for your cows -(Laughter) - if you vote this party, you will have made it.  Now, in the height of dry season, when the Karimojong need grass most, when he needs - but manipulating his ignorance, where will this party bring this grass? And that if you vote this read colour, it is bloodshed, it is whatever this hand can slaughter you.  Then the other party coming and saying that hoe can dig your own grave, you know, you reject the hoe, this is a kind of simplistic politicising that has taken place in this country. (Laughter) Why do we want to go back there, is there nowhere else to go?  So, just like the Minister Amanya Mushega hon. said, that I for one, two, has no quarrel with political parties.  The principle of it. More particularly if they have constructed their own ideas and are principled, and there is regulatory mechanism so that they exist of them can also be - so that we are protected from these.  How nearer to the cliff can you be without falling?  (Applause) My answer will be, stay as far as possible -(Laughter)- because I cannot guarantee your falling there.  

So, now when we have the opportunity to access this, why not take that wise advice, particularly at a critical time like this. So, I am saying that bringing candidates at any given time before the electorate, and having an opportunity to listen to both of them, it is an excellent idea that we should not oppose.  It is such an innovation, it gives us an opportunity to ask relevant questions, and also those who have other motives, if you want to say it in the open - and one thing I like about, the Bill here, in that candidate meeting programme, is that - you come as David Pulkol not hiding behind any label, not the kind of shirt you are putting on, that is immaterial to us.  The colour of your tie that is immaterial.  But in the past, people have been victimised thrown out of jobs, thrown out of house, just simply because of the colour of shirts they are putting on.

MRS. MUGARURA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that whether he stands as David Pulkol for elections, still the masses would know he is a minister.  So, there is already influence whether you put on the colour or not.  What has gone into the people still remains and influences the decision.

MR. PULKOL:  Thank information, Mr. Chairman, I think she is entitled to her own opinion, but surely being a minister is not a political party. (Laughter)

MRS. MATEMBE: Point of information.  The information I want to give to the informer and this House, is that the first NRC expanded elections, hon. Ministers, despite they are so called influence, lost elections, thank you.

MR. PULKOL:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I know one who was my boss, he was my minister who lost in Kabale, in case you want to be given the examples.  Now, the other one is this what a nice thing so that - what is that, that you have which you do not want to say when all of us are there?  I mean, have an opportunity besides your consultation, no problem, have also opportunity to appear with other people, and give the people opportunity, after all the problem of choice is not yours.  What is your problem? It is the people’s problem.  Because they are the ones to choose, not you.  So, I support actually the principle of candidate meeting as an innovation in our campaigns politics in Uganda. And I would like to see it work and see how we can build upon it.  Because it is working in some other countries.  They appear all together they are being asked questions.  So, why should it be foreign to Uganda if it can work? Let us have it.  When are we going to have it?  Now, if you have the opportunity now, why do you not build on it?  The other one, is referendum.  I stand with those who are saying referendum now -(Applause)- because I am seeing that we are being ambushed to indirectly bringing in political parties in the whole picture, when we are saying that should wait.  In as along as, I am using that loosely, in as long as the political parties special representation will be there, I think, indirectly you are asking us to take a decision on this.  Indirectly, why should I participate? So, I am saying that for that reason, I think we better, if that is an issue now, then let us have a referendum now on that issue or other issues.  So, I would rather say that if that is out of the way, a referendum must be tackled here. Who will determine what must go to the referendum? (Applause) 

Now, the way it has been built in this Bill, I think is in loading too much that task force, the National Constituent Assembly.  And I think that is why there is all these debates, this head.  Because we have even examples in this hon. House, where people come and say, I am speaking on behalf of people even when actually - you know, because the people are so wise.  And there is a danger of course we run to, people going to the Constituent Assembly and keeping the ladder and forget the people who brought them there, because we have seen them crossing in the Parliament here.  Yes, you come from one party, you deliberately - you regularly decide to cross without even consulting the people.  

Now, it is possible even in this Constituent Assembly if we give them too much like we are giving them, as far as determining what should go to the referendum.  I am saying let us remove that responsibility from that Constituent Assembly.  It should not be only them; they can recommend other things.  But, I think we have heard the constitution Commission for example, which has done in my view a commendable job and they have received a lot of memorandum from the people, they know what is controversial a memoranda from the people.  They know what has been controversial and what has not been controversial.  They could guide also what could go for referendum.  And maybe, invite really views on what should go to the referendum rather than putting it in the Constituent Assembly alone.  The Constituent Assembly has many other jobs.  But if we could dilute this one or remove that power and give lessen it up, then I will be very comfortable.  Because my fear is a justified fear is what happens if these people, because after all the memoranda came from the people of Uganda, and they know what they wanted when they were saying this Constitution Commission.  Now, this process can easily be hijacked, why do we not go to them and say what did you mean.  Here you remained vague, you let us know what you actually meant, and that is what the referendum could service to adopt the Constitution. 

So, I think even - because suppose they meet and say, this one for example, where I have strong feelings about like political parties now, you know, supposing they went there and said, it is no longer an issue. And the people of Uganda rise up to say; no, this is an issue.  So, why not save them the burden? Because like the Uganda we have now even if this Parliament took a decision for example, against something, the people may be saying something as they can rise up against even this House. (Applause) We are now in a different Uganda and so we should debate from the point of knowing where we are and where we have come from.  For goodness sake, do not take us back.  “Ish alla” Thank you.

MR. E.T.S. ADRIKO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to say a few words in support of the Motion.  I will confine my remarks to three areas, and those are human development or human capacity building in the context of the debate, and introduction of political party activities.  Secondly, I will say a few words on the membership of the Constituent Assembly, and lastly, on the demarcation of the electoral areas.  I want to start by echoing the words of my Colleague Bidandi Ssali, and this afternoon, hon. Amanya Mushega, by discouraging those who of our Colleagues who wish for the return of political party activities rather prematurely in my opinion. This is because over the last five years, I think as a country; we have not done badly for ourselves.  When hon. Tiberondwa was speaking this afternoon, he had some very good words to say about the image of this country outside, and he had some good words to say, about the President.   And indeed, even every distinguished Member of this House, have had very good word to say about the State of Affairs of our country, for the last five years.  For example, I have heard hon. Bidandi Ssali whom, I regard as elder statesman and a party propagandist of the UPM; say something good. I have also heard, as I said earlier on hon. Tiberondwa whom I understand is a strong supporter of UPC also say some very good words.  

So, have people like on hon. Mayanja Nkangi and indeed our distinguished MP, hon. Paul Ssemogerere who is the leader of the DP. The point I am trying to say is that we must develop in depth capacity in the leadership of our country.  We must maximise our resource strength and we must minimise our resource weaknesses. I would like to illustrate this by reference to an example in sports.  I went to a certain secondary school in 1960.  In this school where I went, they were very good in sports; they were very good in cricket, they were very good in football but they were not so good in athletics but the school received two students who came from Nabumali.  One person was called Amukun and another person was called Awori.  These people were prolific runners and within the two years they were in that school we sent quite a number of people to the Rome olympics as a school.  The point I am saying is that, where you have good policies and good leaders, there is a drag effect that you create around that leadership and those policies - a cadre of very good leaders.  Therefore, when we have policies that are working, when we have leaders who mean well for this country, I think it is time that we should maximise that kind of resource by building around them.  Our Colleagues have already recited our experiences as a country when we have been through very difficult periods - I think that it will be wrong for us to return to methods of management which had begotten us people who have crooked habits; who are not straight.  If I could turn to another example in sports - for example our neighbours, Kenya here, we might train very hard in our year to try to beat somebody like Kipchoge Keino only to realise next year that there are four or five other Kipchoge Keino’s whom you have to reckon with.  

So, I think that as a country we should, therefore, build depth in our leadership.  We should encourage the tolerance that exists in our country.  When I see for example that some of my Colleagues who were on the Front Bench are now at the Back Bench and some who were in the Front Bench went back and came back again.  Again this is very, very important national culture.  I see my Colleague hon. Kirunda Kivejinja here. Before I came here, he was in the Front; then he went to the Backbench but now he is back to the Front-bench again and he may go back. (Laughter) 

So, I think these are good attributes. Our illustrious Army Commander Elly Tumwine is here with us and it goes on. There is acceptance that life must move, we must change and I think that this is something to encourage.  Therefore, in that context, my own view is that let us give time for capacity building.  Let us develop the politics consensus rather than the politics of ‘winners take all.’  To sum up when we have good policies and good leaders, there is a positive drag effect and when you have bad leaders and bad policies, you have a negative drag effect.  

The second point I wanted to turn to is on the membership of the Constituent Assembly.  Members have poured cold water on the statistics, which to them marginally favour a separate Assembly.  My own view is that we should be very, very sensitive to opinions of the public.  If we detect any hint of change in the views of the public, I think we should bend that way.  We have had very many examples where leaders have supplanted the views of the people and arrogated those views to them.  So, I therefore, think that even if the majority in favour of a separate Constituent Assembly was one I would urge Members to accept this because that is a hint from the public that they wish for a change.  I can best compare it with a shopkeeper’s scale, as a scale is balanced and even if you drop one ‘ayota’ of grain on the other, the balance goes the other way or for that matter in the science I know best, when you do a test for acid or alkaline media you dip a litmus paper which turns blue or red; there is no ambiguity.  I think our attitude, as leaders, should be that when we detect a change in the public attitude we should oblige. Besides, I think there is no contradiction between the opinion which has been expressed by Members who come from Constituents where the people have said, that the present NRC should continue to debate. I do not think there is any contradiction because it appears that would be taken as a vote of confidence in the incumbent Member of Parliament.  If the people have said that they want the existing body to go on; that I would take as a vote of confidence and I would not fear going to elections because you are likely to be returned. 

Lastly, I want to say this about electoral areas.  There has been a debate here about the issue of basing the number of delegates on the basis of the population.  I think that there has been a consensus on the definition of these electoral areas form the 1989 elections.  If we are going to change from that or from that as proposed in the Bill and introduce a spectrum of population or something to do with population; it has also got its flaws.  It is not beyond reason to find that in the populous areas, so-called - I would say; so-called populous areas that the member who will be elected from that Constituency could be elected by an electorate who are fewer than in less populous area.  We must not forget that elections will be done by electors who are over 18. It is not the population that is going to elect.  How would you feel if in a certain Constituency which has 200,000 people, there are only 5,000 electors and in another Constituency where there are 50,000 people, there maybe an equal number of electors.  This is possible, because we have seen in certain of our districts, even the scourge of AIDS alone has wiped out the adult population.  So, whom are these people coming to represent?  Are the electors themselves representatives and then the electors themselves now see it as an electoral College.

MR. KALULE:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Minister that when a Member is elected to represent people, he does not represent only those who voted for him; he represents even the children and even those that are under 18. So, his argument that you may have a Constituency of 200,000 people with only 5,000 electors and another one of 50,000 people with only again with 5,000 electors does not hold any ground because a Member comes to represent even the children, even those under 18 and the old ones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is precisely why I was making a contribution on this point because I think it is a point that can be argued for a very, very long time.  My own view is that the history of enfranchising people is a very long one because in some places, women were not enfranchised to vote for example, in the electoral history.  Do, I still think that therefore, there has been a consensus in the past, that is the basic constituency being and the margin that has been given in the Bill of 120,000 excess population of a country constituting an extra seat, would receive my support and I would urge that the House adopts this position.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. Mrs. S.W. Kazibwe): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to add my voice to all those Colleagues who are in support of this Bill and in as far as the majority of the provisions go.  Many people have questioned the need for us to have a Constitution.  Those of us who are in the majority in this country now who constitute the majority of people, that is sixty per cent of the population and if you go up to the age of 40, it goes up to almost 80 per cent of the population.  We say that we need a Constitution that will propel us forward so that we, through our experience can chat the way forward for our country.  A number of elders have told us a lot of history; incidentally in this country history is a compulsory subject if you have gone up to 0 level and I believe Members in this House have all attained that standard or know the history of this country.  In 1962, we had or got Independence and I want to challenge the hon. Elder Adoko Nekyon, who actually does not have the courtesy to listen to anybody in this House. Every time he makes a contribution he runs out; so how do you expect him to learn from the rest of us?  Because in our own cultures we say that; even young people can beat the drum and elders dance. Adoko Nekyon; that hon. Member will never learn how to dance because he has never listened to the drum of any young person. (Applause)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Contributor that, that is exactly the reason why we take young children to school, not old ones.

DR. MRS. KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, the experience of the less than 20 per cent of this population.  The experience of the people, who are living on borrowed time because the life span of Ugandans - men is 50 and women 53, is so traumatic that because of what they have gone through, they are also asking us to relieve that experience. Scientifically, a very learned fellow, he was not a lawyer, he was a doctor, a Russian called Pavlo did an experiment to show how fluids in our stomach are produced in response to food because you need them to digest.  He gave this dog meat and he put a tube in its stomach to measure how much of these juices are produced.  He did this over sometime, then he started introducing meat with a bell and when he introduced, he rang the bell, instead of meat the dog produced juices.  Then he withdrew the meat completely and the dog still produced juices.  These people who are telling us about old Constitutions which were made by a few people in London and a few people who never actually went back to the people to ask them whether they wanted a Constitution are telling us that the exercise we are going through is futile.  These are the Pavlov dogs who were given meat. (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor of the House that history is very important.  Whether it is made by a few people like the 27 NRM people in the bush, it is still significant.  Now. she went on the Constitution having well informed the whole of the country, including the Kabakas, the Bakamas, the District Councils and elected Members, cleverer than the hon. Members, please.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I do not disagree with what the hon. Member is saying he whole question about these old Constitutions is that in the questionnaires that were sent to the people, there was no question put, a deliberate question put as to whether the people wanted to change the Constitution.  We are not disputing the beauty of the present Constitution, even the beauty of the method used, the thing is that this question was not asked.  It was jumped.  We do not want to go back but we must accept the fact that this question should have been asked.  Do you want a new Constitution? That question was not asked and I would like the hon. Lady to respect that thing.

MR. A.K. MAYANJA: Point of information.  It is surprising that hon. Tiberondwa puts that question. We, in this House decided that it was necessary to have a new Constitution, therefore we put up a Constitutional Commission to go and ask the people; not whether there shall be a Constitution but what kind of Constitution they wanted?

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Could I also inform my Friend and outside this House my brother-in-law, that the process of Constitution making is historical and in the war in the bush and Legal Notice No.1 of 86 states clearly that one - we return to democracy, we have security and we have a new Constitution.  If this question is sustained, then we must go back and we ask the people.  Should we have gone to the bush?  Should we have formed NRC?  The question is rhetorical.  So, the information I would like to give is that and to inform hon. Tiberondwa that the fundamental question is not whether we want multiparties, but whether we want democracy.  The fundamental issue is democracy.  Multi-partism and its concision is one form of democracy.  So, the history of Constitution making is long and if you are to ask question, then we have also to get back to the Ssabataka and as the people of Buganda whether in the first place, two centuries back wanted Kabakaship.

DR. MRS. S.W. KAZIBWE: I am very grateful for all the useful information which I have been given but I would like to inform one of the distinguished elders that the reason, maybe, why these Constitutions have actually put us where we are, is because clever people went to debate them.  There is a difference between being clever and intelligent.  There are two genes that control this.  If you have the gene of cleverness and you have none of intelligence, then you would be tied anybody who crosses your path -(Applause) Mr. Chairman, democracy means popular power and that power is what we have experienced during this NRM period since 1986.  Some of us participated in the 1980 elections and what went on behind the doors of those political parties headquarters, some of us would not like to see. We experienced them.  I wanted to challenge my elder, hon. Ssemogerere to tell me whether in that DP headquarters there was democracy.  I was one of the party activists; indeed I was a woman mobiliser, I was the National Publicity Secretary for the Women’s wing but I had never been given opportunity to debate the DP manifesto. (Applause) 

So, while that political parties are bad but this experience under NRM has given as many people as possible who are interested in good governance, people who are ready to participate in the politics of the country, equal opportunity to come here, not only here but at the grassroots.   The people who are agitating for division of our people at this moment are the people who are called liberal-democrats.  Is that democracy?  Democracy comes when you have educated all the people.  When you have developed them to be able to benefit from the equal opportunities that are available for them to use in accordance with their human rights. (Applause)  In fact this popular participation is threatening these brothers and one of my sisters who is going all over the country like a wounded bull, not a cow. (Laughter) This popular democracy is actually, threatening these people because they felt that democracy is actually for the few educated political elites in the cities. They would decide whom you are to elect, they would decide who is to stand where irrespective of whether people want that person or not, and those of us who are under 40 who are planning or hope to be there, to make sure that the Constitution we are making for this country is implemented.  We do not want to live that experience and we need the time to actually practise democracy so that when we get there we are able to pass on to our children what popular democracy actually means.  When people are exposed to knowledge, and when they are informed, they want to participate in politics.  A poor person who is educated and is looking for bread does not know what this political democracy means.  When a country is going through a time of making sure that everybody has matooke or corn to eat, when we want to make sure that we have decent shelter for our people, when we need every brain of every woman, every man, able bodied, disabled to put our heads together, so that when the basic needs of our people are some how satisfied, because democracy means 51 per cent, at least 51 per cent of these needs, then we shall be in a position to make them participate effectively.  But here is a politics which was being run or stage managed in Kampala, and then this person in the village is supposed to vote for a party I want to challenge again my elder Brother Adoko Nekyon to tell me the percentage of people in this country, who knew that even this Constitutions existed, and who knew what was said in these Constitutions? What were the contents of these Constitutions?  Now, we are going through a stage of sensitizing everybody, so that each person in their own dignity as human beings can, actually, make a decision of their own, not because people like Adoko Nekyon or Mrs. Kazibwe here, who have been tutored in being vocal and able to convince people, go and campaign the whole day to tell them that this is the right thing to chose.  Give people a chance to chose for themselves.  As I stand here, I actually spot this Bill, but as you know I also represent this District, which is hosting, this august House.  Now, what has happened is that I have got a number of memorandum from different women groups, and since my sisters came back to debate the Constitution, I even heard more this very week arguing to put forward their case, and they say, that for them democracy means personal security, it means the rule of law, it means freedom of expression, it means political participation and it means equality of opportunity.  The women of Uganda, have never been a time when they have got all these, and let the students of political science tell me that this criterions are actually wrong ones.  

So, Mr. Chairman, these women are saying that they are very happy with the contents of this Bill, and they are also happy to know that the House is advocating to make a woman come from each district, not to represent women, but also in accordance with a revolution that this NRM has come with, that we should recognise that these women have been advantaged, and we should take them to positions where they can actually be tutored much faster than those who were here before; because these women are the mothers o tomorrow, if they do not internalise the politics of this country, they are the ones who are the teachers, that they are the custodians of a culture and if people do not, actually understand something they will never defend it, and the first defence is in the home.  This is where we shall actually, be able to defend our Constitution.  Whether you like it or not, the person who is the boss in the home is the woman.  As you can see, democracy has really failed because there are very few homes where there is democracy, so when we start with democracy in the home, I think, we shall be able to transfer it to this august House as well and in our politics.  

I turn to the Bill -(Interjection)- it is very, very little, because you have already talked about other things.  The women are saying that if we allow campaigning then we may as well forget that if women will be able to campaign in the whole district or even in a county.  This is a situation where each of us must see the reality of where we are.  How many women in this country will be able to move the way men campaign, at night, in bars, at funerals, in respective of whether there is a dead person, sitting there, and the situation from my own experience that arises out of campaigns if we actually, allow open campaigning the way it has been going on, then we are going to destroy even the moral fibre and the movement forward of what we have started, because if anybody mid-slings your wife, that means a broke home.  If anybody mid-slings a man, he is seen as a hero, and we want to give equal opportunities to everybody to be able to defend themselves on the spot, and we are also saying that, apart from allowing the mass media to tell us here election meeting are going to be, to give official Government information my sister from Bushenyi there, Esther, may not have as much access to the Radio and the T.V. like myself Mrs. Kazibwe in Kampala.  So, let us give equal opportunities everybody to participate in as fair a manner as possible.  When we go to Rule 17(2) giving guiding pictures and photographs, these pictures are, actually, sectarian because they talk about Dr. somebody, then they give a lady in Moslem gap, we think it really implies at the back of ones mind that if you are a moslem in a particular community then you are the one who should be elected.  It also exonerates people with professions that give them titles, and we think this photographs should be like the photographs that appear in anybody’s passports. Passport photographs with your hair combed back, not like Esther when her Aunt could not recognise her. So that everybody will see that we are electing so and so this is exactly what they look like, because we also know that people can wear masks and these day there is also plastic surgery over night, so we would like people to look exactly the way they look no titles and we all faced no Mr. no Mrs., no Miss, just give my name and that will be the end of it, Mr. Chairman, the women -(interruption) 

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that since hon. Miria Matembe started putting on red, she has been very, very excited. (Laughter)

MRS. KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, I think you see the reason why we should have equal numbers of both sexes in this House.  It means that we will not have an imbalance and people’s temperatures go up. On the schedule, on the special group representation, the women are saying, let all those go; but they made a special comment on political parties. In my vernacular where I am born, we say; ‘azaala ekibi tiyeyendera’ meaning that if you give birth an ugly child, that is still your child, you bring her or him up with the rest of the children. So, that whatever little good he or she can learn from the other children you take advantage of having this children together.  This is the beauty of having men and women deliberating together, women have been the people who have suffered most from the instability, but we want everybody to participate. Let the political parties go there, so that they see reality in its own face.  Let them set their representation and we can even have them labelled, this is a representative of DP, this is a representative of UPC so that they can also be asked to answer for some of this things.  So, for us 51 per cent of this population we want the political party representation.  

Now, on the other issue is that in this schedule the form do not actually help us to desegregate the data, to know how many men and women voted, in fact that would have been very good thing if it had been done in 1961 to guide hon. Nekyon who thinks that more women voted than men.  This is very, very crucial, it also helps us to know how much level or degree of awareness has gone into a particular sector, so that when you come up to, actually, look at your forms, you know how many women, actually, nominated people, how many women, actually, registered for voting, this we have been saying because while we talk about participation of different sectors of the society there is not enough gender desegregated date for us to cope up with concrete solutions on how we are to address this particular groups of people to help them participate more effectively.  While I am finishing, I would like to say that my being in this House has also taught me very many things like hon. Rwakoko.  It has really given me a way political knowledge, but it has also given me the strength to stand on two feet, and speak what I believe in, and hope that as many people as possible that want to go and participate in the Constituent Assembly through this Bill, will be given the opportunity do so.  I hope that nobody will feel that if they have not managed to stand, they are cowards, and that if they have not stood, they are losers, all of us stand to gain, and those that lose will have something to learn.  So, let us not fear to pass this Bill and say that let a separate Constituent Assembly go debate and I have all the hope that after we have passed this Bill, we have surety paved the right way and the right direction for our country to move forward.  Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. RWABYOMERE (Women Representative, Kabarole): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  I will first of all deal with the content, then the composition, I therefore, seek the indulgence of the Minister to pay attention to the following Clauses.  In Clause 4, on representation; I would have thought that the criteria for working out the representation was part of numbers.  In the whole of this Bill, women are being proposed to be represented by 8, and yet by numbers women are over 50 per cent of the population of this country.  I therefore, propose very seriously to the Minister to consider the proposal which has been put forward even before, that the district representation of one woman from each district be retained.  Of course, like hon. Kazibwe has pointed out, being here has given us a lot of confidence, it is true that we shall stand for direct election but that does not take care of the origin attentions of NRM to involve women in the affairs especially political affairs of this country, and rightly so we have not let down that idea, we are within the revolutionary thresh-odds, we are determined to remain so, and this proposal if carried, I have moved an express Amendment to that effect, because there is no express provision, if there goes through and I appeal for support of you Members which has more less been assured if it goes through it will take care one of popular representation, two of the positive input of the women, not only in the affairs of this country, but in the crucial process of the Constitution making.  Now, Clause 9(2) hon. Minister, there is provision for the appointment of the Chairman, and Deputy Chairman.  

While it is proposed that the Chairman be appointed by the President, the Deputy Chairman, is being appointed by the delegates.  I would have thought that the reason why delegates are not left to elect a Chairman is because many new people coming all over the whole country meeting for the first time would not be in a position to elect a Chairman, given the qualifications provided for in the Bill.  Now, for the same reasons, these delegates cannot elect the Deputy Chairman, because actually Deputy Chairman performs the functions of the Chairman!  So, unless, there is a different criterion, the Minister has to look into this. Clause 14(1), provides a mandatory requirement that the proceeding of the Assembly shall be in English.  then it goes ahead in sub-section 2, to say that any language can be used, it certainly cannot be any language.  So, I will move at an appropriate time to delete the provisions of any language, it must be the official language, and if that is agreeable, once you decide the English language, then you must set the minimum qualification.  For example, in the last elections, minimum qualifications were post primary, if you agree to this, minimum qualification must be post, secondly, as you see fit, that at least once you have determined the official language as English language you have to set minimum stands - (Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, there are people whose ability at speaking English is very good, but who may not have attained this academic qualifications, in other words, there is no necessary relationship it is there, but it is not always there, that a person with a particular standard of education, manages English in this so that way.

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Hon. Adonia Tiberondwa I say; no, what I mean is the issue of expression, one must be able to express oneself, I could have said minimum qualifications must be for example a degree, I am not saying so, we have many degree holders, I am saying minimum post secondary which is 0’level and really if you look at our education back ground, people who talk it is the element of expression, people must be able to express themselves.  Well, I am putting a suggestion, this is a proposal to the Minister, I sought to the indulgence of the Minister.  

Now, Clause 15; the quorum of 140, what was the criterion used at arriving at this quorum? There is a danger, if you set a high number in quorum, because quorum is to enable you to start a meeting.  If you set to high number required on the Delegates, we have a problem with starting a meeting, then you will have to adjourn, and we have set deadlines, that also brings me to the issue of extension, when you set a deadline, when you have an assignment, when you give yourself an extension, you do not give yourself an extension which is as long as your target.  If you set four months, we are setting four months in the Bill, then you give yourself an extra three months that is seven months, almost one year, I would propose that the Minister could look at the proposed extension and maybe, say one and half month, because that also gives you a push to do things very quickly.  Now, others were saying this depends on the volume of the document.  A document might be six pages and it will take you six months, it can be 100 pages and takes you three days.  So, the idea of volume it could be one of those, but it cannot be the major one.  

Clause 18(3) Prohibits referendum; on matters of local character, this brings me actually to the question to the issue of composition where I wanted to deal with referendum.  The referendum that I am going to refer to is not one of local character as stipulated in the Bill.  But I am talking of a referendum concerning multi-parties, vis-a-vis.  Movement type of system.  Members have already discussed the issue of a referendum, I personally, propose that we have a referendum in principle, but the issue of time whether we have it before the Constituent Assembly or during the Constituent Assembly or after is consequential upon agreeing on referendum as a principle. Mr. Chairman, when the report of the Constitution Commission came out, there was a recommendation that people recommended that after the elections in 1995, there should be five years of the movement system type of government and after that there is a referendum and then we have, according to what is decided, we proceed.  Now, when that report came out, our friends, the DPs and the UPCs said they did not agree.  I still ask, who was it that they did not agree with?  Especially the DPs went ahead and said we should have a referendum then when we came here, we talked of a referendum, now they are saying we do not want a referendum.  We had listened very carefully to the leader of DP who speak for fifty-three minutes.  He got special permission.  Now, he talked a lot of theory, he talked a lot in the past, we listened but democracy is not a question of theory and if once you have dealt with theory, if you really want to be conclusive you must thereafter, have action.  Now, what happened in 1980; we know but you cannot keep saying that because you won in 1980, due to difficulties then you were not able to take power then you should be the rightful person?  That is like having a blank cheque.  If hon. Ssemogerere I would have handed back to him the blank cheque because today we have progress, we are not having theory, we have talked seven years, we want action and the people are assisting us because we are peoples representatives.  Now, democracy; what is democracy? It is a popular representative.  You cannot have the other way.  And it has different forms and different methods.  Now if you describe democracy to people who have never see it they will not understand of course.  It is like explaining a giraffe to children and then asking them to draw it.  They will certainly draw everything else except a giraffe but if you show it to them they will certainly know.  Now, this is what has happened with the people of Uganda.  I will, of course, speak about what I know.  I will relate to the people I represent, Kabarole District.  Certainly the people of Kabarole know what they want and they are the same people who took a very strong political stand in 1960s and 1980s.  We are yet suffering for having taken that stand but we do not regret.  So when a misguided sister like the one my Minister referred to, we had the disaster of hosting the misguided sister, there is no way you can come thirteen years later and impress people that you also know that Kabarole is there because in 1960, in 1980, leaders did not know that Kabarole existed.  So I talk about democracy, I talk about the referendum, I talk about multi-parties in relation to the district that I represent and to what I know about democracy.  I have proposed expressly that the issue of a referendum be decided since it has been raised in this House, we decide on it.  So I will move, at an appropriate time, an express amendment so that this House has a stand on this issue because it is an issue that has been raised.  If we decide on it as a principle then consequently we shall decide on time as and when it is going to take place and what form.

Clause 22; I seek indulgence of the Minister to look closely at the functions of the Commissioner and the functions of the Chairman.  I fail to have a clear distinction and if their functions overlap, it will have complications.  I have actually ended up dealing with the composition and the representatives.  
	
Now, on the issue of Municipalities, for the same reasons on representation but numbers because when municipalities were represented, there was a reason and the major reason was for equal representation, popular representation.  Now, if you say municipalities are not there, for example, if you say Kabarole Municipality is not there that means there is only Burahya because Kabarole Municipality is within Burahya county. It means they increase in the number, let us say the number in Burahya County - I do not remember - but if you take the average, if it is let us say 90,000, that is the average population density in the counties, if you have 90,000 already in Burahya and you add 50,000 of Kabarole Municipality, you still have to have two counties and two candidates.  So to avoid this difficulty, since we are already having municipalities, we retain them.  I have also provided that expressly and I will move the amendment at the appropriate time. 

I noticed, I address this to the Minister, I notice actually the Minister overstepped his authority in the memorandum by adding the word “Republic.” There would be no harm if we delete this word since this is an issue that should be determined by the Constituent Assembly.  I am sure we can have that out without any quarrel. Mr. Chairman, with that I thank you for your indulgence.

MR. OMADI (Butebo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I make my comments I would like to deplore some of the statements that are made in this House based on political parties.  I am saying so because we who have lived in this country and witnessed quite a number of changes should be grateful to NRM.  I am particularly unhappy with my Brother Nekyon because he is trying to revive certain delicate issues that we experienced in the past, that is, by again reviving representation from kingdoms, from who you see the issues of the kingdoms were settled -(Interjection)- they were settled in that even the kingdoms themselves accepted districts to be established in their kingdoms.  So the representation to the Constituent Assembly should be based on districts so that equitable representation is made.

Another point is that when we are discussing a Bill that is going to affect our children, that is going to stand the test of time, we should discuss the Bill very maturely. Now, people were talking of referendum, some Members, are talking of this and that, the ordinary man in the village is not going to be benefited by a referendum.  What the ordinary man want in the village is social services which NRM Government has been trying and is trying to provide. (Applause)  I would like, therefore, to appeal to those who are concerned with the social services like my hon. Son there, to provide us with educational facilities for his brother.  I would like hon. Bidandi Ssali, at one time he was a youth in the UPC secretariat when I was already in the House, to carefully scrutinise the leaders in the Local Government.  There is a lot of embezzlement of public funds but this is happening because those who are elected to offices are not scrutinised before they are elected -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER: Appointed.

MR. OMADI: I am saying  “elected” because we accepted the system which is being used.  So, somebody is trying to correct me, appointment and elections are two different words.  In any case I was a headmaster of a secondary school -(Laughter)- so do not try to tamper with me.

I would like also to appeal to ladies who have come into this House through this system to be modest in their behaviour. (Laughter)  It is very embarrassing to see a lady who is a national leader behaving the way we see some of the ladies behave in this House -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. 

MR. OMADI: Mr. Chairman, I am a married man, I have got a bit family -(Interruption)

MR. NYAKATURA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, the statement by the Member is serious allegation and an insult on the part of our female Members.  Is the gentleman, the hon. Member in order to continue deliberating without substantiating or at least withdraw it?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, would you please substantiate?

MR. OMADI; Mr. Chairman, I have made my point even if I withdraw it will still remain -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  Would you please try to substantiate.

MR. OMADI: Mr. Chairman, I can substantiate.  The way was not modest and that is a fact.  (Interruption)

MRS. RWABYOMERE: Point of order.  No, it is actually information, Mr. Chairman.  Hon. Matembe happens not to be here. When a Member of this House misbehaves or misconducts himself or herself, according to the rules, he or she is disciplined or ordered out of this House by the Chair like what happened by the fuggerly from hon. Obwangor the other day. He missed a day’s session, and was ordered out of this House, and he refused, he resisted until the Sergeant-At-Arms ordered him out.  I have not heard any ruling from the Chair ordering hon. Matembe out from the House.  (Laughter)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, it was specifically put by the Chair that the hon. Member on the Floor substantiates as to how Mrs. Matembe has misbehaved.  All he said is that how she was behaving.  We would like him to substantiate how was that behaving.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what he was trying to say.  Proceed, please.

MR. OMADI: Mr. Chairman, if what I have said has caused some commotion in the minds of some people, some hon. Members, I would like to withdraw but in any case the point is made.

First, as regards the composition of the Constituent Assembly, I wish to propose that it broad based to encompass the different views and shades of opinions in this country.  Suggest that Members in this House, if possible, should be involved in this exercise of Constitution making because some of them are trying to create a situation whereby they will in future say we were excluded from the making of that Constitution.  I, therefore, would like to suggest that we should elect or we should reinforce this very Assembly, the Members of this Assembly, by electing some more members one from each county in this country in order to make a Constitution that will be acceptable to everybody.

As far as the political parties are concerned, Mr. Chairman, already in this House there are political parties.  DP is here, UPC is here, UPM is here, CP is here, who is not here.  Now, why do you want to bring us people who have not been elected? If there people in UPC offices, DP or CP, if they want to participate in this Constitution making exercise let them go and stand and be elected.  For some of us who have been here and who believe in the principles of democracy some of us have decided not to go and stand so that we also give chance to those other people who are behind to come and help with this Constitution making. 

As I have said, the NRC itself should be part of this body where the historicals are also involved.  Where the Army is also involved.  Where the women are involved, where they Youth are involved and where the workers are involved.  So, there should be nobody left out when making this Constitution.  We do not want some people, in future, to come forward and say I was not involved. We should all come here and make a Constitution which is acceptable, respected and can stand the test of time. So, everybody who is concerned should be allowed to come here.  I would even further go on to ask that even our institutions of higher learning should be represented so that when they teach , they know what they are teaching. When they teach, they were involved in what they are teaching.

All these are done then we shall have a Constitution that will be accepted by the entire country, by all those who are aspiring to go into politics at a later date.  Further to that, the political parties in this country must understand and we must also understand that we have suffered.  Now, what is five years?  I will quote certain instances that I personally witnessed.  In 1980, Members of this House, the Members who were already in this House in 1980 curved the constituencies for themselves and for that reason they were able to be elected.  Now, do we want to go into a situation like that? I know of my sister who was the ADC, I spent a night at her house, I said why do you not announce the results?  She told me; “I am under instructions not to do so” and what happened? The candidate who had been defeated was declared elected.  That was rigging.  So, it is only when NRM came they said; okay, Members, there is no question of spending money we are going to use counties as boundaries of constituencies.  That is why some of us have come back here but you allow again these people to go and curve constituencies so that when they see Omadi is supported here, they say; ah, ah, keep that way, we are going to do this.  This is not good.  So we have got to be very careful when we are talking of political parties.  And hon. Bidandi Ssali there is aware of what took place so why do we not tell people the truth!  So at the end of the day we had to get a cabinet of youth here, some of them who could drink in the bar and have to fight and they did not reflect the integrity of this nation. So when I mention that we should be modest and reasonable in this House some of you say oh, oh, but I am talking what I have known.  

Short of that arrangement, which I have just talked about, if that is not the case if we do not bring all these people in them we must all go for elections and only if we do so it is only the elected members who should be members of the Constituent Assembly but the alternative I have given, I think, to my own opinion is the best because if you get everybody involved in the making of a constitution, then there will be no cause for anybody to complain.  There would be no cause for hon. Tiberondwa to say UPC was not consulted.  Whom do we consult in the UPC? (Laughter) I know of people in the UPC who are busy eating money from Uganda house, I am UPC but have I ever eaten your money -(Laughter)-  So, -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor that the money he is talking about I have never eaten also. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR. OMADI: If my Friend, Mr. Chairman, has not also eaten the money then -(Interjection)- I am saying money from Uganda house. I suggest that we really exercise seriousness when we are discussing a very important Bill like this because it is that Bill which is going to ensure that there is peace, tranquility and progress in this country.  The only thing I am worried about is that one, I am not sure whether some of these fellows, some of our friends are not letting down NRM.  I am not sure whether they are really honest.  I am not sure whether these people are innocent.  I am not sure whether they are not corrupt.  Some of the lieutenants within the NRM who have had a chance to get appointed Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Chairmen of this and that, I am not sure because these are the people again who let the previous government down.  So, I urge the Prime Minister to exercise vigilance in the activities of some of these fellows.  This country is full of corrupt people and from the top.  Can the Prime Minister tell this House, today why he did not announce the price for cotton when there is no law in this country declaring liberalisation? Is it going to be by a policy without a law in place?  Now, people have nowhere to sell their cotton, people are producing this and that, roads in the rural areas are not taken care of.  Now, what are these people doing here and none of them has ever been to my constituency -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Shame.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR. OMADI: When they come they stop at the district headquarters and back they come to Kampala.  A Minister should go to the district and behave the way one of the young men behaved the other day when he was in Pallisa, the hon. Pulkol.  He said “no, I am going to see those schools,” the District Education Officer tried to stop he but he said; “no, I am going to see the schools, I want to see my schools and he did that” and he promised to send us mabaati but he has not also done so. (Laughter)

Mr. Chairman, another point I would like to touch  -(Interruption)- yes, hon. Pulkol came to Pallisa and noticed and promised to send us mabaati -(Interruption.)

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C. Adyebo): Point of information. Mr. Chairman, Members of the House, hon. Omadi coming from a cotton growing area raised the issue of the problem of crop finance for cotton buying.  As you are aware or as some of you may be aware, last year when the Lint Marketing Board handled the buying of cotton in a hurry government eventually lost 1.2 billion shillings because of the abrupt fall of the price of cotton in the international market.  Early this year as you may be aware again all of a sudden the former Eastern Block of the Soviet Union which is one of the biggest growers of cotton in the world after converting itself into capitalism, threw all the cotton they had for their industries to the world market and you may interest yourself to be reminded that the quality of the Soviet cotton is much better than the one of Uganda. When now Uganda cotton face abrupt competition in the world market because of the overhauling of massive cotton from the Soviet Union in the world market that is even cheaper than Uganda cotton.  Government had to study the movement of the prices because we do not want to make mistakes and as I talk now the price of cotton in international market is about 225 shillings when we got the indication from the world market we had to convene cabinet meetings several times to discuss what price we had to offer subsequent to the announcement, subsequent to what is now happening in the world market.  As a result the government decided to give extra money to every peasant farmer growing cotton.  That is why we raised from shs.225 which we would have been giving to the farmers had we stuck to the international market to Shs. 300 and that is why the government came with the announcement of Shs. 300 being the price payable to the farmers sometime last year towards the end of the year.  As Members can be in the picture again I do not need to emphasize that we are depending on the movement of international market prices.  Last night you heard that for the second time there has been a drop for petroleum products.  We are not actually unmindful about what is happening in the country but we are also part of the world community.  Much as hon. Omadi is concerned, we are equally concerned.  We have in the government issued four licenses recently to four unions including South Bugisu to start exporting cotton come in the world market, participate, relieve the problem of Lint Marketing Board, we also issued license to Nyakatonzi in the western Uganda to start now participating in the buying and exporting of cotton.  We have licensed Bunyoro Co-operative Union.  Four unions have already been licensed to participate together with the Lint Marketing Board and I think these are positive steps which we are taking.  I, therefore, would plead with him that sometimes he has also to visit the office of the Prime Minister to give him information.  That is a public office but since he was elected in 1989 he has never even bothered to go there.  Thank you very much for the information. 

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Prime Minister for the information he has given but I would like to inform him very frankly that Lint Marketing Board right now is paying the farmers Shs. 250 not Shs. 300.  That is seed cotton that is cotton that has not been ginned.  Now, if the government did give a price of Shs. 300 to the farmer, I think that price should be given to the farmer.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker and this House that in fact the Shs.250 is given to those who are buying cotton from the farmers but the farmers are being paid between Shs.100 and Shs.180.  Thank you.

MR. OMADI: Mr. Chairman, the situation as I said, requires to be looked into by the Prime Minister.  As for not visiting the Prime Minister’s office, if I do not have anything burning me I do not see why I should go on bothering my Prime Minister.  Those who are cheap politicians should go there but some of us have been in politics for too long.  (Laughter)

The other point I would like to put to you here is in connection with security.  We in Pallisa have now become a district where the Karimojong are turning to steal. Just three days back fifteen Karimojong were repulsed from Kabwangasi and from Kakoro, a week before they abducted my youngest brother and took my cattle but we managed to recover them beyond Kori.  I would like to request those concerned with security to come to help us.  Secondly, it is wrong to say that there is complete security in the area.  Across in Kachumba and Kidongole we have got a man called Ogwang who is terrorising, killing people and doing all sorts of things.  We need security in Pallisa so that we can develop.  We are capable of supplying enough rice to fee the whole Uganda, enough potatoes to feed this country.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN: On what now?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order when we are discussing such an important Bill to the nation when we do not have a quorum because we are sixty-eight people instead of ninety. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  The hon. Minister is here and if you are tired you can go. 
 
MR. OYAT BALMOI (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have already contributed to the Bill before the House.  Sir, allow me to make a few remarks before I comment on the Bill itself.  It is true -(Interruption)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, for the sake of putting our record in order, I would like to follow up to your ruling about the continuation in light of the point of order that was raised about the quorum.  I would like to inform you, Mr. Chairman and the House, that considering the Members who are in the lobby, we are very well in quorum, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I want to assure you that we form a quorum.  For that I sure, please proceed.

MR. OYAT BALMOI:  Thank you. We are talking about a Bill that is seeking to put in place a constituent assembly that would discuss and promulgate what I call the grand mother of laws. I think, therefore, Mr. Chairman, it is very important that Members of this Assembly discuss this Bill with all the good will and without losing sight of our national unity.  It could not have come at a better time than this.  As many Members know of my stand in this House from day one I stand for national unity and nothing short -(Applause)- and because of this I must say I stand to support the Bill.  I may refer to the past that since the House was expanded, we have been able to carry out a very important experiment given our history.  An experiment that has worked under the NRM Government we have been able to carry the nation forward.  I will illustrate.  People talk about parties and it is true that all the parties are represented here.  There was a drama in this House I remember involving the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning, hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, who did admit in the hearing of us all that in those days in the 80s they used to dismiss Bills as those UPC things but today things are different.  I may ask, when they were behaving in such a manner, where did they put the interest of the people of Uganda? Because they bear allegiance to their parties.  What we have now come out with as a House is that we support the national position regardless of our affiliation and that is what we must not lose.  We must not get excited just because we are going to make a constitution and depart from looking at Uganda as a nation state. To do so would be unfortunate, Mr. Chairman.  I would regret why I ever joined this House because coming from a disturbed area where there was war I would not like a repeat of the same scenarios I have seen in the north anywhere else in Uganda Just because leaders have disagreed and they have greedy ambitions.  This should not be the case.  The Bill is asking us to do yet another honourable thing to let the people say exactly what they want. The people of Uganda, today in 1993 what is good for them and what is not.  Nobody should presume that he or she knows better what the people feel.  Let us leave it to the people to say:  I am supporting the Bill for a different reason from that advanced, by the hon. Minister.  I support it from the standpoint of a national issue and transparency and saving the name of the revolution that has brought about common sense in the governance of this country.  This is a fact, it may be bitter to swallow but let us take it because it is true.  It is from here when we aim at smooth hand over to the next administration and the constitution should, as many Members have said, stand the test of time.

Turning to the Bill itself, Clause 4; I must say I have consulted very widely with the people in Lamwo County of Kitgum District and I have listened very attentively to the people, advising them along the way as we discuss on crucial issues but they were of the opinion that there should be no appointment of chairman by the President because the elected delegates can do that themselves.  Regarding the other special groups they say that there is no need to have any special groups but the Army.  Only the NRA should be represented, in order to avoid giving 18 reasons or any other reasons for taking over because then they will have been part and parcel of the making of the Constitution and the making of a nation for that matter. They further suggest that, let, the assembly be elected instead of President nominating one. This is so, not that the Presidents standing is in question at all.  Nobody in this country or outside it doubts.  But to protect that good name, let the Assembly be allowed through this Bill to co-opt people of status who are knowledgeable in Ugandan society to join the elected members instead of the President nominating at the risk of some detractors saying “this is Museveni’s Constitution, this is NRM Constitution.” Let the elected members be enabled to co-opt suitably qualified Ugandans to help us make a good constitution. That is my proposal.

As regards the status of women.  They say and I do agree with them - that the hon. Ladies and other ladies outside this House, in this country, particularly, should come up strongly and defend their own position that we the men recognise.  It remains now for the ladies to come out and stand for this position and be elected on their own merits. If you keep spoon-feeding a child, it will never grow to know how to feed itself.  

And about the election of the Chairman.  Again they say, the delegates can compete on equal footing as to who should be elected be a Chairman or Deputy Chairman of this Constituent Assembly. No one and I do not believe it; no one should deceive the world that people assemble and they will not know one another and they will not know who to choose.  That is absolutely out.  People who matter - as that book says “Who is Who” are known throughout this country.  Uganda is a small state; people are known to one another.  If there is no intrigue, at least we have a clean spirit to build this nation; we should be able to do that. But if we want to make it for some group interest and things like, we risk; we risk losing the originality for which the grandsons and granddaughters of this country went to the bush, shed their blood to make us free; they did not do that in vain.  We must really honour the national motto “For God and my County,” in good faith.  That is the way forward.

There are other provisions that Members have already spoken about on which people of my constituency have viewed their concern.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

MR. OYAT BALMOI:  On quorum, they do not differ.  They agree with the two-thirds forming a quorum, instead of a fixed figure. 

Clause 18, on contentious issues.  They contended that if any matter appears for discussion in the Constituent Assembly, let us make it a national issue. Otherwise, if it is a local issue, it should never appear on the Constitution for debating.  That will settle it. We should learn to trust one another and respect the way of life of each individual group and learn to live in diversity.  That is the richness of this country, Uganda, which we tend to always forget because of our various interests one way or the other Mr. Chairman, I believe that this House has done some commendable job.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

MR. BALMOI: I am winding up, Mr. Chairman. I believe that we have done a commendable job in making laws since we joined the expanded House.  It would be unfortunate to dub this House as incompetent.  And, therefore, I would like to appeal to hon. Members and friends, that let us all go out to contest these elections. And those of us who will be lucky to make it, will show the world, whether we were ever incompetent or not.  Without fear, because we do not want to take the future and the destiny of this nation into our hands.  Why do we not learn from the gesture of the army itself who gave us the power when they took it over?  They even went ahead to say, “Now instead of the Defence Council we are going to be represented by 10 people only.”  And if we are including the police and so on, we have no problem.  That is a nationalistic enough.  So, there is no question of resolving ourselves (National Assembly) into Constituent Assembly. Let us be categorical, we go out for elections; let us not complicate matters.  The people, not only of Lamwo but even right here in Kampala where I have friends.  When I talk to some friends around, they say, we want peace; we want jobs.  (Interjection) Yes, because that is well being of the people; if they are not employed, how can they sustain life? You see.  People are interested in tranquility.  They are not interested in the other things we talk of in the abstract.

So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill by these few remarks.  Thank you very much.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday, next week, at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 16th, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)







