Wednesday, 10th March, 1999

(Parliament met at 2.30 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order).

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, 'The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1999' be read for the First Time.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON SWITZERLAND INTERNATIONAL PROCUMENT COMPANY (SWIPCO) CONTRACT WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA.

MR. AWORI:Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of procedure; I am seeking guidance from the Chair. I do understand, from previous practise, that once a document, whether it is a Bill or a report, has been submitted to Parliament, and that Session expires, that document will expire.  This one was submitted to us more than one session ago, is it still valid?  I am seeking your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it was a decision of the Business Committee to include it on the Business of the House, and I think that brought it to this Floor.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ( Mr. Augustine Ruzindana): Mr. Speaker, hon. Colleagues, let me start by correcting what you have just heard.  The report was not laid on the Table in a previous Session, it was laid on the Table during this Session.  Mr. Speaker, the report is dated July 1997, but it was actually laid on the Table during this Session.  The report is coming rather late partly because of our rules.  If look at the rules on the order of Business, reports come as number 13, and because of that, reports actually do not get space on the Order Paper. That is why our report, and many other reports, have actually come late.

There may be an advantage, however, since it has given us time to appreciate other matters, which were not known at the time investigations were carried out. There have been new developments which could have necessitated the review of our report, but since it was laid on the Table, it became property of Parliament and the Committee could not review it. It is only this House that can now change the contents of the report.  

A few developments have taken place, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to mention two or three of them.  Besides our report, there is a report by the Inspector General of Government, which has not been made available to Members.  Secondly, there is actually another report by other consultants, that looks into the improving of Public procurement in Uganda, this report is dated 12th August 1998.  It is by the International Trade Centre of Geneva; that is another consultancy going on.  

The third development, which I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, involves a letter from the Central Tender Board to the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance. I have just received a copy of that letter and it gives retrospective authority to the contract with SWIPCO as a procurement consultant for Government.  

With your permission, Mr. Speaker, may I read this letter, because it changes a lot in our report.  The letter is addressed to the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury by the Secretary, Central Tender Board. It reads as follows:
"Please, refer to your letter ES108/16 Vol. 3 dated 1st December 1998, on the above mentioned subject.  The Board, at its meetings held on 7th and 14th December 1998, and also at the meetings held on 4th, 11th, 19th,January 1999, deliberated on the issue at length, having considered the letter from the Auditor General attached to your letter referenced above."I have not seen the letter from the Auditor General.  

The extract of the report from the IGG on SWIPCO, dated 30th September 1998, on the various correspondences between the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney General, and the IGG resolved as follows:
"(a)approved the negotiated contract for the first two years i.e 1996/97 and 1997/98, despite some shortcomings in certain provisions of the contract, as this was considered a fait-accompli. The Board thought, that rejecting the claim, might result in serious legal action for which the Government might incur high costs, with the accompanying liabilities resulting thereof.  The total fee payable should be adjusted by deducting what has been paid to SWIPCO already." I do not know the total fee payable, I hope the Minister of Finance will inform the House what the fee payable is.  

"The Board further resolved that we invite SWIPCO to re-negotiate the contract and submit the re-negotiated contract to the Board for final approval. The Board also recommended that in the course of re-negotiation of the contract, the following points should be effectively addressed:
(1) Under Article 1.9, it is provided that 'The consultants, sub-consultants and Personnel shall pay such taxes, duties, fees, and other taxes, as may be levied under the applicable law, exclusively for the work performed in Uganda.'  The Minister's letter to the Attorney General, reference C4501, dated 15th January 1999, made a case for non payment of taxes as it could lead to increasing the cost of Government. The condition should be maintained as originally agreed.  

(2) Article 3.4.1 states the activities which must be performed by the consultant and action to be taken for none performance.  The new contract should establish the monitoring criteria so that savings accruing to the Government could be monitored more effectively, especially with the conditions which relate to payment of fees to level of savings. The fees chargeable by SWIPCO should be re-negotiated from 2.1 percent to 2 percent for full procurement, and from 1.8 percent to 1 percent for auditing or procurement.

(4) Clause 3.6, where the fees are based on procurement worth 200 million dollars per year, should be re-negotiated so that the fees are based on actual value of procurement handled rather than on estimated figures. Moreover, SWIPCO financial evaluation, which enabled the firm to win, was based on handling procurement evaluated at US Dollars 23 million rather than 200 million.  

(5) The Board further noted that while Annex B provides for exclusion of the procurement by the Military Police, National Medical Stores, parastatals and Decentralised districts, the provision under Annex B is a contradiction, in that, all the services above are brought under the jurisdiction of SWIPCO. This contradiction can be removed.  

The Board would finally wish to ensure that the re-negotiated contract should not contain contradictions in the various articles provided in the contract and the appendices.  The re-negotiated contract should be sent to the Board for review and approval.  

Please, quote this letter, as you authority in any further correspondence on this subject."  

It was signed by the Acting Secretary, Central Tender Board. Copies were given to other people except Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee and any other authority within parliament.

This letter just came to my notice when I was up here at lunch time and I thought Members should be aware of it.

Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I have read this report, and I think it is a serious one, because it concerns matters in the Ministry of Finance. As we realise, there is no Minister from the Ministry, and there are issues which we shall need guidance on; I do not know, Mr. Speaker, if it is procedurally correct for us to continue debating this report? There are quite a number of Ministers, I do not know why they are not taking this very seriously. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, order please. I am equally anxious to have the presence of the hon. Minister of Finance in this House, in light of the fact that when this debate ensues, it is going to touch on his Ministry.  But, I am equally comforted that we are at a stage where the Chairperson is still presenting the report, although all of us would have wished the Minister of Finance to be around. I take it that he will be here any time, but in order to progress, we should allow the Chairperson to proceed with the presentation of the report, then when we get there, we should be able take a decision on the matter that you have raised.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, with your permission, -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas I agree entirely with your wisdom and guidance, I am still alarmed about a slight matter.  The letter, which the Chairman has just read, emanating from the Central Tender Board, absolutely negates what the Ministry of Finance officials told the House Committee.  So, I am still wondering, Mr. Speaker, how we can proceed when there are no people from the Ministry of Finance to take comments and to answer questions and queries, which Members would wish to raise.  I do not know whether it could be within your competence, Mr. Speaker, to immediately use modern methods to summon the Minister of Finance here.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, you can see, we are only two Ministers here, we left the Cabinet meeting still going on; I know that the Minister is on his way here. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the hon. Member for Ayivu took recognisance of the information given by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. He says that the Minister of Finance is on his way here from Cabinet, but as I had ruled, for the time being we can proceed to hear the Chairperson present the report.

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you for allowing me to proceed, Mr. Speaker. I will start where I had started yesterday and go through the report. I want, however, to draw to the attention of the House that the letter I have just read confirms what we had found out. We found out that the contract had never been awarded by the central tender board, and this was also confirmed by the report of the Inspector General of Government.

At the beginning of November 1996, the Public Accounts Committee started inquiries into the transparency of the process of awarding the contract for procurement of goods, services and works, in the whole of Government and the parastatal sectors, to a foreign company called SWIPCO.  Inquires started after the matter was brought before the House and after documents relating to the contract had been passed on to the public Accounts Committee by Members of Parliament, who had got them from some Ministers.  

When PAC started receiving evidence and testimony about the SWIPCO contract, some questions were raised by SWIPCO  as to whether Parliament should handle such an issue, and if so, whether the Public Accounts Committee was the right Committee of Parliament to handle the matter.  However, there is no doubt that Parliament has the right to look into the manner in which the Executive performs its functions, including the way Government awards contracts.  

Article 90 of the Constitution provides that the functions of a standing Committee shall include "to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies."  There is, therefore, no doubt that awarding the contract is an activity that can attract such an assessment and evaluation.  

Rule 123 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, charges the Public Accounts Committee with the duty to "monitor all expenditure of public funds as required under Clause (3) of article 164 of the Constitution."  

Article 164 (3) of the Constitution provides that, "Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds."  The contract in question is about procurement of goods, services and works; and Government procurement involves the expenditure of public funds.  There is therefore no doubt that the SWIPCO contract is within the mandate of PAC, since it involves expenditure of public funds. 

As we investigated, we met a number of problems. The Ministry of Finance and other Government agencies,however, were extremely co-operative with the Public Accounts Committee, but for some unknown reasons, SWIPCO vigorously attempted to interfere with the Public Accounts Committee inquiries. There were paid advertisements in the press, praising SWIPCO and damning anyone inquiring into the contract as a supporter of corruption.  There was a smear campaign launched against the members of PAC and other Members of Parliament, who in one way or another, had expressed views SWIPCO did not like. Individual members of PAC and other MPs were intimidated. In fact, one member of PAC was asked to write to the Press retracting what the press had reported him to have said in a PAC meeting. A newspaper that reported the contents of one of the letters of SWIPCO was put under police investigations.   

For a company contracted to enforce transparency in Government procurement transactions, to so vigorously and vociferously fight efforts by Parliament to check the transparency of its own contract, is indeed quite surprising. The press, eminent advocates, and even a venerable, well known columnist, were enlisted in the campaign of misinformation and misrepresentation, including attacking and challenging the authority of the Auditor General to investigate the contract and making his findings known to PAC. 

The methodology which the committee followed:
The committee received documentary evidence from various sources. We interviewed witnesses from the Ministry of Finance, Central Tender Board, Government Central Purchasing Corporation, SWIPCO, Crown Agents and PALMA.  The interview with SWIPCO was full of drama.  On the day SWIPCO was invited to appear before PAC, SWIPCO senior officials, including the official in charge of Africa, came and informed the committee that they were instructed not to talk to PAC until a certain SWIPCO senior official arrived in the country from the U.S.  They, therefore, requested PAC to give them another day, when the official would be in the country.  However, the day before their appearance, the same SWIPCO officials, who requested for postponement, had appeared before another Parliamentary Standing Committee ready to testify with a lot of documentary hand outs for committee members.  Under the circumstances, PAC granted SWIPCO another day when the
key official would be around, and he came, accompanied by, among others, one hon. Member of Parliament.   

In addition to the documents received from the various sources and testimony from a number of witnesses, PAC also requested the Auditor General to examine the award of the contract and report to PAC.  The Auditor General found out that the award of the contract violated the Public Finance Act, Central Tender Board regulations. The report of the Auditor General to PAC is what resulted in the unjustified attack on him by SWIPCO and its friends.

The Terms of Reference:
PAC set out to establish the following issues:
1.  The need by Government for the services of SWIPCO, and the type of services to be rendered and to whom.
2.  Whether the procedure followed in awarding the Contract, conformed with the existing law, rules, regulations and established procedure.
3.  The scope or coverage of the contract and whether the contract had legal effect on parastatals and other statutory bodies, without reference to their institutional mechanisms and statutes. 
4. who was to pay for SWIPCO services. 
5. The credentials of SWIPCO, including the profile and the experience of the company.  

Previous Efforts to reform the Procurement System:
Since the National Resistance Movement took power in 1986, there have been major studies of the Government procurement system by three reputable international organisations; the fourth one is the one I have just mentioned.  The report of the first study made by the International Development Business Consultants of New York was finished and submitted in October 1998.  As a result of this study, the Central Purchasing Corporation was established and a team of consultants from the Crown Agents of the UK was engaged,for three years, to advise and assist the Central Tender Board and the Central Purchasing Corporation in strengthening their operations.  The Crown Agents advisory team submitted their final report in 1992. The Crown Agents Consultancy constituted the second study which produced several reports in the course of its three year duration.  

A further study, covering Government procurement and the logistics of import operations, generally, was conducted by the International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, of Geneva, Switzerland in 1994.  This study also made recommendations on how the operations of the Central Tender Board and the Central Purchasing Corporation can be improved.  It is this same organisation that has carried out another study and given a report, dated 12th August 1998. 

What were the conclusions and recommendations made by these reports? The above reports identified, for Government, the defects within the procurement system and the appropriate remedial action Government should take.  The problems identified included the following:
1.  Inadequate professional expertise
2.  Inadequate procurement data
3.  Inadequate legal framework; the laws and regulations, in addition to being absolete, are ambiguous on the role of CTB, and they are also too narrow in the range of alternative procurement options. 
4.  Budget problems invalidate sound procurement planning, leading to delays in release of funds, thus, affecting delivery schedules, raising prices and aborted and uncompleted purchases. 

These studies identified the following solutions to lie in a reorganised and strengthened Central Tender Board:
1. The role of the Central Tender Board should be revised to make it a specialised institution without ambiguities in its functions, and also to remove duplication with user Ministries in the Central Purchasing Corporation.

2. The re-organised Central Tender Board should be given an appropriate legal status, giving it administrative and financial independence.  If financial independence requires financing its own operations, the Central Tender Board could charge a modest fee for its services.

3. The composition of the Board; Board members and the
Secretariat, should be professionalised.

4. A new legal frame work should be put in place.  The legal status making it a policy maker and a policy executioner requires major structural changes.

5. Technical assistance should be procured to facilitate the implementation of the above recommendations.  

After these reports, has Government implemented any of the above recommendations?  Yes.  Technical Consultancy Services were procured in 1988 for three years.  Crown Agents were hired to assist in the improvement of purchasing, purchase approval and supplies operations.  

In the course of three years, a number of reports were made by the Consultants, indicating what had been done and what was yet to be done.  Some of what has been done includes the following:
Policy was agreed on, documentation and procedures were produced and a Manual written.  500 officials went through local courses and a cataloguing system was initiated and a catalogue produced.  New stock control and purchasing forms were designed and procedures were written.  A suppliers register was produced, and
systems for tender preparation and evaluation manuals were provided.  Procedures for biding, together with guidelines and specimen documents, were submitted.  Specification requirements for various types of contracts, special conditions of contracts, sourcing, rules for biding and instructions to bidders were all agreed.  Therefore, the required action should have been implementation of the un-implemented recommendations, and the procurement of any consultancy services should have been to this end.  Is this then the purpose of the contract with SWIPCO?

The Process of Procurement of SWIPCO Services.
Identification of the need of a procurement agent. 
The recorded process started towards the end of 1994,when the Ministry of Finance and SWIPCO met officials of Central Tender Board and Central Purchasing Corporation on separate occasions, on the SWIPCO issue.  

On 23rd November 1994, a meeting took place between SWIPCO and Central Purchasing Corporation, on the possibilities of establishing business relations.  Another meeting took place on 29th November 1994. That meeting was attended, on the side of SWIPCO, by Michael Shure and the hon. E. Karuhanga, again for the same purpose.

On 28th November 1994, a meeting took place between the Minister of Finance and the Director General of Central Purchasing Corporation, on the procurement proposal made to Government by SWIPCO.  Yet another meeting on the same issue took place around the same time, between the Minister of Finance and the Chairman of Central Tender Board.  As a follow up of these two meetings, the Director General, Central Purchasing Corporation, and the Chairman, Central Tender Board, separately, wrote to the Minister of Finance, giving him their comments on the SWIPCO proposal, which they had not yet seen.  The following are the comments made by the two officials on the SWIPCO proposals:  

In his letter of 28th November 1994, the Director General, Central Purchasing Corporation, informed the Minister of Finance that,"although at this point of time we do not have details of SWIPCO's proposal to Government, we want to make a few observations, which we hope will be useful to you."  

In paragraph 3 of his letter, with the heading, "Central
Purchasing corporation's Present Procurement System", the Director General informed the Minister that, "when the Central Purchasing Corporation was established in 1990, Crown Agents of Britain were contracted, through World Bank fundings, to provide it with the necessary startup technical assistance.  The two objectives of the technical assistance were;
1. To facilitate the establishment of proper and efficient operation policies for the Corporation, that would result in timely and economic Government purchasing.
2. To facilitate professional development to Central Purchasing Corporation staff, so that they could sustain effective execution of the establishment policies and procedures."

The first phase of this technical assistance project was completed in May 1992.  To this day, Central Purchasing Corporation uses the various procurement manuals and procedure prepared by the consultants.  

In paragraph 4, entitled "possible areas of co-operation between SWIPCO and Central Purchasing Corporation", the Director General informed the Minister that, "we are of the view that SWIPCO and Central Purchasing Corporation can co-operate effectively, if the main objective of such co-operation is to further build the latter's technical capacity through staff training and establishment, at Central Purchasing Corporation, of a link to the former's global trade information network.  We believe that this form of co-operation can be extended
to other procurement institutions of Government and the private sector, and can result in improved procurement decisions. However, Government may wish to make comparisons between the package of procurement services offered by SWIPCO, with similar services available from other multi-national procurement agencies. 

Finally, we wish to state that we shall only be too willing to provide you with additional information you may require."  

On 20th December 1994, the Chairman Central Tender Board wrote to the Minister of Finance the following brief: 
"You may recall the brief discussion we had (Nkangi/Tumwine)during early November 1994 concerning the interest the Swiss Purchasing Company (SWIPCO) has expressed in providing procurement services to the Government of Uganda.  

Discussions have been held with our Board and between our Board and Central Purchasing Corporation in order to examine the merits and demerits of using a procurement agency such as SWIPCO for handling Government tenders. 

I have enclosed a short brief on how the system is operating now, what would happen if a Procurement Agency is used and finally, what preliminary steps could be taken if Government decided to engage SWIPCO as its procurement agent.

I may add, that if the idea of using a procurement agency is approved, it is better to open the tender to other qualified firms for competitive bidding."

The brief on the operations of the Government procurement system is informative, but more so, the advantages and disadvantages pointed out, and then the suggestions made on how SWIPCO could operate.  The following advantages were identified:
1.  Procurement expertise is consolidated in one organisation.
2.  The organisation is better placed to have more knowledge of the market or suppliers, worldwide.
3.  It should benefit from bulk purchasing and the resultant accrued discounts.
4.  It could offer training to its clients'organisations.

Disadvantages:
1.  It shall exclude other firms from participating in tendering services, thus creating a monopolistic situation.
2.  It shall stifle the growing initiative of indigenous firms of consultants, for instance, consultancy firms in the Construction Industry and other services.  
3. It will be difficult to pay the agency fees, where external funding is used.
4. From experience with similar organisations like UNDP, there is a tendency to ignore the local suppliers.
5. The Central Purchasing Corporation is likely to be rendered idle, though Government has made some headway towards its capitalization.  

Following the above advantages and disadvantages identified, the following suggestions were made to the Minister:

1. The Company (SWIPCO), can register in Uganda and compete for jobs, like any other procurement firm, for instance Kjear and Kjear, Peje and Crown Agents.

2. Alternatively, the Company could offer training to Central Tender Board, Central Purchasing Corporation, Ministries, Departments and Parastatals.

3. SWIPCO would be tested on one project to gauge the efficiency of their services, before opening up the whole public procurement to them.

4. A small team from the Central Tender Board and Central
Purchasing Corporation should travel to Nairobi and talk to Kenyan authorities, in order to find out more about the services of SWIPCO to the Government of Kenya.

5. The Government of Uganda should consult major donors on their opinion, regarding the engagement of a procurement agent and payment of its fees from donor funds.

A number of conclusions emerge from these briefs to the Minister:
1.  The letters clearly show that consultations on the need for the SWIPCO services, were made after SWIPCO had made a proposal to provide procurement services to Government.
2.  The identification of the need for the services was made by SWIPCO, not by Government.
3.  The idea to compare the offer of SWIPCO with the offers of other companies, was made by the Central Tender Board and the Central Purchasing Corporation.
4.  There had been no internal discussions within the Ministry of Finance on the engagement of a procurement agency.  This is clear from the comments of senior officials of the Ministry, on the briefs from Central Tender Board and Central Purchasing Corporation.  For example, in the above mentioned brief of the Chairman Central Tender Board, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary
to the Treasury, asked the Minister of Finance whether the fact that the Minister had asked Mr. Kitabire, a subordinate to the permanent secretary, to invite three or four firms to bid for the work of procurement on behalf of the Government, meant that the Minister had 'decided to abolish the Central Purchasing Corporation.'  It is clear that the permanent secretary/secretary
to the Treasury, first learnt of the proposals from the letters from the two institutions.
5.  The suggestions made by the Central Tender Board, other than comparing the SWIPCO offer with other offers, were ignored.

Letter of invitation to bid:
Arising from the advice of the Central Tender Board and Central Purchasing Corporation, the Minister, on 18th January 1995, invited five foreign companies, and one local association of procurement agents, to present offers for procurement services to Government by 28th February 1995.  From the interview with a number of Ministry officials, the Public Accounts Committee has
come to the conclusion that the letter of invitation to these companies was drafted by SWIPCO.  This conclusion is born out of the fact that there is no official within the Ministry of Finance, Central Tender Board or Central Purchasing Corporation who is known to have drafted the letter.  One official remembers making comments on the draft, but he did not know the origin of the draft.

Secondly, the language used in the letter of invitation is not the language normally used in such letters in Uganda.  For example, envelope "A", containing the technical proposal, was supposed to contain:

1.  The company's 'legal accreditation in country of origin.' This is not the language used in Uganda.  In Uganda, companies are not usually accredited, they are incorporated, registered and so on.

2.  The statement of the financial capacity of the company.  Under this requirement, the letter of the Minister unnecessarily defines the company as "the company itself and any affiliates, partners,associates or subsidiaries."  The purpose of this definition will become clear later, when SWIPCO proposal is analyzed.

The invitation letter also disqualified any company which is not independent of any government, other than the Government of Uganda,or any other government to which it provides professional services.  In other words, Crown Agents, the other responsive bidder, which was at the time a British Government Company, was disqualified from the beginning, leaving SWIPCO as the only qualified bidder meeting the requirements of the letter of
invitation.

We would like, at this juncture, to point out that selective, competitive bidding is normal for consultancy services.  However, the invitation letter also normally includes the evaluation criteria of the bidders' proposals.  The Minister's letter, in this case, did not include the evaluation criteria and this caused tremendous problems at the evaluation stage of the tender, as we shall see later.

Furthermore, Ministers do not normally handle the administrative chores of writing invitation letters.  The normal procedure would have been to request the Central Tender Board to write the invitation letters, or at least the permanent secretary of the Ministry.  This was not done, therefore, bidders were asked to send their bids to the Minister's office, and yet when it came to opening and evaluating the bids, it was done at Central Tender
Board, when the process was already messed up.  The question that still needs to be answered is, what was special about this tender that it did not need to conform to established tender procedures?

Responses to the invitation letter.
Six companies were invited, but only three responded.  One of them,PALMA; an association of procurement companies in Uganda, had just been formed about the time the invitation letter was sent out to them. The President of PALMA is the Director General of Central Purchasing Corporation, which was supposed to be one of the beneficiaries of the consultancy services. Would this infant association really be considered to be a serious competitor with SWIPCO or Crown Agents?  
Having achieved its purpose of providing 'mock' competition, PALMA later withdrew their bid, before evaluation.

The first bidder to respond was Crown Agents, who in their letter dated 13th February 1995, asked for the following clarifications before submitting a responsive bid; I will quote their letter to the hon. Minister:
"We have pleasure to acknowledge receipt of your letter of invitation, dated 18th January 1995, for an offer to provide procurement services to Government Ministries and departments in Uganda.  

We will be happy to submit an offer and would be grateful if you could provide clarification on a number of issues, to facilitate our preparation of a responsive bid.  In the first instance, please advise on the following:
1. What are the anticipated volumes and values of purchases to be made and works to be contracted for, including breakdown by sector if possible?
2. The letter of invitation makes reference to 'pre-established minimum requirements.'  What are the minimum requirements, who establishes them and when will that information become available to bidders?
3. Does the scheme apply to the entire public sector and to all procurement above the pre-stated minimum, or will it apply to discrete divisions and/or particular purchases only?
4. What is/are the source(s) of funding and how are the consultant's services to be paid for?  Will donor funding be sought on the basis of this arrangement?

The information requested in paragraphs 1 to 4 above is needed to enable us determine the resources and inputs required to perform the required service, and thus to prepare an offer that meets with your requirements.

With particular reference to Section 2.5 of the letter of
invitation, we would be pleased if you could elaborate on the objectives for the inclusion of some of its sub-sections.  We seek this clarification for very practical reasons, including the following:
Sub-section 2.5 (a) would seem to exclude organisations that have built expertise and experience in the full range of Supply Chain Management functions, which encompass the procurement function.  It would appear that an organisation with such capability and others such as human resources development, for instance, would, in the long-term, offer the Government ministries and departments a much wider breadth of experience and expertise than one which expressly only offers procurement services exclusively."

Section 2.5 of the letter of invitation, is the one that contains sub-section 2.5 (d), which disqualifies a government owned company, like Crown Agents, from bidding.

When the clarifications required were not provided,Crown Agents, again, wrote to the Minister on 24th February 1995, informing him thus, "As we have not received a response to the clarification sought, we regret we are unable to submit a responsive bid on this occasion.  Should the relevant information be made available in the future, we would be happy to submit a fully costed proposal for your consideration."  

This should have been the end of the story, but surprisingly, Crown Agents submitted a bid in May 1995, long after the deadline had expired and without getting the clarifications they had earlier sought.  However, Crown Agents, in explaining this unusual conduct, informed the Public Accounts Committee that the bid was put in to maintain good relations with Government, without seriously hoping to win.  But obviously, they were already time bad.

Evaluation of the bids.
The invitation letter to bidders stipulated that, within no more than thirty (30) days, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning would proceed to evaluate the technical proposals, envelope "A", of the bids, according to the pre-established minimum requirements.  However, for some unknown reasons, evaluation of the bids did not take place until September 1995; that is about eight months after the time they were supposed to have been evaluated.

On 18th October 1995, the Chairman Central Tender Board wrote to the Minister, giving him a progress report on the evaluation of the tender.  He informed him that he had formed an evaluation panel, composed of officials drawn from the macro economic policy departments of the Ministry of Finance, Central Tender Board, Uganda Revenue Authority and Central Purchasing Corporation,  and
that the panel had 'subsequently formulated the evaluation criteria.'  The report of the results of the evaluation was enclosed for the Minister.

The Chairman, however, also informed the Minister of the
difficulties the panel had faced.  He informed him thus, 
"I wish to add that comparison of the two financial proposals was not straight forward because of the very different approaches taken by the two firms in computing their charges."  

Several assumptions had to be made in order to arrive at some tentative figure for SWIPCO's approximate fees.  It should be noted that SWIPCO did not quote a fixed periodic or personnel rate, but gave the formula which would form the basis for computing their fee.  If our assumptions are not accepted, the size of the fee would be much higher.  For instance, one major assumption made is that the consultant will process only bids financed by the Treasury, and which are above 50 million in value.  
The Chairman went on to propose that negotiations should be carried out with the recommended firm, SWIPCO, and thereafter, the secretary to the Treasury - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, I do not know from which document you are now reading?

MR. RUZINDANA: I think there could have been a mistake in the typing.  I am going to the outcome of evaluation; there are figures there. In my text, it is page 14, I do not know what page it is in yours; is it page 15?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is page 15.

MR. RUZINDANA: Outcome of Evaluation. Envelope "A"; technical proposal:  We have, under the criteria for evaluation, firms experience, methodology, training, financial capacity, Personnel and then the maximum total score , which is supposed to be 100.  SWIPCO scored a total of 70.526, Crown Agents scored a total of 73.16. The maximum weighted average was 70, SWIPCO scored 49.3682 and Crown Agents scored 51.21.

Envelope "B": financial proposal.
Crown Agents had six expatriates and their charges, which are listed there,would amount to 617,316.  They added transport and the total came to 1,175,437.30 pounds; that is the total. Training costs were to be determined at the time of negotiations. The Members agreed that the cost of computerisation can be left out, because the actual cost and needs of equipment are not easy to establish.  Short term consultancy was valued at 235,107 pounds and the total came to 1,175,437.30 pounds.

SWIPCO:
It is said to be noted that the evaluation of SWIPCO's financial bid was based on the data of actual Treasury funded procurements/purchases handled in one year, from 1st July 1994 to 30th June 1995. The total cost of procurement handled, for that period, was equivalent to 234,000,000 US dollars, which is equivalent to 24 million shillings.  

In the end, the total fee for SWIPCO was 603,500 US dollars; that was option one. Option two came to 523,000 dollars.  As a result, the Central Tender Board recommended that negotiations should be entered into with SWIPCO.  However, the recommended negotiations with SWIPCO did not take place until new developments came up in February 1996.  

In a meeting held on 21st February 1996, on the evaluation of the bids, the Minister of Finance noted the lack of proper comparison on the part of the evaluation, given SWIPCO's indeterminate offer
as compared to Crown Agents' determined one.  

It was agreed, therefore, that the basis for comparison needs to take care of all procurements, as stipulated in the letter of invitation to bid, necessitating the exclusion of the assumption that the evaluation team had made in recommending SWIPCO.  The Chairman, Central Tender Board, was to re-evaluate the financial bids, in light of this guidance, and present his findings by 21st
March 1996.  

On 14th March 1996, the Chairman,Central Tender Board, sent the re-evaluation of the financial bids to the Minister.  The Chairman, among other things, suggested that before one or any other firm is invited for negotiations, the following actions should be taken:

1. Decide whether the services will cover all the procurements or only internally funded ones.
2.  If the decision under 1 is in favour of SWIPCO, a small team of about two people, should be sent to Nairobi to find out from Kenya's Tender Board, details of the contract which SWIPCO has with Kenya.  

The following was the addendum to the evaluation Report after re-evaluation of financial proposals:
It set out procurements from 1st July 1994 to 30th June 1995, including both locally and externally funded procurement.   Under this re-evaluation, the total of SWIPCO's option one was 4,608,275.88 US dollars. The total of option two was 3,932,807.89 US dollars; and this is nearer to the current claims.

The day after the Chairman wrote his report, Mr. George Canovas, Vice President of the African Division of SWIPCO, U.S.A., wrote to the hon. Minister of Finance complaining about the turn of events. The letter is Annex 6 in your report, and it says the following: "Based on the events that have transpired during the last three weeks, SWIPCO would like to respectfully lodge an official letter of concern for your action of remanding SWIPCO's financial proposal for re-evaluation to the Central Tender Board(hereinafter'CTB').  SWIPCO finds this action incomprehensible, and without foundation.  Specifically, since the 'CTB' had completed the process of evaluation, made independent considerations of each of the bidding companies, and issued a final report outlining the results of its indepth evaluation. Therefore, SWIPCO stands ready to challenge the decision to re-evaluate SWIPCO's financial proposal. SWIPCO has had direct contact with President Museveni, initiated diplomatic assistance by the U.S State Department and will begin the process of an internal investigation through the Inspector General of Government(IGG).  
1.Background
In November 1994, President Museveni directed the Ministry of Finance to launch an international competition to obtain a Procurement Management Company.  The goal was to select an experienced, independent firm to assist Government in its procurement of goods and services with non AID funds and to audit performance.  The purchasing process was to be transparent and in accordance with internationally recognised procedures.  

Last November, the Central Tender Board issued its evaluation of the two finalists.  In its opinion, there was no contest between the two finalists.  SWIPCO U.S.A, was declared the winner by the unusually large margin of 15 points.  On the technical portion of the evaluation, both SWIPCO and Crown Agents were basically evenly paired. In the Financial section of the evaluation, SWIPCO was substantially better positioned than its
competitor.  
It is SWIPCO's position that the financial evaluation was completed correctly by the 'CTB', and no variation should be made to those findings.  

 There have been several issues that have plagued the process, bringing into question the transparency of the overall exercise. Specifically, Crown Agents did not comply with the deadline of the closing of bids." And this is true, as we have seen.  "Regardless, Crown Agents was allowed to submit their proposal months after the deadline. This, under normal circumstances, is a blatant violation of the process.  SWIPCO did not protest at that time,confident that our submitted proposal would stand regardless of the efforts of Crown Agents and others involved in supporting their position.

It become very clear that SWIPCO's efforts were being
subverted. After nearly a year, and at the strong recommendation of the President, the tenders were opened.  At the tender opening,Crown Agents strongly protested that SWIPCO should be disqualified since, as they claimed, there was no representative from our office.  In fact, SWIPCO did send a representative and Crown Agents' attempt to have SWIPCO disqualified failed.  
   
After a lengthy evaluation process by the 'CTB', they issued their recommendation to your office.  In essence, the recommendation suggested that SWIPCO be awarded a letter of invitation to negotiate a contract.  However, this announcement from the 'CTB' took nearly five months to communicate to SWIPCO.  
II. Basis for Concern.
SWIPCO is very concerned with the evolution of this tendering process. If normal Ugandan Procurement procedures were followed, a letter awarding the opportunity to negotiate a final contract would have been issued by your office immediately following the Central Tender Board's decision. However, this has not been the
case.

On February 12, 1996, Dr. Segura met with President Museveni to discuss various issues including this problem.  Since we had approached the President on this matter previously, he was again surprised and concerned that no action had been taken to award the contract.  At that point, the President directed that the letter of award be issued in accordance with the 'CTB' recommendations. A telephone call to the Minister of State for Finance, Mr.Rukikaire, conveying the same instruction was made.  
However, immediately following the Presidential Directive, you instructed the Chairman of the 'CTB' to begin a re-evaluation of SWIPCO's Financial Proposal for no other reason than to re-adjust the final fee SWIPCO would charge the Government; forcing SWIPCO into losing what had already been decidedly won.  It is clear that based on the method of the re?evaluation, the sole purpose is to once again  attempt to disqualify SWIPCO by increasing the amount of procurements, by including donor funds which would in turn raise SWIPCO's fee since our fee is based on a percentage of the total procurements.  This cannot be a transparent method of evaluating tenders.

Moreover, SWIPCO believes that this action is flawed because the use of donor funds in the calculation of SWIPCO's fees will skew the final results; since donors make an independent decision on how the procurement will be managed.  Moreover, it is unwise to assume that Financial Donors will give up their authority to manage procurements initiated by those donors.  It is clear that
the only reason that these donor funds have now been incorporated to calculate SWIPCO's fee, is to again attempt to disqualify SWIPCO.  

In reality, the fee that SWIPCO is charging is structured as follows:  
a. The fees are paid by the suppliers.
b. This means that there is no requirement that the Government of Uganda appropriate funds for the payment of services,i.e.,no need to budget for the services. The Goverment of Uganda would only stand as a guarantor of the fee; and  
c. The fee is offset by the savings SWIPCO guarantees to produce,i.e., at least double the fee of 1.8%. Hence, even if SWIPCO's fee is charged to the Government of Uganda, the entire fee, multiplied by two, should be subtracted and shown as a fiscal gain by the Government of Uganda; our entire fee can be offset by the savings we produce.  

It is important to note that SWIPCO guarantees the stated savings. Moreover, SWIPCO has proposed to install a computer system that will manage and track the purchases of the Government,incorporated with SWIPCO's proprietary Software, SWISSTRACK. These issues must be considered to provide a clear picture of SWIPCO's fees.

III. SWIPCO respectfully requests 
SWIPCO requests that the following actions be taken:
1. The re-evaluation using donor funds should be considered an inadequate form of verifying SWIPCO's fees.  In the alternative, if donor funds are going to be considered contrary to this protest, it should be assumed that less than ten per cent of the donors' financial assistance will allow for your proposed scheme.

2. The evaluation should consider SWIPCO's savings guarantee of 1.8 per cent multiplied by two,totaling 3.6 per cent overall savings of procurement on a yearly basis.
3.  Consideration should be given to SWIPCO's intention of installing a computerised tracking system in government offices. This should be considered as a substantial investment in Uganda.  
SWIPCO respectfully requests that action on the above be taken immediately, and that a letter of award be issued based on the original evaluation of 'CTB'."

On 27th March 1996, the said George Canovas again wrote to the hon. Minister, Mayanja Nkangi, giving him new information on the alleged savings Government would make, by engaging the services of SWIPCO.  Following this letter, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, on 29th April 1996, wrote to the Chairman the following interesting letter:

"EVALUATION OF PROCUREMENT ADVISORY CONSULTANCY SERVICES
In view of the submission by SWIPCO that their services to the Central Tender Board would,in effect, cost the Government (that is the Central Tender Board) nothing on the alleged ground that SWIPCO, if selected to provide the technical advice, would save Government money while at the same time paying itself for its services to the Government, I hereby authorise you to hold negotiations with the said Company.  If you find that the Company's claim can be sustained operationally, then the Company
will win the tender.

I enclose herewith a copy of information related to the said company's Savings Guarantee, dated 27th March 1996, which the company submitted to me recently purporting to show how the savings will be effected so as to render the Central Tender Board's liability to the Company zero for the Company's Consultancy services.  

Please, liaise with my Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to the Treasury concerning the negotiations and let me know the results afterwards."

On 12th May 1996, the Chairman, Central Tender Board, wrote to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, informing him that Central Tender Board had been requested, by SWIPCO, to render services to Central Tender Board. He was therefore requesting him to contact the Uganda High Commission in Kenya, to find out the nature of services rendered by SWIPCO, the terms under which they were engaged and the usefulness of the Consultancy services to them.  No reply has been received so far.  However, the Chairman went ahead and selected a negotiating team, which led to the signing of a contract with SWIPCO on 5th September 1996.  

Contract with SWIPCO
The contract was drafted by SWIPCO, just like the letter of invitation to bid.  In the negotiating team, chosen by the Chairman Central Tender Board, there was an officer from the Attorney General's Chambers,however it is doubtful whether this amounts to perusal by the Attorney General, as required by the Constitution. The contract is a very long document, so we shall make comments on just a few aspects of it. 

Under Paragraph.3.1.2; Obligations of the Consultants, it is stated that, "The Consultant shall provide direct procurement or auditing of procurement services, for all the purchases of the Central Tender Board and/or ministries of the Government, financed by Uganda's own internal budget, and auditing of procurement disbursements from loans made by lending institutions (multilateral/bilateral), at the option of Government."

Comment: You may recall that in SWIPCO's letter quoted above,
objecting to the re-evaluation of the financial proposal, the main reason was that the use of the external funds in calculating SWIPCO's fees would skew the results against SWIPCO, because the donors for these funds would make independent decisions on how procurement would be managed; "It is clear that the only reason that the donor funds have now been incorporated to calculate SWIPCO's fee is to again attempt to disqualify SWIPCO."
Now we find that these funds have been included in the contract.  The contract should have included only the amount for which SWIPCO was evaluated, that is, 24 million U.S dollars.

Under Paragraph 3.6; Performance Guarantee, it is stated that the performance guarantee is based on 200 million U.S dollars, an amount which SWIPCO objected to, for evaluation purposes.  The figure in the contract should have been 24 million dollars, on which it was evaluated.  The Performance Guarantee was based on the wrong amount. The team of negotiators ought to have pointed this out.  

Under Paragraph5.1, Government agrees to become a Commission Agent of SWIPCO. The validity of the contract between the supplier and the Government is predicated on the collection of the commission by Government.  Who is the principal and who is the agent?  What is the legal contractual relationship between the supplier and SWIPCO?  

In Paragraph 5.1 (a), SWIPCO is prohibited from direct contacts with the supplier or bidder.  The Consultant is purely engaged by Government, so what is the rationale for making the supplier or bidder pay for services not rendered to him or her?  Secondly, why maintain the fiction that the supplier or bidder is the one paying, when everyone knows that the commission will be included
in the price Government will pay? Is this the right time for Government to increase the price of all Government purchases by 1.8 per cent or 2.1 per cent? 

Appendix B of the contract provides for the inclusion of
parastatals, and even the decentralised districts, under the operation of the contract, irrespective of their governing laws and regulations, without amending them.  Does Government actually have the power to do this without amending a series of laws relating to these parastatals and districts?  Why would Government amend laws in the interest of a private company?  

In the above quoted letter by George Canovas, dated 15th March 1996, he says that "consideration should be give to SWIPCO's intention of installing a computerised tracking system in Government offices.  This should be considered as a substantial investment in Uganda". This substantial investment is revealed, in appendix D, to consist of 4 PC type computers to serve all Ministries, departments, parastatals and decentralised districts. This is substantial investment indeed! 

In Appendix E of the contract, the computation of the savings will be done jointly by the consultant and Central Tender Board, whose inadequacies are supposed to be the main reason for engaging SWIPCO.  In otherwords,  SWIPCO will itself evaluate the savings it has made. Obviously, the outcome of the evaluation of itself is a foregone conclusion.  How objective, therefore, are the trumpeted alleged savings expected from SWIPCO?  It would be interesting, honourable Members, to read the comments
of the Inspector General of Government on the savings.  

Effective date for the contract. 
Paragraph 5.1(b), provides that the Ministry of Finance will issue,within 30 days following the signing of the contract, a directive to all accounting officers, instructing them to abide by the terms of the contract.  This directive was duly issued on 27th September 1996, by hon. Basoga Nsadhu. It covered all procurement, without exception, financed by Uganda's own internal budget and procurement disbursements for loans made by lending institutions(multi lateral and bilateral). However, it is not clear whether parastatals, not financed by the Government Budget or loans, are covered by this directive, neither is it clear whether all existing legal arrangements are revoked by this directive.  It is this vagueness that is designed to enable SWIPCO cover every possible organisation which has links with Government.  The reality of this wholesale coverage of the entire public sector, is doubtful.  

It is at this stage, of hon. Basoga's letter, that Parliament became aware of this SWIPCO contract, leading to investigations by the Public Accounts Committee.  

SWIPCO, the company. According to the documents available, and the testimony of this official, SWIPCO was registered on 23rd July 1992, with a nominal and paid up capital of 150,000 Swiss Francs, consisting of 150 bearer shares of 1000 Swiss Francs each.  Indeed, in the statement of its financial capacity, it submitted a non committal testimonial from its auditors, Coopers and Lybrand S.A., which said the following:
"TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN 
We hereby declare and attest that we are the external auditors of SICPA, S.A, having its domicile at Rue de la Paix 4,1003 Lausanne, Switzerland, and that we are also the external auditors of the SWIPCO Group, having its legal domicile at Rue de la Paix 2, 1003 Lausanne, Switzerland.  

The SICPA Group is one of the most important shareholders of SWIPCO S.A. and possesses the necessary economical resources for the development of SWIPCO's programmes throughout the world, particularly as regards the bid invitation from the Government of Uganda."
  
What this means is that SWIPCO had no funds of its own. Its capital is equal to that of a medium size shop in Kampala.  This is why in its financial capacity, it provides the capacity of SICPA, which does not expressly give its own guarantee of SWIPCO anywhere.  In fact, in SWIPCO Statutes (Articles and Memorandum of Association), Article 7 specifically states that the shareholders are only responsible for statutory performance and are not personally responsible for the company's debts.  In any case, even if SICPA had made the whole investment of 150,000 Swiss Francs,what type of commitment would this be for a company the size of SICPA?  

Members may recall that in the invitation letter to bidders, the Minister defined a company to include "affiliates, partners,associates and subsidiaries". The purposes was to cover up the financial incapacity of the company and its lack of experience by using the capacity of some other companies, even if they had no substantial links with SWIPCO.  

In the documents submitted with its bid, SWIPCO states that, "to implement and conduct its operations, SWIPCO has the  financial and economic support of the SICPA S.A. Group and of Oppenheimer and Co. Inc." The latter company was not even mentioned in the testimonial of Coopers and Lybrand S.A.

In yet another document, SWIPCO gives the names of another Group of shareholders, who are dropped in other documents.  If again you read the adverts of SWIPCO in the local press, you will easily note the differences about who their shareholders are, and also other major contradictions on the structure of the company, clearly emerge. In the evaluation criteria, under Financial Capacity, the bidder was supposed to produce a bank's recommendation, audited accounts, share capital, CV's of previous contracts, financial ratio and capacity to negotiate.  SWIPCO did not produce any audited accounts, neither did it meet the other requirements. Instead of producing these requirements, SWIPCO produced a testimonial about SICPA's capacity.  Why didn't SICPA bid in its own right?  Yet SWIPCO scored 12.2 out of 15 merit points.  It would be interesting to find out from the evaluators how they came to this score when the required criteria were not met.

Experience of SWIPCO.
We have already noted that SWIPCO was formed in July 1992. Therefore, all its experience must relate to the work done during and after 1992.  However, most of the executed contracts presented as evidence of SWIPCO's experience, were done by other companies or individuals in fields unrelated to procurement and earlier than 1992.  In consultancy contracts, it is normal for bidders to show the experience of the consultants they will employ, but the bidder cannot claim the experience of its consultants to be its own. This is what happened.  Bidders cannot also claim the experience of their shareholders to be their own experience, otherwise a bidder like Crown Agents could claim the experience,since time immemorial, of the British Government and its Agencies, as its own. This illustrates the absurdity of SWIPCO's claims to have built ink factories, e.t.c,  merely because SICPA built them.

Altogether, 180 projects were submitted with the SWIPCO bid, as proof of their vast experience.  However, analysis of this experience shows that 113 of these projects were implemented before the formation of SWIPCO in July 1992.  For example, SWIPCO alleged that it contracted a number of ink manufacturing and sewerage treatment plants in the 60s and 70s.  Of the remaining 58 projects, 10 were related to the contract for the handling of the 12th Pan American Sporting Games held in Argentina in 1994 and 9 related to projects in Africa (7 being in Kenya).  There is therefore no doubt that the submission of experience is either total misrepresentation or a false claim of the experience of other companies.

Again, the definition of a company, in the Minister's letter of invitation, comes in handy to lend credence to the claims of SWIPCO, that the experience of other companies can be claimed  as its own, merely because a few officials of those companies invested a few Swiss Francs in SWIPCO.  

Implementation of the contract up to the time the report was written.  As for the implementation of the contract so far, the Minister will be in a better position to tell us.  
As pointed out earlier in this report, the contract came to the attention of Parliament when hon. Basoga Nsadhu had already, in September 1996, ordered the whole public sector to submit their procurement transactions, above Shs. 50 million, to the scrutiny of SWIPCO. Let us also bear in mind that the investigations of PAC were carried out in a manner designed not to interfere with the implementation of the contract, so that SWIPCO could have the opportunity to prove its worth.  

What has SWIPCO done in the 9 months of the existence of the contract? That is from the time the investigations were carried out 2 and a half years ago now .  The information available indicates that, excluding the Ministry of Defence and the re-shipment inspection (SGS) Tender, still under consideration at that time, the volume of business handled did not exceed 1 million dollars. The volume of business expected to be handled annually, however,was supposed to be worth 200 million US dollars.  SWIPCO has had almost a year to prove its claims and yet the realities on the ground seem to show that the provisions of the contract have had no real impact.  Is it reasonable, therefore, to continue with this contract, which discourages the search for meaningful reforms in the procurement sector, without any demonstrable benefits?

Even the account on which SWIPCO fees are supposed to be deposited by suppliers, by that time,had not been opened. It seems there are legal and procedural hurdles in the way to turning Government into a commission agent.

Conclusion and recommendations. 
1. The need by Government for a private procurement agent was sold to Government by SWIPCO.  The earlier studies of the Government procurement system did not logically lead to the contract with SWIPCO.

2. The existing tendering process was largely never followed, and to the best of our knowledge, the award of the tender has not been formally made by the Central Tender Board.  This has actually been confirmed by the letter, which I read to you at the beginning,dated 4th February 1999, prospectively awarding the contract to SWIPCO.  The Minister of Finance merely instructed the chairman to start negotiations with SWIPCO, without an award being given.  The award, as you have seen, was given in February this year, without any competition.  

3. SWIPCO, as a company, did not have relevant experience in the procurement services, to handle the whole public sector.  In its existence of 3 years, before being awarded the contract, the biggest contract it had handled related to the Pan American sporting Games.  Perhaps when Uganda hosts the Africa Games at Nambole, SWIPCO could be useful.

4.  The contract, if implemented, would take over some of the functions of Statutory Authorities like Central Tender Board and Central Purchasing Corporation.

5.  Although the contract provided for training, it is not clear how this provision will enhance the capacity of existing institutions in the Government procurement system.

6.  The assumption that Government will not pay for SWIPCO services, is fiction.  The cost will be included in the bid to be met by the Government.  The costs of all Government purchases will, in effect, rise by about 2 percent.  And as Members have heard,SWIPCO is now demanding direct payment, from the Treasury, of over 10 million Dollars for the duration of its three year contract.

7.  It would be prudent to implement the recommendations of the previous studies on the procurement services.  Those studies were commissioned by this Government and their reports were partially implemented.  It does not make sense to abandon them without any reasonable grounds, other than the pressure of influence peddlers.

 8.  The evaluation panel of the tender bent their evaluation process in favour of SWIPCO.  SWIPCO was awarded  marks for requirements not provided e.g bank recommendation, audited accounts, financial ratios and so on.  The Committee therefore recommends that appropriate disciplinary action be taken against those Government officials. Where necessary, Section 258 of the Penal Code and Article 164(2) of the Constitution should apply.

9.  The minister seems to have been under pressure from many quarters.  He erred in the contract handling process and bears full responsibility.

10.  Some people contend that termination may lead to heavy costs for Government, but Article 164(2) of the constitution is clear on who should make good a loss of this nature.  In its submission, on which it was evaluated, SWIPCO expected a fee of 618,000 U.S dollars per annum.  In fact, the business handled in the last 9 months, at the time the report was written, was less than 2 million U.S dollars, which was far below the total procurement in the public sector.

11. Because of the foregoing, the Committee has concluded that the contract is not the appropriate remedy to the problems in the Government procurement system.  The committee therefore recommends that the contract be terminated forthwith. Indeed, Government does agree with this recommendation, by the fact that it engaged the services of another consultant to actually study improving public procurement in Uganda. This consultant submitted a report in August 1998. 

A number of issues need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker.  Since we wrote this report, a number of developments have taken place. The Inspector General of Government has issued a report, I hope the Clerk will distribute that report to Members, and then another report has since been made on the procurement system. 

Before I close, I would like to make the following points on the mode of payment:  
1. According to hon. Basoga Nsadhu's letter of 27 September 1996, he asserted that the SWIPCO fee would be paid by the supplier at the rate of 1.8 or 2.1. After two and half years of SWIPCO's services, is this the case?  We now hear that there are attempts to procure funds from the Treasury to pay SWIPCO, when the basis of the contract was that no money from the Treasury would be paid as a fee to SWIPCO.

2. A general account was supposed to be opened for collection of the SWIPCO fees. We need to know how much has been collected in this account year by year, and how much the balance is on this account.

3. The consultant guaranteed that the services provided would generate savings to the client at twice the fees demanded.  Have savings been made to double the fee of the consultant?  If savings had not been generated at the end of each year, the contract says that the consultant would forfeit the performance guarantee and the contract may be discontinued without any responsibility by the client.  Should we, therefore, understand that since the contract still persists, then savings were made.  If so, how much saving was made?  I would like to inform the House that actually the performance guarantee of U.S $800,000 was effected through the National Insurance Corporation on 13th November 1996, long after the contract was signed.  Has this got any material effect on the contract and the quantum of the contract?  

With these words,Mr. Speaker,I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Hon. Members, this has been a fairly detailed report. The chairman has made references,not only to Annexure and Appendices, but he also made reference to certain other documents which you do not seem to have.  One conspicuous one is the reference to the IGG's report.  I do not know whether Members have copies of this, or whether you have read
it.

Secondly, he has made reference to two other documents in the body of the report.  I also do not know whether Members have those reports. He also made reference to a letter addressed by the Secretary, Central Tender Board to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. That letter makes reference to some clause of the contract, which I do not know whether members have in their possession, or have read.  
So, I am entirely in your hands.  We can proceed with the debate, but I do not know whether, in light of what I have observed or pointed out, you will be in a position to proceed with the debate intelligently. 

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, since those documents you are referring to have been cited in the chairman's report, would I, through you, seek to know from the chairman how soon we can get copies. It is absolutely necessary that Members can get copies of the IGG's report and copies of the Annexure for the other document which was sent to the Central Tender Board.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This document is from the Central Tender Board to the Ministry of Finance, specifically to the Permanent Secretary. In this letter, the Central Tender Board is literally saying, re-negotiate, particularly the following clauses of the agreement or the contract.  

MR. NYAI: If you refer to the first sentence of the letter from the Central Tender Board, it reads: "Please refer to your letter ES108/16 VOLUME 1, dated 1st December 1998, on the above mentioned subject."
For the sake of conviction, Mr. Speaker, I would imagine
we would need all those things, including this letter. I know it is very useful to us. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was of the view that the committee would now guide the attention of this House, considering the Government position as contained in the central Tender Board letter. 

I also think the other supporting evidence, or what transpired in the past, would also help us to particularly appreciate and getwhere we want to, because certain people cause losses to this Nation.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I entirely agree with you, but I put the issue to the House. 

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to seek
clarification from the chairman, because I do not quite seem to get clarified as to the way forward now.  To begin with, there was a time we were all eagerly, and urgently desirous of analysing the SWIPCO matter; it was hot then, and any temporary injunction by Parliament probably could have forestalled the development or the existence of SWIPCO in the way it did, but that did not come. Now, two years down the road, we have been presented with a report.  My problem now is, what is the way forward?  Because, even the recommendations contained in the report are well out of date. New things have come up in between, including retrospective ratification of the contract by a number of Government Ministers, who were responsible, some are still Ministers, some are not, others were reshuffled to very innocent Ministries.  

I really want guidance.  Is the value of this report for academic reasons; so that we can learn from our past mistakes, or can the value of this report be enhanced by an up date or a comparison of what actually has been happening since SWIPCO has been here.  I just seek clarification, I am still confused.  
Thank you, Mr.Speaker.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, you may recall that when this matter came up in the Business Committee, I thought that the Public Accounts Committee should perhaps make a review of the report,before we present it to the whole House, but when this matter was considered by the Business Committee, they said that the report is now property of the House because it was already laid on the Table and, therefore, the committee could not review it.  It is only the House that could review the report; that is point one.

Secondly, what is the way forward?  Mr. Speaker, we have presented a scenario,where a contract was awarded on the basis of a figure on which it was evaluated. The fees, which it was expecting to get, were clear; US $618,000, and when there was an attempt to evaluate it on a higher figure, the company itself objected to that, I read the long letter of their objection.  But from what we have heard, their claim is actually equal to the figure of the re-evaluation; the one to which SWIPCO had objected. Therefore,for us to chart a way forward, I think the Minister needs to bring to the House the claim made by SWIPCO, so that the House finds out whether it conforms to the findings of this report, and if it does not, then the House will take an appropriate decision. 

One major finding in the report is that the Minister decided that the contract should be awarded to SWIPCO because no public funds would be paid for its fees.  The House would want to know whether there are any public funds going to be paid as its fees, because it is SWIPCO itself which said that no public funds would be paid; that suppliers would be the ones to meet the fees. We pointed this out to the Minister of Finance, six months after the signing of thecontract.  Why did the Minister not take heed to our recommendations contained in the report, which he had received, and then at the end of the day, we find that there is a large bill, which the Treasury has got to meet?  The Minister had appropriate information from our report, and the same matter was raised in our discussions with him.  

Let me turn to the report of the IGG; I think it would be
interesting to Members, it is about 30 pages. If the Clerk can afford it, I think it is a report that Members should actually have. Mr. Speaker, if I may, let me quote from one or two paragraphs of this report, "It is evident from the above, that SWIPCO were not straight forward in the bidding process, but resorted to lobbying and blatant distortions to secure a contract with Government.  It was dishonest of SWIPCO to insist that the Government excludes donor or any other funds while evaluating SWIPCO's bid, so as to edge out Crown Agents, then turn round and lobby for inclusion of the same funds together with parastatals, police, districts and so on.  The evaluation process was not fair."

There is another quotation I would want to cite,in conclusion, it says, "therefore the Ministerial directive to parastatals to
channel procurement above the 50,000 threshhold, is not legally enforceable"

The other quotation says, "Even if the Minister has powers to control and supervise Uganda's finances, under the Public Finance Act, these powers, with regard to ordering procurement, were vested in accounting officers personally and in conjunction with the Central Tender Board. 

Furthermore, although the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance has capacity to contract on behalf of the Government, he had no authority to do so in the absence of the Central Tender Board approval, pursuant to regulation 71 and 10 of the Public Finance Tender Board Regulations, 1977, as amended.  Regulation 71 stipulates that the Board shall give authority for the contract as a prerequisite, and regulation 10 gives the Board the mandate to enter into contract on behalf of Government."

And finally, the quotation I will cite says, "Consequently, any contract entered into, in contravention of the law, as in the present case, is unenforceable.  The courts of law cannot condone an illegality, whether between private persons or with Government.  The much anticipated and feared legal action by SWIPCO in the event their invoice is not paid is, therefore, without foundation.  The illegality in the SWIPCO contract is in the manner it was negotiated and executed on the part of Government i.e. without CTB authority and not in the nature of its performance."

In other words, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, my point of order arises from one basic fact; several Members of Parliament have asked the Chairman whether those other documents can be made available to them, but he has been talking up to now, and he has not indicated so.  Mr. Speaker,would it therefore be in order for him to narrate stories rather than tell this House whether those papers will be available to us?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I heard the hon. Chairperson say clearly that these documents, including the one he is quoting from, would be useful for Members to have.  That is what he said at the begining of the clarification he is making.  So, in my opinion, he is in order to quote from certain portions of the report, which he says is going to be useful for Members to have.

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, I was quoting to show why Members they should have the report of the Inspector General of Government.  I do not need to quote any further, I think Members should have the report of IGG among the documents they have, and a copy of the letter from the Central Tender Board to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance.  I think Members should have those documents. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, you sought clarification and it has been given.

MR. MUSUMBA: That is why I am standing up; I have not yet got it clearly, if you may allow me, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In my view, even if the chairman arranged with the Clerk to give us those documents, the questions would still remain unanswered; that is an update of the new situation now.  Sir, it is five months from today to the time when the SWIPCO contract will end; it will end on September 5th, I think.  In which case, if we made a bad contract, we would want to know the legal implications. Can we get out of it; is SWIPCO going to walk laughing all the way to the bank , are we, as a Government, safe? 
There are a lot of other issues that come up with or without the documents the chairman is talking about.  I would want to propose,therefore, that this House refers this matter either to the same Committee or another Committee, including lawyers, to update themselves on the new situation.  This is because the Chairman's report has come too late.  Maybe, we can have a concise, precise way forward from people who have taken time to evaluate it.  This is just a proposal to this House.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I happen to be a Member of the Business Committee and I know that the hon. Chairman of PAC had wanted to update this report. At that time, however, the consensus in the Committee was that the report was already with the House, what he needed was to come and present the report.  I think, in all fairness, it would have been better for PAC to have the opportunity to look at the report and provide an addendum to it. I am rather surprised, because right now, it is not very clear whether the Committee would still want us to resolve to terminate the contract.  Up to now, I am very surprised that the Government side has not said a word, because this report is a criticism of the conduct of Government in this particular matter.  

Under normal circumstances, when a report like this one has been presented by a Committee, there would be a comprehensive response from Government, giving its position on the matter, before we can debate the report's findings -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, then it would be in order for the House to debate this report, having taken into account the report, as presented by the Chairman, and the response of Government to it. SWIPCO cannot now come here and present their side, the only people who can actually speak are the people in Government.  So, I am very surprised that up to now, Government is not guiding us as to how we should actually conduct this business. 
Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula): Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me address the House on this matter. It is normal, in the procedure of this House, that when a matter is Tabled, there is a way that it is handled for purposes of debate, and there is a time when Government should reply. Immediately the Chairman had provided the report, the next point was to decide the way forward;how we are going to handle the report which had just been Tabled by the Chairman of PAC.  Therefore, we cannot, as Government, be blamed for not answering.  What are we answering to?  We have to realise exactly what the case is going to be.  What are we doing? Are we going to examine the legal part of the contract, are we going to examine the losses, are we going to examine the possibility of retaining the contract? What are we going to debate on?  
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Sir.  I want to get clarification from the Chairman of PAC.  This report criticises a contract which was entered into by a private company and the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  I have seen its annextures, I would have expected that at certain point, the Attorney General of the Government of Uganda would have made some indications in respect to that contract.  Are we to assume that the Attorney General did
not make any comment at any point at all, in respect to the contract?  At no point at all?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us get focused.  When the
Chairperson concluded the presentation of his report, I posed a question, in fact it was a suggestion, that in light of the numerous documents the chairman made reference to, would the House be in position to debate?  That question has not been decided.  

Another question was, this is a report which was made several months ago or several years ago, how is the House going to pronounce itself, even if it started the debate today?  We have a number of recommendations here, I want to pick one.  One of them says, that the contract be terminated.  Which contract?  This is the contract between Government and SWIPCO.  Why?  Because it was not properly concluded.  Even from the word 'go', it is said that the award, which subsequently led to the conclusion of the negotiation of the contract, was in itself faulty.  Now, the Chairperson comes and says the scenario has changed because of one or two matters he has revealed, but which he says would be better tackled when Members have an opportunity of having some of these documents.  I think we should decide whether we can proceed to debate this matter now.  If we cannot debate now, what do you want the Chairman to do so that you can debate this matter properly?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I always pick up where you leave off.  I am seeking clarification from the Attorney General on the matter of recommendation 8; the last sentence.

THE SPEAKER: No.  Hon. Awori, if you are picking up from me, then you did not hear well.  

MS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker, some information.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you have taken wise counsel from hon. Awori's intervention.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, in my view, it is important that the Public Accounts Committee looks at this report, updates it with an addendum, before we can meaningfully discuss a two year old report.  If necessary, they can re-affirm their recommendation that the contract be terminated, having taken into account any further consultations they may have had with the Government. 
It will be at that time that we can discuss the report and dispose of it.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any quarrel with that?  Hon. Members, you have not indicated to me whether the procedure that I am suggesting is something you will go with.  I think, we should focus on these two issues so that we proceed.  Are you helping us through that?

DR. BYARUHANGA PHILIP: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You have
appropriately said that the report is before this House, so has the Chairman, and he has also pointed out that there are some vital documents that hon. Members of the House should really look at before we debate.  So, I request, from the way you have guided us,that we study these documents; we cannot go back to update this report when it is already before the House.  I would rather
Members accept your guidance, we get access to the documents, we go through them, and then we have an appropriate debate.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. MAYOMBO: Mr. Speaker, this report is dated July 1997. While the Chairman was presenting it, he did say, very clearly, that a number of things in this report have been over taken by events.  I think this Parliament is entitled to hear from Government what steps have been taken since then, before we can have any meaningful discussion.  
I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is there still any quarrel with that?  Hon. Members,there is one basic proposal that this is an old report, since then,a lot of water has gone under the bridge.  At least, the Chairperson, the Minister, or both, should be able to confirm or contradict that,before you pronounce yourselves on this report.  I do not see anything wrong with that.  That is how we should proceed, so that we articulate ourselves properly.  I will put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: This means, therefore, that the Chairperson or the Minister will update this particular report and come to the House and indicate how the report has been updated, then we can debate.

MR. NYAI: Motion, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but we have pronounced ourselves on this matter.

MR. NYAI: I am moving a different Motion, Mr. Speaker.  According to our Rules, I believe a Motion takes precedence -(Interruption)

(Technical fault with the PA system) 

THE SPEAKER: Order please!  What is the problem?  Order, hon. Members. I understand the system has gone off because we have been pressing the booking button at random in our anxiety to make contributions, which is something we have always been advised on.  That is one problem we now have,therefore, we shall proceed in the manner that we have pronounced. I do not know whether hon. Dick Nyai would still like to have the Floor?

(The Public Address System broke down)

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m and adjourned till Thursday, 11th March 1999) 
