Thursday, 14 March 1996    

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND PHYSICAL PLANNING  (Maj. Tom Butiime):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  This statement is on guidelines on the management of land during the transitional period.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of Order.  Mr Chairman, the Minister is making a very important statement on land and I would believe that carriers of this message would be the Members of Parliament. I wish very reluctantly, to draw your attention that we may not be having a quorum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That is true. We cannot proceed if we do not have the required quorum, but before we adjourn, I want to tell you very sadly, that I am forced to instruct the Clerk to pay hon. Members only on condition that they attend Parliament.  Those who will not attend, shall not be paid.  I will adjourn for 15 minutes.
 
ADJOURNMENT FOR 15 MINUTES

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND PHYSICAL PLANNING  (Maj. Tom Butiime):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  These are just guidelines on the management of land during the transitional period.  There was a booklet which was circulated to all the Members of this House and I am sure they quite conversant with what is in the booklet which was circulated. 

Mr Chairman, Chapter 15 of the Constitution came into effect on the 8th of October 1995, contains provisions on land management in the whole country.  Land management activities involve the following; physical planning, land surveying, mapping, valuation of land for various purposes, leasing rents and rates, stamp duty, compulsory acquisition, land registration and issuance of land Titles.  Article 242 of the Constitution provides that Government may under laws made by Parliament and policies made from time to time, regulate the use of land.  Whereas the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning is still responsible for mapping and carrying out physical planning for the whole country, other activities of land management have gone to the controlling authorities.  For instance, under the restructuring process of the Ministry, the function of land surveying has been privatised and the Ministry has remained with a role of giving guidelines and quality control in land survey.  The detailed activities of land transactions, that is to say, allocation, have been vested with the new controlling authorities as provided for in the Constitution.  

With these developments, Mr Chairman, it has been deemed imperative and appropriate at this stage, for me to issue guidelines on the management of land during this period as we await the necessary legislation in order to operationalise the provisions of the new Constitution in the area of land transactions.  The same guidelines will be issued to Chairmen of LC V, Chief Administrative Officers in the districts, Magistrates, Interim Land Boards, to the Chairmen and others in the entire country, so that they can follow in this transitional period on matters pertaining to land management.

On the question of interpretation of the provision on land management within the new Constitution, compulsory acquisition of land, Article 26 of the Constitution lists the purposes under which personal property, that is land can be compulsorily acquired and these are for public use in the interest of defence, public safety, public order and public morality.  The conditions governing such acquisitions shall be prescribed by Parliament.  The Constitution also precludes taking possession or acquisition of property, land, before payment of fair and adequate compensation.  Government too, therefore, will have to buy land from landlords for its various uses.  

Article 272 of the Constitution entrusts the ownership of land to the citizens of this country.  The estate in land ownership open to non-citizens is only leasehold.  Mr Chairman, in case of purchases of land by non-citizens, the provisions of the Land Transfer Act Chapter 202 where the Minister responsible for land has to give his consent are still applicable and land continues to be owned in accordance with the following land tenure systems;- customary, freehold, milo and leasehold and Parliament shall enact a law regulating the different types of land ownership, powers of the Uganda Land Commission Article 238.  

The Constitution provides of the Uganda Land Commission, in view of the Article 237 (i) and 239, 24l, the Uganda Land Commission ceased to be a controlling authority of land with effect from the 8th October 1995 and cannot, therefore, continue to allocate any land.  The Commission will continue to hold and manage land which is owned by the Uganda Government, which is owned by the Government of Uganda and Parliament will prescribe other functions and responsibilities to be carried out by the Uganda Land Commission.  Articles 237, 240, 241, 276 and 285 on Urban Authorities and District Land Boards.  With effect from 8th October, 1995, the Statutory leases of the Urban Councils ceased to exist.  This meant that these Councils ceased to be land controlling authorities and their power to allocate land also ceased forthwith. 

The District Land Boards:

The Constitution has made provision for a District Land Board in each district which will have powers to control land.  District Land Boards which include Kampala City Council will hold allocate land that is not owned by any person or authority within their areas of jurisdiction.  This will be land which is not already occupied or owned by anyone under customary, mailo, freehold or leasehold tenure.  In essence, there will be very little land for the District Land Boards to allocate, since most of the land is claimed under the existing Land tenure systems which we have talked about already.

District Land Boards shall facilitate the registration and transfer of interest in land and District Land Boards shall deal with all other matters connected with land in the District in accordance with laws made by the next Parliament and Parliament shall prescribe the membership procedure and terms of service of the District Land Boards.  

Article 279 talks about pending matters.  During the transitional period before the new Land Controlling Authorities are instituted, there will not be much activity with regard to land transactions, except matters which were pending by 8th October 1995.  The following are deemed to be pending matters within the meaning of Article 279 (i) in relation to the former Land Controlling Authorities, Uganda Land Commission and Urban Authorities.  All grants that had been minuted before the 8th October 1995.  However, the Attorney General will soon come to the NRC to seek approval for Interim measures in land before the next Parliament.  

Operational guidelines of the Constitution vis-a-vis other existing laws, consent to transfer land.  Minister’s consent to transfer land to a non-citizen under Section 2 of the Land Transfer Act, Chapter 205 will continue until when Parliament enacts any other laws to the contrary.  The consents of the Commission or land administration to transfers of mailo or freehold, land under Section 225 (c) (i) of the Public Lands Act read together with Section 10 of the Land Reform Decree is no longer necessary and has ceased forthwith mailo and freehold, which had been converted to leases have now been restored by the new Constitution.  The consent of the Commissioner of Land Administration to transfer leases out of former public land or under Section 225 (c) of the Public Land Act 1969, will continue until a new Parliament amends or repeals the Public Lands Act. There is no more need for the Commissioner of Land Administration to consent in case of transfers of leases and sub-leases out of freehold and mailo land.  The owner’s consent is sufficient for the land to be transferred to a new purchaser or owner.

Extension of leases under the Public Lands Act:

In view of the provisions of the new Constitution and for the purposes of continuity, the former controlling urban authorities will, until Parliament makes special laws regarding leases continue to extend running leases to full term when the development covenant has been complied with in line with a Lease Agreement.  Former controlling authorities should continue to grant short term extensions to enable leases with running leases complete development.  Where leases on initial term have expired, the former controlling authorities have no authority to grant extensions.  This is due to the fact that on expiry, the land reverts to the controlling authority who has now lost power or alienation under the new Constitution.  Further transactions on such expired leases are to be handled by the future District Land Boards.

Consent to mortgage, transfer undeveloped land:

Since the Constitution vests the ownership of land in the people and since the former controlling authorities, that is to say, urban are no longer in charge of land, the consent to mortgage a title is no longer a requirement.  Similarly, the consent to transfer and develop land at a charge of 10 per cent payable to former controlling authorities also ceases to be relevant as there is no legal basis upon which the former controlling authorities can grant consent to mortgage a title within the initial period, that is say, the initial five years.  An individual landowner will be able to mortgage his or her property at will.

Revision of the present legislation, Mr Chairman.

As a consequence of the Constitution, there will be revision of almost all legislation relating to land delivery and land management.  The following legislation are currently being revised and will be laid before the new Parliament.  The Town and Country Planning Act, the Public Lands Compensation for Resumption Act, the Land Acquisition Act, the Registration of Titles Act, the Survey Act, the Land Succession Law. 

In addition to the proposed Land tenure and Control Bill, will be written.  This had sought to introduce a uniform land tenure throughout the country and in addition, to consolidate the Public Lands Act 1969 and the Land Transfer Act, Chapter 202 into one legislation and the Condominium Law, which we are working on has also been tailored accordingly.  This will be part of the enabling legislation to implement the provisions of land management in the Constitution.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ELYAU:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I thank the Minister for presenting this very important statement, but Mr Chairman, already the statement has come rather late.  Right from the 8th of October last year, the authorities have continued leasing the land and they have involved the people concerned to pay whatever money and whatever business.  Now, what guarantee shall we have on these people?  Do we take them as being people who have been unfortunate, or what?   So, I want the Minister to clarify the situation, because, areas where I come, people were still getting leased land irrespective of this new Constitution, people never took heed of it.  I thank you.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Minister for Lands for his comprehensive statement on land which has removed a vacuum that has been existing.  However, I wish to make one observation. 

According to the new Constitution, any land that is acquired hitherto, will have to be paid in advance by Government.  I think that is very fair to the landowners.  What arrangement is the Minister and the Ministry of Lands making to ensure that people - citizens land which were acquired prior to the Constitution will be paid for, because, it will appear fair to pay those you acquire to A, while those which accumulated since 1980 are still unpaid and by the time I left, more than 3 billion were outstanding in arrears.  I wish the Minister to clarify on that point.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ASIKU DRATRUTRU: Point of clarification.  Mine is a point of clarification, I have not got it right from the Minister; I just wanted to be clarified what about public land which was obtained by a method of lease - public land which was acquired through lease, that may be freehold, yes, there was authority to which payment was being made annually, that is the down rent.  I want him to clear me, I do not know who is now going to get this money, to whom do we pay?

MR WANDIRA PAUL  (Baale County, Mukono):  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much indeed for giving me this opportunity to say something on this very important point.  The land is one of the most important points in the country, which require careful discussion about it.  Since the time I came to Parliament, some people have been complaining about the shortage of land.  I remember Mr Chairman, one day when I said, that supposing a visitor came and he was standing outside here, hearing what we are talking about land, the shortage of it, in a country of more than square miles of United Kingdom, with only 17 million people and yet, those people who have 70 million never complain about it.  

Some people have been complaining, they have been jealousy because, only one part of Uganda had a chance of having pieces of land, that is Buganda.  I like this new Constitution, Mr Chairman. I think it is one of the best points they discussed. If I had more time, there about six points which I can explain, which I think this Parliament should consider very seriously.  When land is left to the people, those people have been complaining and getting jealousy of the Baganda, the land will be demarcated in their own districts and that will help us from people moving from one place to the other.  The Baganda have stayed in their area because of the land.  A land is the mother of a person.  If you hear somebody coming from Apac, he has been working in Kigezi, he dies, they say, let the body be taken back to Apac.  

With those reasons, Mr Chairman, you could see the importance of this Bill. We have to discuss it very seriously and Government should not interfere with this problem which has been passed by the Constitution which we highly praise; everybody says, it is a wonderful Constitution we have made.  I have said, there about six mistakes, if I had time, I would mention them.  I strongly support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mine is very simple. I want to make one request to the hon. Minister.  Now, in view of the importance of this statement, I want to request the Minister to circulate his statement, because, I know a number of questions will be raised by our constituents, and if we can have it on hand, so that we can answer some of the queries that will be raised, it will be of great importance or great help to us.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR AKURE: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I just want clarification from the Minister.  We are having a problem in the lost counties where by, these Gold men from South Africa, have gone ahead even to chase people from their own land - these gold miners and now, they are not even able to negotiate with the owners of the land.  What do we do on this matter, because, the people have been chased away from their land and these people even when they are calling the meeting, they are undisciplined, they do not even respect administration in the area.  Now, what will the people of Dodoth do to those people?   I want the Minister to clarify to me, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for this very, very important statement and in view of the importance of this statement and its implications on the application of the relevant provisions of the new Constitution, I wanted to propose that since this statement is very extensive, we should also look at it extensively.  That we submit this statement to the Committee of this House, which is deals with natural resources, so that they can study it extensively and make detailed recommendations to this House, before we can adopt it as a decision of this House; that we give it to the Committee of this House to look at, and advise this House on what to do on every bit of what he has read, Mr Chairman.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I will just make a small addition to the point made by hon. Kalule Ssengo and that is to say, I came in when the hon. Minister was making his statement, but the part I heard, he made allusion to so many technical matters, he alluded to so many pieces of legislation sections.  So, it is important that the Members of this House should get this statement in writing, so that they can read it and when they do so, - this is my point, Mr Chairman, you should grant an opportunity for Members to raise their questions and observations on the statement after they have thoroughly digested it.  That is all I wanted to say.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to hon. Abu Baker Mayanja is this, that unless it is a different Ministerial statement that is being made, I remember and I was looking at it the other day, that this thing was circulated and all of us have copies.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr, Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify to this august House, as a matter of national issue, point.  The point is that, during Amin’s time, some foreigners acquired land in Uganda when they were supposed to be citizens and some of those pieces of land were from public land and therefore, they got free hold or whatever you might call it, but the point is that, since their countries were liberated, these people have returned.  What is going to happen to that piece of land?  Can it be sold to me as a citizen or what happens?

MR IMAGA ARUNA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify on the land of Municipalities.  For example, in Towns like Gulu, Lira, Arua, these were public lands, which Government gazetted as towns.  Now, the administrative authority was the Municipalities, now, if the lease expires now, to whom will this land revert, because in other towns like Kampala, the land has got some owners, mailo land and so on. but in Towns where the land was public land and the Government gazetted it and handed it to Municipalities, now the Municipalities have no authority.  Now, how will this be handled, Mr Chairman. 

MR APUUN:  Point of clarification.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister on the leases of land and also Government gazetted one time land.  In Karamoja, almost the whole of the land is game reserve and we are wondering as now, land has been vested in the hands of the people of Uganda; the power is now in the hands of the people of Uganda.  I would want to find out the position of Government as to when they will re-gazette these areas and Karamoja is completely affected.

Secondly, we are wondering why the Ministry has continued giving leases to the people in Kampala, because, there is now, what they call ‘gold rush’ in Karamoja, the whole of the land has been curved, one of the areas is what hon. Akure has just mentioned, the whole of Matheniko has been curved by these individuals in Kampala to prospect and may be eventually to mine and also in Upe county, those areas have been curved by individuals in Kampala here and also they have extended up to Chekwi county, but we are wondering really why there is that ‘rush’ and why there is a continuous lease given by the Ministry.  So, we want that clarification from the Minister, Mr Chairman.

MR OKURUT:  Mr Chairman, let me first of all thank the hon. Minister for his very comprehensive statement. 
Secondly, I would like to ask your indulgence and that of the Members in case I stand the risk of being ruled out for repetition.  A comprehensive statement of this kind which affects land, - land is a very important asset in our lives, it used to be a practice, I do not know why it has been discontinued, that a statement of this kind, should be circularised; so that each one of us has a copy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The copies have been circulated, we have even balances here. 

MR OKURUT:  Mr Chairman, can I make my point.  The point I am making is that, the statement of the Minister is very comprehensive; the other one was sketchy; yes, let me make my point, you will also have your turn.  I feel that this is a very comprehensive statement and I thank the Minister for it and it has been a practise of this House to circulate such statements. So, I am asking that the Minister, does justice to this House and actually gives us a copy of his statement.  Thank you very much.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I have two points, one is a point of appreciation.  Mr Chairman, people who live around the city have been noting with curiosity what has been going in the City Council of Kampala here.  They have been saying, there was a time when the Mayor of this City was an Asian, the Town Clerk was an Asian, the City Engineer was an Asian and consequently, they almost sold the entire city to Asians.  As we speak at the moment, the Mayor is a pure Ugandan, the Town Clerk is a Ugandan, the City Engineer is a Ugandan and they are selling the city almost the same way, the others did. 

That is where curiosity lies and it has been attributed to so many guesses one of which is corruption.  I am saying that is the attribution. 

So, the point of appreciation is that this city Council will no longer be dealing with that and that is a matter for which we should be grateful.

Second point; some three weeks ago, a group of Americans that I have been working with on the Tsetse Project arrived in Uganda.  As they do always, they sought audience with the President; this time, they came with clear evidence, they had money available to set up a University in Tsetse Islands.  The question was, how do we do it, do we do it, do we do it on land privately owned or do we do it on land which belonged to the public?  I was present and the President answered the question.  He said, it is better with private land and I was curious, I was wondering, why should he say that?  He said, if you go for the public land, the bureaucracy which takes so long, you will almost be defeated and this caused surprise to these visiting Americans.  Why is it that to lease a piece of land for a cause as worthy as that, should take years?   

Mr Chairman, the request I have, which is the second point, is that the Minister looks into the process of these leases, streamlines it, so that one knows it is from this office, to the next one, to the last one; rather than to lay it to the temptations and whims of his officers in the Ministry to even frustrate causes that would otherwise be helpful to Ugandans.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIIME:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  In the first place, we are reading this statement two weeks after this little book was written and circulated to this House (this one here) and hon. Stanislus Okurut is not right to say that my statement is more comprehensive than what is here.  In fact, my statement is just an abridged form of what is written here; it is more elaborate here than the statement.  So, every Member when he goes home this evening should check in his library and he will find this little white document there.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

Mr Chairman, normally, a Ministerial statement is usually not very much debated and I will therefore, refrain from answering a few questions, because some of them need a kind of study and land itself is a very complicated matter and therefore, some of the questions may have to be answered in the near future, but let me just answer a few starting with that one of the former Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, who was wondering whether the back log of people who have not been paid will be paid and that we shall not start with those whose land Government is going to take; that he knows very well and he has the best answer, that when he was PS he did not pay a very, many, many people and there was no money because, he never convinced the Secretary to the Treasury to give him enough money to pay our people and we are really talking in terms of 14 to 15 billion shillings which Government owes to people in this country whose land was acquired; 14/= to 15/= billion and this money has got to be found in order to finish off and pay our people whose land Government acquired.  So, really, that is the only answer I can give on that point.

On the question of -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am rather surprised that the Minister is blaming the former PS for failing to convince the Secretary to the Treasury to release money to pay for these debts.  Mr Chairman, I belong to the Sectoral Committee that covers this Ministry and every year, I think every Member of this House has read our recommendation on this matter and they have every year approved them and I am surprised that the Minister or Ministers responsible for this matter, having got approval and recommendation from this House, did not prevail on their counterparts to release the money, because, a decision of this House to me, I understand is binding on the Ministry and every year, we were recommending that these debts be paid and this House, every year approved this recommendation, Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIIME:  Mr Chairman, we are trying to work with the Ministry of Finance, we are now in the period of negotiations between the Ministries and the Directorate of Budget for the new Budget in the coming financial year and we hope we can over come this problem of having the money which is old and any more money Government needs to buy land, we hope this one can now be included in the next Budget by the negotiations continuing.  

Mr Chairman, on the question of people continuing to allocate land, I think after 8th October, there was no such authority to allocate land and therefore, if anything was done after that, that must have been illegal and therefore, whichever land may have been allocated after 8th October, I think was done illegally.

On the question of Karamoja, the ‘rush’ and the gold prospectors and land being grabbed, really, this entirely depends on whether those people who are prospecting gold already have land titles and there is a difference between just land for agriculture and land for farming land and grazing land and land for mining, because, this one, is apparently not under the Ministry of Lands, but that one falls under the Ministry of Natural Resources and it is called a location and the land title is completely different from the one which one would get just as a piece of land - those are called locations and therefore, that one can be followed in the Ministry of Natural Resources after proper consultations have been made.

MR ASIKU DRATRUTRU: Point of clarification.  What I want to be cleared of is the practicability of that issue.  The surface of the land is allocated and leased to individuals for farming activities and the man may have the lease title.  Underneath that land, there may be gold as it is expected in Karamoja; the Minister is telling us, what his beneath belongs to Ministry of Natural Resources, what is on top, belongs to himself.  I am now wondering how the man who goes into the bottom of the land gets there without disturbing him on the surface?   (Laughter)

MAJ. BUTIIME:  Mr Chairman, that one is taken care of actually in the Constitution and the Hon. Member should try to find out how that matter is catered for in the Constitution, but there is a difference and I know that there is a difference because, the owner of that land, should any mineral be found in his land, he has a certain percentage I think which he takes when there is - when mining and et cetera begins.  So, I do not want to go into such a very technical issue as I said.

Hon. Abu Baker Mayanja, I think his point was well covered by the fact that this statement had actually been circulated two weeks ago and in the case of hon. Tiberondwa, this is just a Ministerial Statement and it was circulated and the Committee on Natural Resources, if it is interested, it can have its library and look at it, and study it and give its own assessment but I cannot say, that I have now to give out this Statement and hand it over to the Sectoral Committee on Natural Resources.  Me, I have done my work and hon. Tiberondwa can also continue with his.

On the question of expiry of leases, in the Arua Municipality, when a lease expires now, I think that piece of land reverts to Uganda Land Commission, because Uganda Land Commission is the one which leased that land to that urban authority, but Uganda Land Commission cannot allocate that land either now, because, it does not have such a power and that land will have to lie there and wait for a new Parliament and a new District Land Board to re-allocate that land to the former owner or to a new one, depending on applications, but if it were to expire now, it would have to lie there and wait for a controlling authority to be in place for it to be officially allocated or given to another one.

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to bring to the notice and information of the hon. Minister, that by the abolition of the statutory leases in the urban centres, effectively, the land which can belong to the urban authorities are those pieces of land which had not been allocated by the time of the Constitution being brought in place.  Otherwise, anybody who had a lease which expired after, automatically, that land is belonging to him on a freehold system, because, there is now one land system.

MR BUTIIME:  It belongs to him in hope but he cannot get a freehold land title, because there is no authority which can give it to him.  So, he just prays that he lives up to the day when the urban authority will become a Land Board and then, he can get a title freehold.

Mr Chairman, about the Matheniko and Upe areas, people rushing and curving out huge chunks of land to themselves because of the gold rush and the game reserve.  Really, this entirely depends on - it depends on the in-coming District Land Board.  It will know how to deal with all the land in their district.  If this game reserve or land titles which belong to Government institutions, you can only find them in the office of the Commissioner for Land administration; they are held there and therefore, if it is a game reserve and it does have a land title, then this land title is supposed to be in the hands of the Commissioner for land administration; I think hon. Bakashabaruhanga knows that very well and therefore, negotiations can be carried out between the Government, the Uganda Land Commission and the district, whether to de-gazette and make less that piece of land or and this is the same case in the area where hon. Kalule comes from, but these negotiations can be carried out, and Government can accept or refuse to give up  part of that land for other purposes or for people to settle and I do not think any Government which is very democratic will not listen to people if that issue really does arise.  

That is why I am saying that if people are rushing to Karamoja and curving out chunks of land for themselves, I hope they do not have land titles yet.  If they have, then those land titles have become freehold; if they do not, then they have no land because, unless the matter was pending, in other words, minuted, then, even then, the matter can be discussed when the District Land Boards are in place.

Mzee Okurut’s point I think has also been very well catered for and hon. Israel Mayengo, as usual, is very much concerned about corruption, but unfortunately, he cannot be a Chairman of LC V Kampala, he has not tried, otherwise, things would be very much in order, if he had been - but he still remains a Kyamuswa man. 

So, all I am saying is that, which I do not believe, if there has been corruption in Kampala City Council, land has been sold and there is corruption, there will be no more land to sell or give out under this Constitution, it will be very, very, difficult - Kampala City Council will have to buy any land now for development and even Government itself, will have to buy land in order to develop or to give to in -coming investors here in the country and from outside and we are trying to work out in the Budget some money, so that Government can buy land and keep it and sell it to people that deserve having that land and those who would like to develop industries et cetera and that  is quite a lot of money required.  But the most important thing here is that, Government cannot now go and take over land without adequate, fair and proper compensation and you have to pay first and then you can have the land.  If you do not pay and you enter, because you are a Government, there are courts of law; you will not be allowed to take that land.  

Mr Chairman, the bureaucracy and the private sector. 

Well, I think that is why we are privatising and since Government will not have a lot of land, anybody wanting to set up a University, I think the land that he can easily find now, is private land.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am most obliged to the hon. Minister, is saying that he cannot issue land titles and cannot do anything with the land until the new Parliament passes laws according to the new Constitution.  Now, to me, that reading of his Constitution seems not to have been comprehensive.  In fact, the existing law is applicable until the new Constitution changes that law and it is very clear in our Constitution; only that I think what the Minister did and his advisers and in the Ministry, they read the Constitution and they found that they were tied, they could not do anything, but they did not read the whole Constitution.  The whole Constitution when you read it, there is a transitional Chapter of what takes place between the time we pass the Constitution and the time the new Parliament comes and what they should doing and I would like to draw his attention to that provision which is found in Article 273 which is sub-titled the Existing law and it reads as follows:

(i) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the operation of the existing law after the coming into force of this Constitution shall not be affected by the coming into force of this Constitution.  But the existing law shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring into conformity with this Constitution.

(ii) For the purpose of this Article the expression ‘existing law’ means the written and the unwritten law of Uganda or any part of it as existed immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, including any Act of Parliament or Statute or Statutory Instrument enacted or made before that date which is to come into force on or after that date.  If any citizen wants a land title and he comes to the hon. Minister’s office and they deny him, they will be denying him his natural right and it is terrible to put land speculation now at halt and stop the land transactions.

I have in my constituency 1250 lease offers; as we stand, there is a team carrying out surveys and I have explained to them that the law is in place and everything is working and they will be treated according to our Constitution.  Now I am amazed that the hon. Minister - may be he never checked with the Attorney General.

It is wrong to say that the whole Department of Government is going to cease operations and what are they going to do?  Are they going on leave between now and the time that the new Parliament.  Secondly, you can imagine what this means; the implication of it.  It means that until they get themselves on the timetable of the next Parliament to discuss the Laws which will have to go through the usual procedure of proposing news Laws of the Constitution going through the Attorney General chambers, coming through the Sectoral Committee, going to Cabinet, coming here to be presented, lining up.  It will take two years before we do this.  If this is the situation, what happens to our land?  It is too much speculation.  The Law has availed you an option to continue operating Mr Minister and I appeal to you not to go on leave or any of your staff.  The Law is in order.  

I was very happy in fact when I read the publication which they issued because it kind of explained the existing Law and all that.  I never knew that they would turn up and say, action has now stopped.  No Sir.  There is no such a thing as stopping action of Government departments.  We took care of this in the C.A and I would like urge the Minister to talk to his Lawyers in his Ministry and proceed with their work and nobody should go on leave and no office should be closed.  Thank you.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether hon. Karuhanga was here when I was presenting this Statement.  So, if he was not here then he should not come late and try to change things and misinterpret them completely.  There is the question of pending matters.  So, the leases he is talking about if they were already in the process, that one is looked at as a pending matter and therefore, the land titles will be issued as part of a pending matter.  The question of the Ministry going on leave is not correct because on Page 8, of this booklet which I think hon. Karuhanga never bothered to read, he will find on top of that Page, a Statement as follows:  ‘The Attorney General will soon come to the NRC to seek approval for the interim measures on land’.  

I am sure as we are talking now, the Clerk to the National Assembly already he has received a Bill proposed by the Attorney General to come here and seek interim measures how we can continue on matters pertaining to land in this transitional period.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, mainly we do not spend a lot of time discussing arising from Ministerial Statement.  But today we took an exception and that brings us to the end of the ministerial statement.  We shall now proceed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL’S BILL, 1995

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH (Mr Katureebe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Allied Health Professional’s Bill, 1995' be read the second time.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR KATUREEBE: Mr Chairman, in moving this Bill, let me offer a preliminary explanation to hon. Members about the Bill that was circulated to them this week.  We have in our position a Bill that was dated 17th November 1995.  This Bill was considered by the Sectoral Committee of this House and the Sectoral Committee in his wisdom introduced a number of amendments that were then incorporated in a reprint which is the Bill that was circulated to this House.  I would therefore, urge in debating to look at the Bill that was circulated to them this week.  

Although the Bill is simple and straight forward, and show to permit me to make a simple introductory remarks, giving the background to this Bill.  This Bill affects a very important body of Health workers known as ‘Allied Health Professionals.’ The Allied Health Professionals were previously known as ‘ Para-medicals’ and they constitute a large percentage of health care providers and their performance is critical to the successful implementation of strategies for making Health Care accessible to the majority of the population.  The work covers a wide spectrum of services.  This ranges from clinical services such as those rendered by Medical Assistants to Public Health Field Work such as Health Inspection and Vector Control which are covered by Health Inspectors and Entomologists respectively.  

This large Body of Health Workers evolved with time as a matter of necessity and their respective callings have always been appended to the main Medical Professions.  With time, however, and given advances in medicine and medical practice, this body of workers as increasingly been recognised as professionals in their own right, whose status and practice need legal protection and control.

Currently, these Allied Health Professionals are not legally allowed to independently engage in the management of Common Health Conditions.  But we all know that due to economic hardships, many are already independently carrying out private practice.  Such illegal practice and absence of clear guidelines for control, supervision, and disciplining of Allied Health Professionals constitutes a serious danger to the population.  

Indeed, there has been a long standing outcry from these Allied Health Professionals themselves that Government should cause to be enacted Law that defines their status that regulates their training, that recognises their qualifications and that may permit them to manage common health conditions in their respective fields of training.  

In that regard, debate has been going on at the Ministry for a long time as to what form this Law should take.  Indeed at one time it was considered that one Law should be made, covering all Health Professionals including doctors and dental practitioners.  However, this was considered unnecessary given the fact that this Body of workers as evolved as professionals in their own field and it was considered desirable that we should have separate legislation for them as we have separate legislation for doctors as well as nurses and mid-wives. 
 
The Ministry of Health appointed a Task Force which was composed of Members of the Allied Professions as well as Medical Doctors to look into this problem comprehensively, and consult as widely as possible with Members of the Medical Profession.  This Task Force made the Report and their recommendations, are the basis upon which this Bill has been based.  

The following categories of Allied Health Professionals were considered and are considered in this Bill:  Medical Assistants, Medical Laboratory Technicians and Assistants, Public Health Dental Assistants, Dental Technicians, Orthopaedic Assistants and Technicians, Occupational Therapists, Physio-therapists, Health Inspectors and Assistants, Dispensers, Radio-graphers, Entomology Assistant Field Officers, and sub-specialities relating to this group of Health Workers.  

As a result of the Report of the Task Force, and as a result of consultations within the Medical Field and developments on the international scene, all the titles have already been administratively changed to new titles to reflect the nature of the work that these people do.  For example, the Laboratory Technician has already been given the title of Laboratory Technologist.   Medical Assistant is already been referred to as a Medical Clinical Officer.  

Overall, Mr Chairman, the Bill seeks to provide for the regulation, supervision and control of Allied Health Professionals and to provide for the establishment of the Council that will be responsible for registering and licensing these Health Professionals and for disciplining them and other matters as are detailed in the Bill.  

The Bill has eight parts - The first part deals with definitions; the second part is a very important part because it is the one that establishes the Council - the Allied Health Professionals Council which will be a professional body and a body corporate whose functions are set out in section five of the Bill.  More importantly, these functions include the one to regulate the standards of Allied Health Professionals, the one to regulate the conduct of Allied Health Professionals, and excise disciplinary control over them; to approve courses of study for Allied Health Professionals; to approve supervise and regulated training institutions for the different categories of Allied Health Professionals.  This I have pointed out as being important, Mr Chairman, because the manner in which some of these schools were started which have been providing training for these Allied Health Professionals was uncoordinated.  We have some certificates being awarded of the Ministry of Health, and some diplomas of Ministry of Health.  Others are of Makerere University.  It is important to have one Body that will set the standards and recognise these training institutions as well as qualifications.  This is one of the major functions of the Council as established.  

Mr Chairman, the third part of the Bill is talking about the management and staff.  This is the one that brings out the registrar who is made the secretary of the Council.  

The fourth part deals with the important Financial Provisions.  This is very important - given that we have made this Council a Body Corporate, but it will be drawing largely its finances from Government.  The salient feature here is that they introduced control of the Minister as well as the Auditor General in getting these people to regulate their finances.  

The fifth part deals with the registration of Allied Health Professionals.  For the first time these people are going to be required to register their qualifications and have them recognised by this Council.  When we come to the section that will be dealing with private practice, this will be very important because nobody will be able to register and get a licence to privately practice unless you are already registered and recognised as Health Professional.  

This brings me to this other important part.  This important feature of the Bill which provides for private practice.  I think I should make a few comments on it.  

Mr Chairman, this Bill seeks to lay down strict guidelines under which these Allied Health Professionals will be able to carry out private practice.  It is not the intention of the Ministry of Health to tell people to go and open private clinics anyhow because they would pause a danger to the public.  You will find within the Bill that there are strict guidelines taking into account the nature of the work, the qualifications, the experience, recording keeping and the type of cases which would be suitable for each category of Allied Health Workers.  There is also introduced in the Bill, an important roll for the National Drug Authority and the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council as part of the Radio - mechanism for the private practice of these Allied Health Professionals.  

It is specifically proposed under section 30 that a number of categories of Allied Health Professionals be allowed to engage in private practice under the limitations I have already talked about.  These are dispensers; these are the people who normally manage drug shops that do not deal in classified drugs.  

Medical Clinical Officers or Medical Assistants - as we all know, these are people who already manage many of our dispensaries and health centres.  

Laboratory Technologists - these are people that run Laboratory services and Physio-therapists - the people that do physio-therapy services.  The Bill provides for the Director of Health Services on the advice of the Council and in agreement with the Medical and Dental Practitioner’s Council to identify any other category of Allied Health Professionals that can be given the authority to do private practice. 

Mr Chairman, the other parts of the Bill, part 6, is licensing and registration for Private Practice.  As I have said, no one will simply wake up one morning and set up a clinic without first having registered himself as an Allied Health Professional in a given category and has got to comply with certain conditions of his licence.  

Then the 7th part deals with disciplinary action.  Again, Mr Chairman, this is very important professionally because all professions must have a regulatory mechanism that can discipline their own members who bridge professional conduct.  This is brought out in the seventh part of the Bill.  

Then the last part deals with miscellaneous provisions.  One important part of that is the supervisory authority.  That the Council can appoint somebody else or another authority to supervise these practice of these Allied Health Professionals wherever they maybe.  It is also the section where you find Provisions related to offenses and penalties.  

Mr Chairman, as I said this Bill is very simple and straight forward, and I must add it as received very careful consideration by the Sectoral Committee who introduced very important amendment that have polished it to what I believe will not give a headache to this House.

Let me also make this point, Mr Chairman, that the absence of this Law has been one of the legitimate demands of the Allied Medical workers.  Indeed it is one of the grounds they stood on to stage on their last strike.  It is important that this House carefully considers this Bill and passes it, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Mr Chairman, I stand here to support the Bill and I am supporting it on behalf of the Sectoral Committee on Social Services which looked at the Draft Bill and made several amendments as had been mentioned by the hon. Minister. 

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members of this House, the NRC Sectoral Committee on Social Services is pleased to recommend this Bill to you for passing.  For quite a long time this category of workers in the Medical Field have not been having a Law to cover them up to set their standard to regulate their training and to discipline them.  So, this Law is now coming in to give that kind of situation which was absent and some of them have been over anxious and as we have been reading, many of the Health Professions in this area have been agitating Government to enact a Law.  So, the Committee is pleased to note that the Bill finally came to this House and I would like to recommend it to be enacted.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the Allied Health Professionals cover a large Body of workers who are doing a very good job of this country.  It is for that reason that this category definitely the Sectoral Committee recommends them to have this Bill in place.  This category covers the Medical Clinical Officers who were formerly being called Medical Assistants; then we have the Medical Laboratory Technicians who were being called Medical Laboratory Assistants; Public Health Dental Assistants; Dental Technicians; Occupation Therapists; Physio-therapists; Clinical Psychiatrical Officers; Orthopaedic Assistants and Technicians; Health Inspectors and Assistants; Dispensers; Anaesthetic Officers; Radio-Graphers; Entomology Assistant Field Officers; Orphomolic  Clinical Officers; these are the category which this Bill actually is trying to give a legal basis.  

The Council also disciplined the Allied Health Professionals.  Mr Chairman, the Bill will also seek to allow the Allied Health Professionals to engage in private practice which has not been the case before, and also to regulate the same in order to establish good practice for the welfare of the patients.  

The Bill also regulates Professional Education by having the Council to recognise schools for purposes of registration.  The Allied Health Professional Bill is divided into eight parts which the Minister has adequately covered.  The Bill has a Schedule which deals with the procedure and proceedings of the Council and the Board which have been established under this Bill.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the Committee examined the Bill and came up with a number of amendments on the regional Bill; that is 17th November, 1990/95.  

The amendments which the Committee agreed upon with the Minister responsible for the Bill resulted into the redrafting and printing of the new Bill which has been circulated to the hon. Members of this House this week.  Apparently it is very difficult if one was not really briefed how the new Bill differs from the first.  But I think the significant difference is that the old Bill has 33 Pages.  The new Bill contains only 32 Pages.  I understand the Government Printer could not give the number because of the technicalities which they had.  The new Bill, Mr Chairman, as the Minister introduced it, we looked at Clause 6 of the old Bill which was giving powers to the Minister to appoint so many people but not providing the position of the Chairman, and the Committees recommends that the Minister appoints these people and the chairman of this Council should be a senior Allied Health Professional to be the Chairman of this Council.  Also the Committee made an additional membership to the Council by including one representative of the Faculties of Medicine of the University established in Uganda by Law.  This has been an omission and the Committee felt that a representative from the University will be necessary.  

Also the Sectoral Committee recommended having one representative of the National Drug Authority.  That is under section 6 of the Bill.  

Mr Chairman, when we come to Clause 10, 2(a), this was modified to differ from the first one which was - (a) was in the first one ‘There will be a Board which shall consist of not more than nine persons, appointed by the Council’ and then in the new Bill we said, ‘this Board will consist of not less than 6 and not more than nine persons elected by various Professions and approved by the Council.’  So, we are giving the various Professionals to elect these people and then the Council will approve.  Than we introduced a new sub-Clause 2(c) to cater for the representative of relevant department from the Medical Schools of the University established by Law to be on the Board.  

Sub-section 6 of 10 was modified to differ from the original Bill which was circulated to us before.  

We also made some changes in Clause 12 because it was saying that ‘there shall be a registrar of the Council who shall be appointed by the Health Service Commission in Consultation with the Council.’  To be in line with a new Constitution the Health Service Commission does not get any directives from any other person.  So, we said this registrar shall be a public officer appointed by the Health Service Commission.  Also we redrafted 12(b) which was saying - ‘if in the opinion of the Council registrar becomes incapable of performing the duties of Registrar and is removed from the office’ and we said, if in the opinion of the council the Registrar becomes incapable of performing the duties of Registrar by reason of infirmity of body or mind, or other sufficient cause and is removed from the office by Health Service Commission.  So, we are giving the powers of the Health Service Commission to remove this person.

Clause 14 in the old Bill, was giving a Provision to an Assistant Registrar and the Committee sought felt that the title of the Assistant Registrar is not senior enough.  So, the Committee recommended to change the title of the Assistant Registrar to that of a Deputy Registrar of the Council who shall be a public officer, also who will be appointed by the Health Service Committee.  Also Clause 15, we included a new clause 2 which provides for Public Officers to be seconded to this Council because we felt that could be the Council may at one time, feel that they do not have a person with a specific calibre who would be available in Government.  So, the Committee recommend that Public Officers who may have special skills could also be posted or assigned to work in the Council.  

Mr Chairman, in the old Bill the Financial Year of the Council was from 1st January to 31st December and the Committee felt that that was not proper and were recommending that a Financial Year of the Council should be from July and ending on the 30th day of June of each year.  Clause 18 was also redrafted and this was a confusion because in the old Bill it was saying - ‘the Registrar shall, within three months before the end of each financial year prepare and submit to the Council for its approval.’  So, we said, the Council shall, within three months before the end of each financial year prepare and submit to the Minister for his approval the estimates of income and expenditure of the Council for the next issuing year and at any time before the end of the financial year prepare and submit to the Minister for his or her approval any supplementary estimates.  

Mr Chairman, we also looked at Clause 19 - 4 and we drafted it.  In the old one it says, ‘the Minister shall cause copies of the annual report together with the copy of the Audit Accounts to be laid before the legislature at the first available opportunity after receipt of them, but not later than the next sitting of the legislature after the date on which the Minister received the annual report and Audit Accounts.’  Then we said in the new Bill that ‘the Minister shall lay copies of annual report together with the copies of the Audit Accounts before the legislature within three months.’ So, we did the redrafting.  The same also applies to Clause 20 - we drafted this Clause and also redrafted Clause 21, 22 and also we continued and redrafted Clause 21.  Clause 21, I was saying, ‘The Council shall approve the course of study for different categories of Allied Health Professionals and qualifications awarded to persons who pass the qualifying examinations.’  In the Bill we said, ‘The Council shall approve the courses of study for the different categories of Allied Health Professionals and the qualifications awarded to persons who pass the qualifying examinations.’

Mr Chairman, we went to Clause 24 and 25 of the old Bill and we just rearranged them in such a way that Clause 24, 5 of the old Bill becomes Clause 24 and Clause 24 of the old Bill becomes Clause 25 so that it follows -(Interruption)- appear to be a big sequence of this Bill.  This is talking about applications for registration and registration of Allied Health Professionals.  

Mr Chairman, we also looked at Clause 26 of the old Bill which we redrafted.  The old Bill was saying ‘On the registration of the Allied Health Professional, the Registrar shall issue to the person registered a certificate of registration in a prescribed form.’  Now, for us we said in the new Bill which we recommended to this House, that on registration of Allied Health Professionals, the Registrar shall issue to the person registered a certificate of registration in a prescribed form together with the seal of the Council which shall be affixed on the certificate.’  

The Committee also looked at Clause 29 of the old Bill and we redrafted it.  We looked at also Clause 30 (f) which redrafted to say, ‘Any other profession as maybe declared by the Minister on that advert of the Council.  This is talking about the professionals to engage in private practice.  In old section, we deleted Clause 2 of subsection 29 which appear to be irrelevant.  

We deleted Clause 5 which was irrelevant in the Bill and made an amendments in Clause 4.  Also in Clause 35 (2), of the old Bill was amended to say that, ‘if in the opinion of the person who made the inspection - any action against the unit is necessary, he shall submit the report to that effect to the Council within 30 days.   I think that one we should included it.  Then in the old Bill, we deleted Clause 35 - 4 which was a bit irrelevant.  Clause 38, old, was saying that ‘The Chairman, of the Disciplinary Committee shall be chaired by the Chairman appointed by the Council from among its Members who shall provide at all meetings of the Committee’.  Then in the old 2, there was a provision for four Members appointed by the Council from amongst its Members.  But we said, no, because the Bill covers various categories of professions.  We said there must be at least three members appointed by the Council.  Then we provided for (c) to say that ‘one person appointed on the Council on that Disciplinary Committee shall be a person registered in the same field of discipline as a person whose conduct is a submit of inquiry’.  

We also looked at 41 of the old Bill and redrafted 41(b).  It was saying, ‘a person who, having served with summons to attend and give evidence or to produce any book, plan or document at any inquiry held under the Provision of section 40 of this Statute fails without reasonable cause to obey the summons or refuses without reasonable cause to answer fully to the best of his or her knowledge or belief.’ That one we deleted and said, ‘a person who refuses without reasonable cause to answer questions put to him not fully with reasonable ...’.  That one we deleted.  

Article 42, we did some redrafting and then we rearranged the old 44 to come to 43 and the old 43 becomes 44.  Then new 43 starts with ‘within three months after the conclusion of an inquiry’.  Unlike as it was in the old one where it was saying, ‘as soon as practicable’.   But this one we said within three months after the conclusion of an inquiry and the decision of the Council.  ‘The Registrar shall notify the person concerned in writing of the decision of the Council’.  That is discipline.  We said, within three months, the Registrar should notify the person concerned about the decision of the Council.

45(3) was redrafted, Mr Chairman, to read as it appears in the Bill, ‘a Professional whom the Council has suspended from practice or whose name the Council has recommended to be removed from the Register shall be informed of his or her right to appeal to the High Court under sub-section of this section.’ This was redrafted to differ from what was in the old Bill.  
47(4) was in the old Bill.  It was deleted.

49 was also redrafted.  These words were missing - ‘The Council may, in respect of any region, District or a small area appoint a senior registered professional in the, in the relevant profession - that was omitted.  I think we shall include that in the Committee Stage.  ‘in the relevant profession to be the supervisory authority to any registered Allied Health Professional.’  

Mr Chairman, 53 was also redrafted as it appears in the Bill.  55 in the old Bill was compelling all Allied Health Professionals to be belonging to an Association. But we changed it to say that they should be continuous training and that the Allied Health Professionals Association will be free to arranged for continued education in the relevant fields of the Allied Health Professionals.  

Mr Chairman, 57, regarding the punishment.  The old Bill was proposing only UShs 30,000 - ‘a person who commits an offence under this Statute is liable to only conviction to a fine of not less than UShs 30,000 or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three years or both the fine and imprisonment.’ So, the Committee recommended that the UShs 30,000 was too low as a punishment and the Committee under 57 recommended UShs 300,000 for any person who contravenes this Law.  We also agreed that 57 - 2 in the old Bill be deleted because it appear to be irrelevant.  When we went in the Schedule, we did not have any amendments apart from Schedule 9 - 3 where the quorum in the old Bill was saying that ‘the quorum of the Board shall be 2/3 of the Members of the Board.’  The Committee recommends that this one be revised to say, ‘the quorum of the Board shall be half of all the Members of the Board.’  Mr Chairman, that is how the Committee looked at this Bill.  As I said earlier on, we would like to recommend this Bill to be passed by this House to attend to the problem of our Colleagues in the Allied Health Professionals so that they can perform better.

Furthermore, Mr Chairman, before I sit down, we also agreed with the Minister that in order to provide good services to our clients or to the patients, that the issue of re-instating name tags for identification purposes should be introduced in all the Health Units belonging to the Government.  The Minister promised that he was going to take this one up because there was a general concern that when you go to the hospital, you would not tell whether the person who attends to you is a cleaner or a Medical Assistant or a Doctor, and that if this one was introduced, it will provide a report between the patients and Health Professionals.  

So, with those remarks, Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Committee, I would like to recommend to be passed by this hon. House, and I beg to move.

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, let me also take this opportunity to thank the Minister for coming up with this Bill as we close up business in this House.  
Mr Chairman, I am going to make just a few comments regarding this Bill.  

For a long time Members of our Medical Profession have been complaining.  This is one of the most disgruntled departments in this country.  Recently you remember the Doctors in this country staged a strike and several people lost their lives.  

Mr Chairman you will remember recently the paramedical students at Makerere University Medical School had a strike or at least they pretended to strike.  It brought a lot of problems to the Minister and to the Ministry.  Mr Chairman, health is a must to everybody in this Country and it is the duty of this country to make sure that everybody in this country is healthy.  Health is a -(Inaudible)- for any development in any country, Mr Chairman.  Therefore, this Bill is most timely and very responsible.  

Mr Chairman, I wish the Minister had started with the Doctors and Dentists Bill before coming to this Bill so that this one can come second and then the nurses and midwives Bill could come third because of the order of importance.  However, this Bill which seeks to regulate and supervise and see how our Allied Health workers can be supervised under control, is equally important because for a long time, these people have been operating without any regulation - without any proper control.  For a long time these people have been taking care of our lives in different Health Centres without proper registration, with irrelevant authorities.  These people have been conducting clinical tests; these people have been conducting helping women in deliveries and so on without proper qualifications, without proper registration, and so on.  As a result many lives have been lost. 

Mr Chairman, it is a pity that this has been going on for a long time because of the absence of such a Bill to regulate this Allied Health workers.  

The part I want to talk on is the licensing and registration for private practice.  I think this is the most crucial part of this Bill because this time it allows Allied Health Professionals to get licence and register for private practice.  In the past they have been practising without any licence or registration.  In other words they have been practising illegally. Those who have been disgruntled with Government hospitals shall now be allowed to practice privately.  They will be allowed to register; they will be allowed to get licence and practice.  However, practising privately will need what I would call ‘careful supervision’ by the Ministry.  I you allow our medical professionals to practice without proper supervision, this Bill is going to be very useless because everybody who is handling matters concerning health needs supervision.  

Occasionally we have heard stories of Doctors and even Allied Health Workers performing in very bad circumstances; performing in very bad environment; performing on patients and abandoning their medical professional ethics which I think is a bit of a pity.  Recently we heard stories of Doctors and Allied Health Workers assaulting patients.  Sometimes we heard of a Doctor who raped a patient.  Mr Chairman, these acts must stop.  How can you rape a patient if you are a doctor and you know what they call a ‘hippocratic oath’ which every doctor is supposed to swear?  Mr Chairman, this is appalling.  Members of our medical profession had better wake up and stick to their medical ethics.

Clause 49 gives provisions for the Council to appoint a senior registered professional to supervise any registered Allied Health Professional which literally means that the Council will give somebody who is a senior registered professional to supervise another professional.  In other words, they are going to supervise their fellow workers to carry on in environment which they know best especially in regions like in Apac, Lira, Mbarara, Masaka.  

My opinion is that the Government should come in, since we are now decentralising most of these districts, with proper method of supervising these Allied Health Workers.  If this is the most convenient method of supervising them, then they should as well be supervised to avoiding some of these incidences where corruption comes in.  Somebody who is a doctor; maybe he is an Allied worker, and he collides with somebody who is also an Allied worker to commit some of these offenses we have been hearing about in the Papers.  

My opinion is that the Ministry should stand firm and divest itself in upcountry stations and supervise people who are going to supervise these Allied workers.  Because if it does not do that, we are going to end up with very bad situations especially in upcountry stations.  

My last contribution is on what the Chairman of the Committee talked about last. He talked about nametags for all our medical workers.  The Sectoral Committee on Social Services discovered that most of our doctors are not only putting on uniforms, but they are not also putting on nametags.  This has led to a lot of malpractice especially in Government hospitals.  Any doctor worthy any assault is supposed to carry a nametag for proper recognition.  For a long time many patients have been complaining to us, that at times you go to a hospital and find a Doctor very dirty, shabby.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that these nametags are very important, but unfortunately the Ministry sometimes fails to provide uniforms.  So, you find it difficult to put a nametag on your shirt.  

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that piece of information.  Mr Chairman, it is the duty of the Ministry of Health to provide all the Health workers with uniforms; especially those who work in Government hospitals, with uniforms and nametags.  A nametag would cost maybe about UShs 2,000 only.  But it is very important that all our health workers carry nametags so that they can be easily identified, so that they can get the confidence of the patient.  A doctor who is shabby, who is ill-dressed, dirty will not carry any respect especially by the patients.  Some doctors in our upcountry stations have surrendered themselves already to some of these bad social things we see in our society.  Some of them have taken to drinking too much out of frustration.  Some of them have taken to smoking too much.  We have seen these things happen.  They have been happening for a long time and these Laws we are putting in place will make sure that our Allied Health workers behave.  

With these few words, Mr Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: With that we come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn the Council until Tuesday, next week starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 March at 2.30 p.m.)

