Tuesday, 29 March 2011

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you from the weekend. Once again, I appeal to you to find time to come and transact Parliamentary business, which we have to complete by the second week of May, 2011 because there is a lot on our table. 

We have some visitors in the gallery and when I get the details, I will formerly introduce them to you. Thank you.

2.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want some clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minster. Last week, I attended a meeting of one of the LCII councils in my place and I was informed that the money that was meant for NUSAF II has never been remitted. 

I was also told that the people, who were recruited as staff, have been told that there will be no payments. As a result, they have also stopped working and that they will not work until they have received some money.

The Prime Minister’s Office should give me an explanation on what happened to money for NUSAF II. But I also want to add that this problem is not limited to this particular sub county; it affects all the other sub counties in the districts of Serere and Soroti. 

I actually do not know what happened because right now, the financial year is coming to its end. People had already submitted their proposals for the project because they had been told they would be paid on the basis of approved proposals. That is why I need that clarification from Government.

2.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, if hon. Okupa wanted an answer to that question, he would have done what he normally does; to give me notice in order for me to cause the relevant minister to give him a well-researched answer. Since he has not done so, I am unable to do that. I will cause the relevant minister to give him a well-researched answer. I thank you.

2.49
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. As you will recall, I gave a notice to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate the irregularities in the February-March 2011 general elections; and I knew that with your understanding, this item would be on the Order Paper for today. Now that this has not happened, could I proceed to present my motion at this juncture, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Before I reply, I would like to announce that in the gallery, we have a delegation of students from Kyambogo University, Faculty of Education. They have come to observe how Parliament conducts its business. You are most welcome. (Applause) Also in the gallery is Mr Toshihiro Muckay, a student from Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Member, I have heard your plea. I know that the plea is about a motion, which you forwarded to Parliament on 24 March 2011. I would like to inform the House that after this motion was received, it was sent to Mr Bakwega to take note.

The purpose of this motion is clear, but as you are aware, the business of the House is determined and arranged by the Business Committee. I would like to further inform the House that the last time the Business Committee sat, it had not received this motion. So, if it has to be given space, the Business Committee has to arrange to accommodate it.
However, allow me to say this that I have studied this motion and got to realise its intention, which is for this House to set up a select committee to investigate, make recommendations and report on the conduct of the general elections mainly the local government elections.

However, obviously, you will realise that this House has only one month of its lifespan. So, setting up a committee and drafting its terms of reference for it to traverse the entire country and where necessary, to investigate this matter and report, cannot be possible for this committee to report such to the Eighth Parliament and it cannot be a committee to report to the Ninth Parliament.

Another point that you should look at is that you are talking about the conduct of local government elections yet some of the people who participated in these elections are in court; don’t you see that this is already a subject of court? According to our rules, we may not be allowed to debate matters that are still in court because that will be subjudice. 

Anyway, allow me say that the Business Committee has not sat to allocate space for this motion. But even when it does, the committee will have to consider these two issues: Can the Eighth Parliament have a committee to investigate the conduct of elections in Uganda and be able to report by end of next month when we already have Easter and other public holidays in between? You will realise that it may not be possible, but I suggest we sit and discuss this matter with you to find a better way of handling it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I had gone far in preparing for this motion. As you may realise, some of the victims of the irregularities and malpractices, unfortunately may not be here in the Ninth Parliament, in which respect I would imagine that even when we commence on it, it would not stop us from revising it in the Ninth Parliament as and when the situation permits. The reintroduction can always be done, but to those who have first-hand information and who are Members of the Eight Parliament, I would propose, Mr Speaker, and you as the chairman of the Business Committee, to squeeze some space. The details can come with the committee once it is established. But I strongly feel it would be – (interruption) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, hon. colleague for giving way. I am not trying to challenge the ruling of the Speaker or to attack the spirit of your motion but I am trying to seek clarification. There is a view that the actors in Parliament, having been part of this election, having been losers and winners, may be the same people to investigate. 
Hon. Ssekikubo, educate us more. I remember I was not in Parliament but I was one of those who used to strongly criticise the select committee of Parliament that was probing election violence and my argument then was; if there was violence, it means you were the beneficiaries – (Interjections) - I am telling you. How are you going to give –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, while in this Parliament every statement we make goes into the Hansard. We have just come out of a very gruesome election and there are those who genuinely won. Is hon. Tumwebaze, who was a member of my National Youth Council when I was a commissioner, in order to impute that those of us who genuinely won did so because we were involved in violence? Is he in order? What will other people think about us when they read the Hansard? Are you here because you exercised violence? Is that how you got to be elected? Is the hon. Member in order to make such a statement?

THE SPEAKER: Is this a slip of the tongue?  

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I said that when there was a select committee on election violence, I was not a member of this House, and I held a view that was critical of the work. So, I was simply saying if Members of Parliament are confessing that there has been election-violence and the same people in the House are the ones investigating such violence, it means that violence enabled them win the election because the other people who did not make it were not part of this House. 

So, Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to get from my colleague, which can help build up –

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that we address the motion with issues relevant to it. You should forget about other select committees that we have had but address the subject of this motion. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I wanted from hon. Ssekikubo, which could help us, is how are we going to draw the line between we, Members of Parliament investigating and we being the same people who were actors in the same election? He should throw more light on this.

THE SPEAKER: No. I do not think it is a question of us, Members of Parliament. We can investigate this because if you have a vested interest, you declare it and decline. That is the way to go. But the problem is setting up a select committee by this Parliament and this Parliament expecting a report from that committee is really not possible. And we cannot set up a select committee for the next Parliament; with the little time we have, we may not be able to achieve the desired goal in this motion. 

I have also said that some of the matters you might raise here may be relevant to court petitions arising from those elections. And according to our rules, we are not allowed to discuss matters that are in court; that would be subjudice.

Attorney-General, do you have something to say? 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I enjoin you in proposing and submitting the way you did. I do not have anything very useful to add to the two propositions you have made. Suffice to say that normally the Electoral Commission makes a report on the electoral process after every election; that report is submitted to the relevant sessional committee of Parliament. When that report is debated, a report is made to the House. During the debate on that particular report, any appropriate measure may be proposed, and I do not see how all that can be done in the remaining days to the end of this term of Parliament. 

So, in addition to what you have said, Mr Speaker, I see it relatively impracticable to have a select committee at this time for this particular purpose. Thank you so much.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, Parliament is a legal entity. The fact that this Parliament is ending soon does not mean that there will be no Parliament. We already know as of now the Members of Parliament who will come back and those who will not. So, we could set up this committee composed of Members who will come back in the next Parliament. They could start the work and the work would be continued in the next Parliament, just like many other businesses that have been saved and carried forward. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, even if we took that, a select committee of the Eighth Parliament cannot be a select committee for the Ninth Parliament. Therefore, there will be no committee reporting to the Ninth Parliament. The committee will be dismantled and the Ninth parliament will have its own committee.  I think we should end this subject. In any case we can take it to the Business Committee to consider and decide. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I wanted to conclude with a clarification. Mr Speaker, the Seventh Parliament set up a select committee on election violence. I appeared before that committee but up to now that report has not been debated. Now, if we institute another, whether now or in the Ninth Parliament, where will you start from? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will suggest that we may in future require periodical reports from these committees that we commit business to, so that they give us updates. However, your last comment is not helpful to the subject before us. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, my understanding of this matter is two-fold. The first one is the issue of principle, as far as rigging and election violence is concerned in this country. The issue of establishing a select committee, I think, is consequential upon a resolution we would have made as Parliament because I do not think from the word go we are going to just debate the issue as to whether we put in place a committee or not. These are cases where people have evidence like him, myself and others, which we intend to lay on Table to prove that there was election rigging and violence.

Secondly, there are cases and they are already in the public domain. I have even seen a document, which was written by H. E. the President condemning the Opposition that we colluded with the Electoral Commission to rig elections. These are matters, which do not require a select committee because we are not going to invite the President. These are matters, which are going to come on the floor. Surely is it-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, you are talking about a different matter because the purpose of this motion is to set a select committee to investigate.
 
MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I think my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo has all the reasons burning in his heart that there is need for us to have a select committee to look into the election violence that we have just gone through. But on the other side, I also do take cognisance of your advice in the sense that the time we have is very short. If we were to borrow leaf from the select committee that carried out its work in the Seventh Parliament, within one month it is not possible for this committee that we are going to establish if this motion goes through, to traverse the country and get evidence from witnesses upcountry and in Kampala.

I am kindly appealing to my brother hon. Ssekikubo, if it is not much of a pain to him, that we sleep over this motion up to the Ninth Parliament so that we are able to have all the time- (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my boss here because I have listened to the suggestion but when we are sworn in - I will not be here but when the new Members of the Ninth Parliament are sworn in, the next thing will be the State of the Nation Address; thereafter, we shall have the Budget and there will be no time for matters of this nature until around September. 

What shall we do with the evidence, which you need to collect at this time when the dust has not settled, when people are still upbeat about these matters and they want to give evidence, testimonies and recounts on what they have gone through? What shall we do with that evidence? Two, some of us will not be in Parliament and there is evidence we want to lay on Table, which is in our possession right now.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have spent enough time on this, can you wind up?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to give the following explanation to the clarification that my Lord Mayor-elect is seeking from me. Even if you are not a member of this House, that does not in any way stop you from being a witness, it is provided for in our Rules of Procedure. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear. Hon. Okello-Okello was not a member of the Seventh Parliament but he was able to come and adduce evidence. So, really even if a person will not be in this House, he can still be called upon by the committee that will be put in place to give evidence.

Secondly - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Chief Whip. The information I would like to give you, the Leader of Opposition together with the Lord Mayor-elect is that since the Lord Mayor-elect has the affinity to lay these documents on Table, he can do so and we shall deal with them. Let him lay them on the Table for record purposes because that cannot be denied. He does not have to wait; so let him play, we shall use them at an appropriate time. I would encourage him to lay them on the Table.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague. The information I would like to provide to the House is that even with the expiry of a term of Parliament, I think a resolution of Parliament is binding and if this House proceeds in such a way that it allows a motion, we can resolve that and set up a select committee. Even if we do not set it up now, somehow in the archives of this House somebody would look backwards and say the last Parliament resolved that this matter be investigated by way of a select committee. That is my view.

Secondly, I think we should not use the technicality of time to then negate on the Member’s right to move this motion. I still implore the House that the motion be moved and-

THE SPEAKER: Mentioning time is not a technicality, it is a reality. I think let us leave this to the Business Committee.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe some critical information I needed to share with my colleagues, particularly hon. Tumwebaze, is that Article 79 (1) of the Constitution is clear that, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” The Parliament to which hon. Tumwebaze belongs has this immense power to ensure that the democratic governance of this country prevails.

Also, Article 1 (3) of this Constitution says, “All power and authority of Government and its organs -including Parliament - derive from this constitution, which in turn derives its authority from the people who consent to be governed in accordance to this Constitution”.

When someone or any institution of this country attempts to subvert the will of the people, it calls on you. You cannot close your doors to the fact that we are waiting for an annual report as the Attorney-General has insinuated. It is incumbent on us, as the institution which swears to protect and safeguard this Constitution, to rise up to the occasion.

In that regard, I still would implore the Business Committee to find time to have a slot for this. Whether I am here or anybody else, they can always find that record and revive it at an appropriate time. I still feel hurt when I look at this unconstitutionality prevailing in this country and a Member raises a bar that is not justified, I am extremely saddened and I really pray, with due respect, that room and space be availed by the good Business Committee. 

I can see questions today, Tuesday, yet they are a preserve normally of Thursdays. Space can be found. It is not entirely Hon. Ssekikubo to always stand here for such a motion. Another time, someone else, maybe hon. Tumwebaze, himself would feel challenged by the Constitution to rise up and have another motion of this kind. 

Mr Speaker, I beg you as the Chairman of the Business Committee, preferably within this week, to have this motion on the Order Paper. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT 

3.17
MS BETI KAMYA (Lubaga Division North, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for finding me time on the Order Paper to make this personal statement. Hon. Members, I wish to once again welcome you back from the “trenches” and to congratulate those who made it back to the House. Special congratulations go to the Lord Mayor-elect, hon. Erias Lukwago – (Applause) - for achieving the highest office in Kampala District.  For those who will not be coming back to this House, there is plenty of life outside Parliament.  And for hon. Mabikke and I, there is plenty of life outside City Hall and State House. (Laughter)  

As you know, I was struggling in a different kind of “trenches” from yours. I was struggling for the highest office in this land with seven other people, three of whom I gave bloody noses while the other four were only lucky  because I got a mechanical breakdown in my system and so I lost four weeks of campaign time. 

My kind of “trenches” required me to traverse the whole country and so I am loaded with incredible experiences, hands-on knowledge and opinions based on the benefits of a broad perspective of Uganda.  But that will be a story for another day because our rules do not permit personal statements that might be deemed controversial. However, I will be interested in the motion when it is raised by hon. Ssekikubo or anyone else because I have a wide spectrum of experience going round the country. 

Today, I wish to explain to this House and to the country at large why I had to give up my sit in this House mindful that I risked losing so much if I did not win the presidency.  I gave up my cosy corner in this House in order to take advantage of the national and international platform plus the facilities available to presidential candidates just once every five years to raise matters contained in this statement to all parts of Uganda and to the world as well as to spearhead the crusade to change the system of governance in Uganda.
 
Mr Speaker, I have been around for some time and I have shared the –

THE SPEAKER: Do I have the same copy that you have?    (Laughter)  It is okay, it is your statement. 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I intend to spearhead the crusade to change the system of governance in Uganda from the unitary system to the federal system. (Applause) 

I have been around for a while and I have shared with fellow Ugandans the excitement of independence from colonial rule, the brutalities of 1966, 1971, 1979, and 1980 and 1985 that came with the changes of Government. I have shared the sorrow and trauma of the five-year-long Luweero and twenty-year-long Acholi insurgences; I have shared the joy and fair experience simultaneously in different parts of the country whenever there was a change of regime as if Uganda was always divided into two.

Mr Speaker, those emotions have been punctuated by regime changes eight times since Independence. But there is one thing in common with all the regime changes. They have meant pleasant prospects for some Ugandans but apprehension and fear for others.  Forty eight years of independence, nine regimes, eight heads of state, two referenda, two liberation wars, two military coups, six elections, billions of donor dollars and incredible endowment of resources, later the tenure of vacation office by President Museveni might still mean apprehension for some and joyous prospects for others. Since Independence, in Uganda while some laugh saying, “tuuli mu kintu,” others cry depending on who resides in State House. (Laughter) In other countries, all citizens cry or laugh together depending on the policies of a sitting Government and not depending of the political party in power; not depending on the personality of the President.  All citizens laugh or cry together depending on policies of Government.  

When I got to that point, sitting in Parliament legislating and earning a handsome salary stopped being an incentive to me because- (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I would like to read the statement verbatim but when I was discussing it with you,  you had reservations about the amount of time that it would take. But if the House wants me to read it verbatim, it gives me a lot of pleasure.  I thank you very much.

When I got to that point, sitting in this Parliament legislating, attending funerals, weddings and supervising NAADS programmes, lobbying for development programmes for my constituency, travelling business class and drinking wine at Foreign Missions’ functions and earning a handsome salary, all stopped being an incentive for me.  Because I realised that we need to completely overhaul the politics of Uganda beyond mere changes of regime and occupants of this House.  Uganda’s problem in my view, is bigger and more complex that regular elections or regime changes and we need to find out what it is.  

Politicians, political analysts, scholars, donors, the World Bank and the IMF have battled for 48 years trying to understand the “problem” of Uganda. They have variously come up with answers ranging from colonialism, leaders who refuse to give up power, past leaders, corruption, low budget allocation to agriculture, opposition politicians who sabotage Government programmes, intermittent insurgences, all of which, according to these analysts can be fixed by regime change, which we have done nine times.  But the problem of Uganda continues.

Soon after Independence, some people thought that the problem of Uganda was her the first President, Sir Edward Mutesa, and that Uganda would never grow into a prosperous nation with him around. The solution, they thought, was to get rid of him and so they did. There were jubilations for some and tears for others.

A few years later, when the problem did not go away, some people thought the problem of Uganda was the second President of Uganda, Dr Milton Obote, and that the solution was to get rid of him and so they did. There were jubilations and tears but the problem did not go away.

A few years later, some people thought the problem of Uganda was the third President of Uganda, Field Marshal Idi Amin, and that the solution would be to get rid of him and so they did. There were jubilations and tears but the problem did not go away. Prof. Yusuf Lule, the fourth President of Uganda lasted only 68 days because some people thought he was the problem of Uganda. There were demonstrations of “ffe twagala Lule, oba tufa tuffe” for some, while for others, it was good riddance but the problem of Uganda did not go away.

For 48 years, Uganda has moved in that fashion with some people always pointing a finger at the sitting president as the problem of Uganda who must be pushed while others wish him to stay in power for their own survival. But Uganda’s history has it that nine changes of regime have not solved the country’s problem, obviously, because the problem is more complex than a president and his regime.

Uganda had problems before 1971; how can we then say that Amin was the problem? Uganda had problems before 1986; how can we then argue that President Museveni is the problem of Uganda? 

President Museveni came trying to solve a problem which he thought was Obote II, who in turn had come to solve a problem which he thought was Amin, who had come to solve a problem which he thought was Obote, who had come to solve a problem which he thought was Mutesa, who had also come to solve a problem which he thought were the colonialists.

In my opinion, the problem of Uganda has always been the presidency not the president. Before politicians become presidents, they are ordinary well-intentioned convincing people but when they enter State House, they become controversial and when they vacate State House, they become harmless ordinary people again. So, we must ask ourselves what is unique in State House that is not in any other office and I beg to offer that it is absolute power - power over the treasury, power over all assets and to crown it all, power over the army. Surely, those three mixed are the ingredients that make a dictatorship. You give somebody absolute power and give him the army to protect him, dictatorship is what you will get.

If we wish to solve Uganda’s problem, we must deal with the absolute power that is vested in the presidency by our Constitution. Presidents have come and gone eight times and they will come and go but focusing on them as the problem of Uganda is missing the point. They come without power and leave without it because power lies with the presidency not with the president. When they acquire that power, presidents have always used it in ways which make Ugandans think they are the problem of Uganda.

We must ask ourselves how that power got into State House. It was taken there by the colonialists who wrestled it from the owners, the indigenous Uganda leaders, by force of military might. After the military defeat and exile of the likes of Omukama Kabalega of Bunyoro and Kabaka Mwanga of Buganda who had resisted colonialism, the colonialist awarded himself free reign in the new territory which he named Uganda, disempowered all traditional leaders and centralised all power in State House under the Governor. That centralised power gave the colonialist unlimited access to all the wealth and authority in Uganda which he used to exploit Uganda.

At Independence, the colonialist did not take that power with him to the UK; the power that he had grabbed from traditional leaders. He left it in Uganda; he took back only the Union Jack leaving all the power intact in State House. He did not even return it to the original owners from whom he had wrestled it. That power is still locked in State House and is inherited intact by every subsequent State House occupant and they use it just as they wish, just like the colonialists who bequeathed it to them.

Every generation has its own unique challenges. The Kabalega and Mwanga generation rose to their generational challenge when they resisted colonialism. They lost the battle but they rose to the challenge by attempting to defend their sovereignty. Their grandsons; Edward Mutesa II, Milton Obote, John Babiha, W.W.Nadiope, Iganatius Musazi, Daudi Ochieng, Charles Gasyonga, Tito Winyi and others also rose  to the generational challenge when they fought colonialism to redeem what their grandfathers had lost and by getting us Independence on the 9th of October 1962, they rose successfully to their generational challenge.

If our grandfathers resisted colonialism and our fathers fought it, surely, our generation’s challenge is to finish it off by dismantling the colonial unitary system which had been deliberately designed to serve imperialists and exploiters by centralising all the power and all authority in Uganda under the Governor. We must find the key to open State House, take out that power and distribute it back to the owners where it belongs. 

The key to that power, in my view, is to change the political system through change of the Constitution replacing this over centralised system with the federal system which devolves power and authority back to the regions. It is in search of that key that we formed Uganda Federal Alliance and that I leave Parliament.

Our first challenge was to de-bugandanise the concept of federalism and ugandanise it. We have made a good start because Uganda Federal Alliance, the party that sponsored me as presidential candidate, also fielded 65 candidates for members of Parliament spread throughout the country and 125 local councillors, 23 of whom won the elections such as in Bukedea, Moyo, Manafwa, Bulambuli, Pallisa, Bushenyi, Luwero and others.

I have made many friends on both sides of this House. I have gained a lot of knowledge and experience from this House. I have travelled widely and broadened my perspective of the world while in this House. I have had my share of fun in this House and in the constituency. In short, my time here in this House has certainly added value to my life and for that, I am grateful to all of you colleagues who have made all that happen. Special appreciation goes to you, Mr Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, for your cooperation and guidance.

It is unlikely that I will seek re-election as a Member of Parliament because I believe in moving forward but I shall treasure my tenure as Member of Parliament for Lubaga North. I shall miss you all and I will pray that God grants each of you, your life’s goals.

Finally, the political views expressed in this statement are of Uganda Federal Alliance. I am sure my colleagues are somewhere there; but if you agree with me, dear colleagues, and you wish to join Uganda Federal Alliance, our offices are in Kabusu along the Kampala-Masaka Road -(Laughter)- where I am likely to be spending time away from the grassroots. 

God bless you all and thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think you have made your case. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 104/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES

3.37
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro South, Isingiro): “Can the Prime Minister answer the following question: For over four years now, almost 2,100 Ugandans have been encamped at Kikagati Sub-county having been chased from Tanzania where they had settled. What plans does the government have to resettle these suffering Ugandans?” 

3.38
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, when I received this question, I informed the hon. Member that the right person to answer this question is the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. [Ms Bako: “This is a real disaster.”] I still insist that he is the one to answer and he is going to do so next Tuesday. I thank you. 

3.38
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I am sure digit “08” means it came in 2008 and this is a serious matter. Today, we are in 2011 and he is asking for more time. But also, this goes to Parliament. How can we take three years to deal with a question which – if hon. Byarugaba asked and he said four years, now it means you have to add on three; the issue is for seven years. What is the problem? It is Parliament making the Executive dodge us. If we had insisted that this question be answered in 2008, it would have been answered there and then. Now, the Prime Minister is coming and he knows that next Tuesday we shall have other business and he knows Parliament’s term is about to expire and the next Parliament will do nothing. We need to seriously have division - we must separate powers; the Executive, the Judiciary and the independence of Parliament.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 112/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

3.40
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to represent my fellow worker, hon. Pajobo, who is absent. The question is; “Can the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development inform the House about:
 
i)	The number of people employed in Uganda in the formal and non-formal sectors
ii)	Of the above, how many Ugandans are employed in the formal sector and how many are non-Ugandans?
iii)	Are all non-Ugandan workers in possession of work permits? If not, what steps have been taken to ensure that those without are brought to book?” 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (WOMEN) (Ms Lukia Nakadama): I thank you so much but I would like to apologise because we are not ready to answer -(Interjections)- this question. It will be answered next week on Tuesday. I thank you. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification on this matter. Again, it stems from the views expressed by my colleague, hon. Nandala. The question was raised in 2008 and our Rules of Procedure require that a minister responds within two weeks.

Secondly, I thought that by the time a matter is put on the order paper, the answer is ready. It is not a matter of saying let me put it on the Order Paper in anticipation that the minister will be ready to give the answer. We, therefore, need clarification on whether the minister took this as a matter of great concern. Leader of Government Business, honestly, are your ministers really in charge of these matters or are you in charge of the ministers? I beg to get clarification on this. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I rise to speak against the fact that Government is not providing answers for so long. Let us take an example of the many Ugandans who are suffering in Kikagati Sub-county. It has taken three years -(Interjections)- yes, I know because this happened during the Seventh Parliament. This question was put to Government about three years ago and there is no answer. So, what is happening to these people? 

I would like to propose that when a question is asked – because these are issues to which ministers should know the answers instantly. It is not about facts, it is not about figures. At least, make a statement that will give Ugandans hope that it is going to be done; but to say that there is no answer and it is postponed is not taking the House seriously. In a way, the Member is being ignored. It is a form of saying, “Your question is irrelevant or it does not matter nor does it make sense.” 

I beg to request Government to put respect in the House by taking the questions that come from the Members seriously. Thank you.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I recall that this question 112/1/08 was raised in the Seventh Parliament when we had a minister called Bakoko Bakoru -(Interjections)- she had no idea, she did not know the answer until she left the country. Now in the Eighth Parliament, we are raising the same question and up to now, there is no answer. I think let us assume that Government does not have an answer other than wasting time rolling it over and over. I thank you. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we have had many questions for oral answer and my ministers have performed well -(Interjections)- yes, it is today when Prof. Kabwegyere was not ready -(Interjections)- “ngoja Kidogo”. Then, the second minister, that question requires a lot of research. She had to ensure that she has adequate answers and I want to assure you that she is going to answer that question. I thank you. (Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Can we get Hon. Alaso’s question? (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I actually got up to put the Prime Minister to order because what we are dealing with is a very serious matter. First of all, I think the ministers are sabotaging Government business by refusing to come and defend Government here. Secondly, I think the ministers are undermining the mandate the people of Uganda have given them. 

Thirdly, I want the Prime Minister to assure me why the same names should be approved, when submitted again to the Appointments Committee. 

Therefore, is the Prime Minister in order to come and defend such ineffectiveness where one is given a question and they take three years? Does that person deserve to be called a minister in the Government of the Republic of Uganda? Is the Prime Minister in order to defend such laziness? 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a response to her question? (Laughter) – Please, take your question after his answer. 

3.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Prime Minister for giving me chance to make a comment in answer – (Members rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, let him respond. I have rejected the point of order. Let him say what he wants to say. (Mr Okupa rose_)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I am listening to the Speaker and not to hon. Okupa. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for being very tolerant because I think some of us tend to overlook the importance of that seat. The insistence on answering questions today is not fair and I think the Prime Minister should be complimented in explaining why. I was not in this House when that question was raised and the Prime Minister promised we would answer. I was in Arua, Moyo and Adjuman on Government work. The answer on Tuesday will give you reasons the answer has taken that long. So, the issue of not being able to answer today does not mean that there will be no answer and on Tuesday. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us utilise the time we have to clear the work - (Members rose_) – hon. Members, you should realise we have a lot of business to clear. You are seeking his explanation but there is no explanation; we cannot clear what we do not have here. As far as questions are concerned, we have decided that although questions are normally answered one day in a week, we will at least clear some of these questions every day. If he has no answer, then there is no answer. Let us move to another person who has an answer. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 115/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

3.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): 
i)	How many children are under detention in remand homes awaiting minister’s order under Section 105 (2) of the Trial and Indictments Act, Cap 23, Laws of Uganda?
ii)	How many orders has the minister made since 2000?
iii)	Is the minister aware that children are being detained with adults in prisons and police cells?
iv)	What plans does Government have to provide child friendly and functional detention facilities?”

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I came to the House prepared for today’s agenda and I see this as “business to follow”. So, I hope I can respond to this or the substantive Attorney-General can respond to it tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you want a recess? We should be serious with our time and ministers should prepare the answers so that we move.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Capital Markets Authority Act, Cap. 84 by converting all references to the shillings into currency points and by inserting a new part XA dealing with offering of securities to the public. The new part comprising sections 90A to 90AF is intended to replace the provisions of the Companies Act, Cap. 110 relating to the issue of prospectuses namely sections 37 to 53 and section 382 to 385 and the Third Schedule of that Act. 

The present state of the legislation is anomalous in provisions which deal with prospectuses are contained in the Companies’ Act which governs only the offerings of securities by – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, allow me to interrupt. Honourable members, I have got a list here of Members that are required to pick up their declaration forms and tomorrow is the last day. Therefore, I think you should listen so that if you have not picked up the form, you do so. That is why I had to interrupt him. 

1.	Gen. Elly Tumwine
2.	Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye
3.	Gen. Aronda Nyakairima
4.	Hon. Frank Tumwebaze 
5.	Hon. Theopista Ssentongo
6.	Hon. Nulu Byamukama 
7.	Hon. Katende Serunjogi
8.	Hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba 
9.	Hon. Bruno Pajobo
10.	Hon. Reagan Okumu 
11.	Hon. John Odit
12.	Hon. Denis Obua 
13.	Hon. Issa Kikungwe
14.	Hon. Badhul Katongole 
15.	Col Ramadhan Kyamulesire 
16.	Hon. Hood Katuramu 
17.	Hon. James Makumbi 
18.	Hon. Michael Mabikke 
19.	Hon. Lulume Bayiga 
20.	Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi 
21.	Hon. Sophia Nalule 
22.	Hon. Christine Nakwang Tubbo 
23.	Hon. Farida Najjuma 
24.	Hon. Rosemary Najjemba 
25.	Hon. Pius Mujuzi 
26.	Hon. Mary Mugyenyi 
27.	Hon. Stephen Bakka 
28.	Maj. Sarah Mpabwa 

So, you are reminded to please pick up the form and fill it so that at least by Thursday you file it with the IGG. 

MR OMACH: Other types of securities offered, for example, an offer for debt securities by a statutory corporation or partnership or a local authority are not covered by the Companies Act and, therefore, there is no legislation at present, which requires the issue of prospectuses in the case of those offerings. 

To remove the anomaly and to introduce consistency in the law, the prospectus provisions governing all forms of offered securities are therefore by the Bill being moved into the Capital Markets Authority Act and the relevant Companies Act provisions will therefore need to be repealed. The consequence will be that there will be one Act, namely, the Capital Markets Authority Act, to regulate all securities markets activities whether by way of Initial Public Offerings or by way of dealings in securities.

Finally in the new part XA, this will not be limited in its application to the companies although companies will be the most common issuers of securities affected by this part. The offering of units or shares under a licence scheme under the Collective Investment Scheme Act No. 4 of 2003 is excluded from the application of these provisions. And part XA also does not apply to any security issued by the Government of Uganda or by Bank of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Chairman of the committee. 

3.59
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you for even reminding us to declare wealth. I am glad to inform you that I have already complied with that requirement. 

The Capital Markets Authority (amendment) Bill - I hope the copies are being circulated. The Capital Markets Authority (amendment) Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 28 September 2010 and referred to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has, in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure, scrutinised the Bill and now has the honour to report its findings to the House.

Methodology

The committee discussed with and received memoranda from the Minister of Finance, and the Capital Markets Authority. The committee also received all relevant legislation in other countries which provided useful information for the consideration of the Bill.

The Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Capital Markets Authority Act, Cap. 84 by converting all references to Shillings into currency points and by inserting a new part XA dealing with offering of securities to the public. The new part comprising sections 90A to 90AF is intended to replace the provisions of the Companies Act, Cap. 110 relating to the issue of prospectuses namely, sections 37 to 53, 382 to 385 and the third schedule of that Act. 

Effect of the Bill

The regulation of all securities in Uganda will be covered under the Capital Markets Authority Act. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, part five which is covered on pages 3 and 4 is a narrative showing the salient features of the Bill. I need not read it.

Observations and Recommendations of the Committee

The committee made the following observations:

Commencement

The committee notes that there is no justification for the extended commencement of the law since the provisions are already in force under the Companies Act. 

Capital Market Authority’s role in regard to introductions or cross listing

The committee notes that many Ugandans suffered loss during the Safaricom Initial Public Offer (IPO) and proposed that the  Capital Markets Authority needs to do due diligence in such cases to protect  the local investors. The committee learned that the East African Securities Regulatory Authorities (EASRA) has documented lessons from the Safaricom matter. The committee, therefore, proposes that the CMA prospectus requirement regulations need to be reviewed to encompass these lessons learnt from Safaricom.

Demutualisation of the Uganda Securities Exchange 

The committee notes that in a bid to make the Uganda Securities Exchange more profitable and effective as a stimulant to economic growth, there is need to demutualise the stock exchange. The demutualisation of a stock exchange refers to the process by which a member-owned exchange is reorganised as a shareholder-owned exchange thereby switching from private to public ownership.  A demutualised stock exchange does not face the same conflict of interest that a member-owned stock exchange faces. Also, as more exchanges demutualise, the heightened competition drives exchanges to improve technologies and fee structures. Another benefit is that by going public, an exchange has access to more capital and the ability to expand into new markets.

Conversion of shillings into currency points

Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to convert Shillings into currency points. However, the committee noted that the conversion does not take into consideration the ratio as provided for in the law revision (Fines and other Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008. The committee therefore proposes an amendment to clause 4 to standardise the relationship between fines and terms of imprisonment.

Access to and use of funds by the issuer

The committee noted that there is need to safeguard investors’ money during the time of receiving the minimum subscriptions but before allotment of funds. This is intended to insure that issuers do not use the monies collected for their own benefit. The committee thus proposed an amendment to clause 90(X)(4) to ensure that such monies are placed on an escrow account. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Well, hon. Members you have received the report, are you ready to make contributions or is it very technical? I think there is no contribution

4.06
MR KADDUNABBI LUBEGA (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): It seems everybody is convinced by the report and I propose that we go to the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: I think we can have sometime and come back tomorrow to handle this thing. It is a very technical subject and you have just received the copies now.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, because Members had the opportunity to look through the proposed amendments and we are in agreement with the committee. So, the House can proceed to committee stage.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

Clause 1

MR TUMWEBAZE: We propose to amend clause 1(a) by deleting clause 1. The justification is that the provisions are already in force under the Companies Act.
b) Amendment of Capital Markets Authority Act, cap. 84 by insertion of a new Clause, amendment of section 6(1) of the principal Act. 

Meetings of the Authority; The principal Act is amended in Section 6(1) by substituting for the words “each month by the words “every three months”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1 deleted)
Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: We propose to insert a new clause before Clause 2. The new Clause is to amend Section 6 of the principal Act; meetings of the Authority.

The principal Act is amended in section 6(1) by substituting for the words “each month” with words “every three months”. Justification is that at the time the authority was set up, this was essential as the board had a lot of matters to resolve and management was monitored closely. 

However, after 14 years, the board no longer requires a monthly meeting. The statutory requirement has become burdensome as members meet whether or not there is business to conduct. The committee, therefore, recommends that section 6(1) be amended to provide for a quarterly meeting of the board. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you amending Clause 6 or you are inserting a new one?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we are inserting a new Clause before Clause 2 and we are amending section 6 of the principal Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 3 in the amendment Bill talks about insertion of a new part XA in cap. 84. We propose to amend that under the definition of the word “professional investor”, we insert the words “a broker, broker’s representative” between the words “fund manager” and “a dealer” appearing in line 5. The justification is that a broker is also a professional investor.
 
90E meaning of “offer to the public” in sub clause (2)(a) substitute for the words “more than” in the third line for the words “less than”. The intention of the provision is to create a minimum subscription below which such an offer would be considered as an offer to the public.

90G Prohibition on offering securities without a prospectus

1)	In sub clause 1(c) rephrase the entire sub clause to read as follows;
“The prospectus states that ‘a copy of this prospectus has been delivered to the Registrar of Companies for registration. However, the securities that are the subject of prospectus have neither been approved nor disapproved by the Capital Markets Authority. Prospective investors should pay due attention to the risk factors outlined in the prospectus.”

The justification is that we find that a better formulation. 

2)	In sub clause (5), insert the words “within three days” between the words “shall” and “upon” in line one. The justification is that it makes it clearer.

90N under the subheading “offer of shares uniform with existing shares” substitute for the head note the following; “short form prospectus”. The justification is that the current head note is misleading.

90P In amendment of registered prospectus, rephrase the entire clause as follows; 

Supplementary prospectus;
1)	Where a prospectus has been approved under this Act in respect of a public offer of securities and, at any time between the opening date and a closing date while an agreement in respect of those securities can be entered into in pursuance of that public offer-
a)	there is a significant change affecting any matter contained in the prospectus, the inclusion of which was required by this Act or 
b)	a significant new matter arises the inclusion of information in respect of which would have been so required if it had arisen when the prospectus was prepared; or
c)	there is a significant inaccuracy in the prospectus, the offeror shall, of its own motion, with prior consent of the Authority, or if required by the Authority publish a supplementary prospectus containing particulars of the change or new matter or, in the case of an inaccuracy, correct it and deliver the supplementary prospectus to the Registrar for registration.
2)	In paragraph one the word “significant” means significant for the purpose of making an informed assessment of the matters mentioned in the Act
3)	Where a supplementary prospectus has been approved in respect of a public offer of securities, the preceding paragraphs of this section shall have effect as if any reference to a prospectus were a reference to the prospectus originally registered and that supplementary prospectus, taken together.
4)	The provisions of sections 90G, 90M shall apply to a supplementary prospectus. The justification is that a prospectus which is already issued to the public cannot be amended; one would have to issue a supplementary prospectus. 

90Q power to suspend or cancel a prospectus. In sub Clause 7, delete the word “simple” in the third last line. The justification is that issues dealing with rates of interests should be left to regulations which can be amended more easily. 

90R Allotment by reference to stock exchange
In sub clause (3), insert the words “or she” after the word “he” so as to cater for the female gender.

90X No Allotment unless minimum subscription received.

In sub clause (4), substitute for the word “separate” in line two with the words “an escrow”. This is to ensure that an insurer does not use this money before allotment.

90AD Continuous disclosure
In sub clause (8) 
(i)	Substitute the words “four million shillings” in the third line with “two hundred currency points”.
(ii)	Substitute the word “two” in the last line with the word “eight”.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of clause 4 of the Bill.

Insert a new sub clause (12) immediately after sub clause (11) to read thus:

“(12)In this section, “Trade secret” means information including but not limited to a formula, pattern, compilation, programme, method, technique or process or information contained or embodied in a product, device or mechanism which;
(a)	is, or may be used in a trade or business;
(b)	is not generally known in that trade or business;
(c)	has economic value from not being generally known and;
(d)	is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.”

This is in order to clarify what amounts to a trade secret.

90AE Regulations in relation to part XA
Replace the word “may” with the word “shall” in order to make the provision mandatory.
I beg to report, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, on Clause 4, convert shillings into currency points, for purposes of – there are clauses from 1 up to 25 – the principal is substituting “two years” with “eight years”. Therefore, from paragraph (a) to paragraph (cc), insert the words “and substituting for “two years” the words “eight years’” at the end of each paragraph.

This is so as to bring the provisions in line with the Law Revision (Fines and Other Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008 which converts fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters into currency points and further standardises the relationship between fines and terms of imprisonment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TUMWEBAZE: Section 103 of the principal Act replaced
(i)	In sub clause (1), delete the expression “with the consent of the cabinet”.
(ii)	In sub clause (2), delete the words “with the approval of Parliament”.

This is because Parliament has delegated this function. Schedule 2 does not necessitate the time of Parliament. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the clause that the committee chairperson wants to amend is clause 6 but not clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: That means there is no amendment for clause 5?

MR OMACH: No, it is not there.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we will have to harmonise the numbering. 
(i)	In sub clause (1), delete the expression “with the consent of the cabinet”.
(ii)	In sub clause (2), delete the words “with the approval of Parliament”.

This is because Parliament has delegated this function. Schedule 2 does not necessitate the time of Parliament. When we talk of Schedule 2, we mean the principal Act. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this matter keeps on coming up whenever we debate legislation but it is a constraining clause to amend this particular provision to provide for the approval by Parliament. We are trying to delegate responsibility so that matters can be expedited. This is why we formulated these provisions including currency points. In fact when you read that particular legislation hon. Tumwebaze referred to – on fines and other related financial provisions act which we passed – you will see that correlation about delegation of powers to ministers. And, of course, as checks and balances, with approval of Cabinet.

If you say it is Parliament to approve, then essentially you are actually not delegating anything. You are bringing back the same matter to be debated here and approved in the same way you pass the actual legislation. So what will you be delegating? I wish that we reflect this more seriously and leave the provision the way it is in the text of the Bill.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. One of the problems we have had in all our legislation is that when we delegate legislation powers to the ministers, they either forget about it or they come up with – what I will call with due respect – very unreasonable subsidiary legislation, which is never brought back to this House for us to know what they have done – not even in the committees.
So, there is no way we can track the powers of ministers when they are given responsibility to handle subsidiary legislation. So, I really feel that the recommendation that has been made should be respected. It is just in that spirit – not that we doubt you. The truth of the matter is that we, as Parliament, have no checks and balances to appraise subsidiary legislation. There are some delegated legislations that were given to ministers and for a number of years they have not done anything. I, therefore, oppose hon. Ruhindi’s suggestion.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think what we can do is to expressly give powers to the sector committees to follow up the making of statutory instruments so that the committee periodically liaises with their respective ministers. I think if we put this in the rules – but maybe in the rules this is not clear.

MR WADRI:  Mr Chairman, I seek your indulgence and guidance in this matter. Even if this thing is put in our Rules of Procedure – you look at the issue of questions for oral answers. Our Rules of Procedure stipulate the time frame within which the members of the Executive who are asked questions should give answers. But some questions have been asked year in and year out and have become stale and forgotten about. For example, I asked a question in 2006, the life of this Parliament is coming to its end within a month or so, but it has never been answered yet the Rules of Procedure provide that when a Member asks a question to a minister, that question has to be answered within a specified time. So, if we went that lengthy to document it in our Rules of Procedure – I am sorry that with these frontbench members that we have, they may not be able to do it.

THE SPEAKER: What we should do with the rules – after the period for the question to stay with the minister to prepare an answer expires, then a week after the expiry, the question should be put on the Order Paper so that the minister can come to explain why he has not been able to respond to such a question. I think that may prompt the ministers to act. You do not consult them – we will be able to track the days to expiry, with nothing coming from that minister – such a minister should come to explain why he has not done so. Otherwise, the situation is not good at all.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to differ from this proposal. I would like to suggest that we should uphold the approval of Parliament because I think there are schedules – not all schedules are that easy to amend and they do not fundamentally touch the context of the Act as it were. So, I think that having a schedule without the approval of Parliament might be fundamentally impacting on the legislation.

But also, I would like to say that I have not seen ministers come here to lay on Table those schedules that Parliament has delayed to approval to prompt us come here to seek a cure. I am saying this because we do some of these things when we are curing something. Nobody has ever been on the floor complaining that for example, they presented to House, a requirement to amend such and such a schedule, but that it was not done on time. So, if nobody has complained, what mischief are we trying to heal? Things seem to be okay with the ministers being comfortable. It is on this basis that I suggest that parliamentary approval should be upheld.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, we can try it out for this Bill.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to say that Schedule One is about currency points and the practice has been that no ministry is allowed to amend it. It has to go to Cabinet.

THE CHAIRMAN: And that is what she is saying, not so?

MR OMACH: Yes, but at the moment, no ministry has changed the currency points. In the Second Schedule, we look at the relevant bodies which are; the Institute of Certified Public Accountancy of Uganda, the Insurance Institute of Uganda, the Uganda Association of Securities Dealers and the Uganda Bankers Association. These are the ones that are to appear in this schedule as per the proposal, where we said that this should only be changed with the approval of Parliament while the first one on the currency points to be changed with the approval of Cabinet.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, but what is your position? Are you against the amendment?

MR OMACH: Let us drop it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause titled “Administrative Fines.” The principal Act is amended by inserting a new section as follows; “Notwithstanding any other law, the authority may impose, by way of penalty, an administrative fine on any person who is found to be in breach of any requirement of this Act or the regulations issued there under.” 

The justification is to enable the CMA compel compliance of the law and for minor breaches, where a penalty of a fine would remedy the breach due to the absence of this legal provision. 

New clause - consequential amendment 

Insert a new clause as follows; “104. Consequential amendments. The principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately after Section 103, the following: ‘the Companies Act, cap 110, is hereby amended by repealing sections: 5 (i), 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53, 382, 383, 384, 385 and the third schedule.” 

I beg to report, Mr Chairman.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I need help from the committee chairperson. This amendment proposes that we give the authority the lee way to impose administrative fines some teeth to bite.  (Interjections) But I would like to ask the Chairman to help me understand whether we already had provided for these penalties in case of breaches? If so, should we just leave the authority to wake up in the morning and just say: “okay thus is the type of fine Alaso should pay.” Is that what you are suggesting?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The colleague is asking something, but I would like to say that this is not just a general thing to be abused. It provides for the powers to levy fines, which are specific in this amendment. If the people they regulate are in breach of the issued regulations – the regulations have to be there – they are not going to just imagine that for hon. hon. Wadri has breached regulation X, which is not in existence; it has to be there. 
So, it is something to be done on the basis of what is stated. But also the principal Act, in addition to these amendments, defines other areas of compliance. We are only trying to give them some entry points to help them regulate and enforce the provision; that is the spirit of this amendment.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, if the regulations provide for this, then what is this amendment for? Wouldn’t it be redundant because it is already catered for in the regulations?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My colleague should understand that the regulations define the rules of the game. This clause is to give powers to the authority to levy fines as a punishment to those who contravene the set regulations; they are for defining how the industry should play.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but I think the regulations should define the scale of the fines so that those enforcing it can have some guidance.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I notice that although the principal Act has regulations, there are no fines. So, this will be another remedy to give the authority some teeth. Regulations are at clause 109.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am practically lost and I am sorry about that, but I thought that once we have the regulations, then the authorities will be using the powers given to them through those regulations including levying penalties against those who breach them as provided for in the regulations. 

My understanding of this amendment is that we are now creating a completely new provision different from what is provided for in the regulations. If that is so, isn’t this going to be redundant, if the regulations already addressed problem? What is the new thing, therefore, that these administrative fines bring in other than what we intend to deal with in the penalties provided for in the regulation?

THE CHAIRMAN: You are of the opinion that instead of, “imposing” we should put, “collect”?

MS ALASO: That would be okay because then they collect as provided for in the regulation. But this seems to be like they will originate a new set of fines on their own because they are administrative. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Let us try to understand one thing. The regulations will define the fine; they will set them their scale. And of course the authority will do so in consultation with all the relevant stakeholders. But my understanding of this clause is to give the authority power to enforce the regulation. We should be able to understand each other on this. The authority derives its power from an Act and this is the very one we are putting in place. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Then say “impose”. That is why I am suggesting that we compromise and say, “collect” - collect by way of penalties and administrative fines because the fines will have been set by the regulation. So, if you contravene this or the other, then we give powers to the administration to collect the relevant fines. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we concede and take your guidance on that. We can replace the word, “impose” with “collect”.

MS ALASO: Mr Chair, then that would also take away the word, “administrative” because the fines are already specified in the law. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the regulation may have a section for what they call administrative fines and then you give powers to these bodies to collect.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, the word “administrative” will also imply discretionary. And this can cause problems. Today, the chief executive officer may, for that day –(Laughter)- say, “we will relax this” and the next day it becomes discretionary. That is what the word “administrative” means. 

THE CHAIRMAN: And that is why they say, “May”.

MR ARUMADRI: Even “May” is more dangerous. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what do we do?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I accepted your guidance on “collect” such that we are not seen to reset the fines. But the guidelines are set in accordance with this regulation. They define the fines and they put their scale in accordance with the breaches. But the authority must be given power and power does not come from the regulations but from the Act. You should be mindful of that.  

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I thought we were strengthening the position of the authority to collect by removing “they may impose” because we think that they should collect and by removing “administrative fines” and just saying “penalties and fines”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you agree with hon. Alaso. Okay, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee, adjusted and improved by hon. Alaso. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled “The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2010” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House on The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause) Hon. Members, according to the Order Paper, this brings us to the end of today’s business. However, you are given notice of business to follow, which will include retirement benefits – we started on this but for some reasons, we stood it over to solve a problem, which was a motion raised by hon. Epetait. Have you cleared the position raised by hon. Epetait?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker, and we are ready to continue with business. 

THE SPEAKER: And apart from the Bills listed there, we have questions for oral answer. I appeal to hon. Ministers not to let us have a similar situation that we had today when no answer was given to any question. These questions have been with you for many years. Please burn the midnight candle and prepare answers for the questions whose notice is given to you on this Order Paper so that we have a smooth flow of business rather than interruptions, which take a lot of our time and yet we do not have sufficient time to clear the business on our table.

With this, we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2:30 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 March 2011 at 2.30 p.m.) 




