Wednesday, 22 March 2006

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you and to sincerely thank you for having turned up in big numbers yesterday. I hope the momentum will continue up to the end because as I said, we have a lot to do. But today I do not know what has happened. Maybe Members are in corridors, maybe they are celebrating the achievement we have scored in Melbourne where our golden girl Inzikuru has made it again! (Applause)

The news we heard in the morning that she had no proper shoes and, therefore, was worried depressed us. But I think the leadership must have worked hard to get her shoes, since she has achieved us this first gold in this event. I think we should really thank that girl and do everything best to help our athletes perform better.  

2.37
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is an issue of urgent concern. This morning as I was driving from Mengo towards Parliament, I found all the buses parked along the sides of the road. In stopping, I found that they had been evicted from their rightful station called Bus Park because some major construction company is carrying out construction of a business mall in that area. 

As I speak now, over 50 buses are lined up at the roadside from Mini Price Bata heading towards Mengo and people are being pulled from the roads to enter the buses without a proper station. I thought it would be very prudent for this House and for the entire public to know what actually is happening. Do we have a concrete programme from the government, where the tentative bus park would be or the trend would continue where the buses are parking at the roadsides causing jam and people are being pulled left, right and centre? 

Mr Speaker, I see the line minister is here who must be having very relevant information to this House. We really want to know the fate of the current bus park. I am not a bus owner but I occasionally use public means of transport. I have also seen a bus owner in the front bench and I know he may not be interested in commenting because of conflict of interest. But, Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence so that this country can know what actually is happening currently around the bus park. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, is it Ministry of Transport or is it Local Government? 

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although the Member on the floor said that the relevant minister is here, actually he was not well informed because this is a Local Government affair. It is a tendering affair and fortunately the Minister of Local Government is here. Thank you.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising this issue on the floor of the House. The matter has been with us for the last two days and we have been studying it. My Minister of State is fully involved with staff from the ministry. I had discussions with hon. Nasasira on the matter and I promise to give a statement tomorrow in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.   

2.40
LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Adjumani): I just want also to echo your statement by thanking Inzikuru who has made second gold for Uganda. The first one, you all remember, she was even received from Entebbe Airport and brought to Kampala as a hero and this House had passed a lot of good words and promises. But when she was trying to follow the promises, which never materialised anyway - I do not know what we are going to do in the second gold now since the first promise we made has never taken place. She was promised diplomatic passport, which she has never been given. She was even promised a house and I think she was promised “heaven” actually. So, what are we going to do? Are we going to promise the girl again? Thank you.

MRS WINFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member, who is a minister in this government, to raise such a complaint at this point in time when we expect him to have the answer as to why the promises were not honoured?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was addressing this issue as a Member of Parliament from Adjumani. (Laughter) And I think he was alerting the Committee on Government Assurance to take up this matter. We do not really need to debate this matter. The issue is on record that we did this. We recommended and there was an undertaking that something will be done. I think before she arrives something should be done and other things to be followed up. I hope this is well taken and we request the Executive to take it up. 

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I remember reading a letter where the President directed a minister to handle the issue of the house. Now, with regard to other details, I have no hesitation once again in directing the Minister of Education and Sports - because really he is the one to table this matter. But, probably we have a Minister of State for Primary Education; he may know exactly how far they have gone.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I should also join colleagues to congratulate our lady Inzikuru again for the success she has accorded this country. Pertaining to the issue of the promises, Sir, I want to assure this House that although the process has been slow, we are trying as much as we can at the ministry to handle whatever promises were made to Inzikuru. I would like to give a well-deserved response to this House in one week’s time. We can give a report to the effect. Thank you.

MR ERESU: Further clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No! On this issue? Let us give the minister one week to make a comprehensive report.

MR ERESU: But, Mr Speaker, I have something else to raise.

THE SPEAKER: On Inzikuru?

MR ERESU: Not on Inzikuru but a matter of serious concern. Mr Speaker, I read in the press yesterday and I saw a picture advertising an impression that there is going to be a very beautiful hotel constructed in the premises of the current UBC. I would like to know whether there is going to be compensation for the land being used so that there will be no problems in future pertaining to the area being utilised for this particular construction. 

MR THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue of Shimoni Demonstration School and the PTC is a cross cutting issue. We know there is a process towards what the honourable member is saying and as a ministry, we have been consulting. But we think since this is a cross cutting issue, we are making consultations with our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Tourism, Investment Authority and then we shall give a well coordinated response to this House. I promise, Mr Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, you notice that in every statement the minister has made, there is no time frame and there are no deadlines. There is nothing that you can hold him on to. He will tell you, I will give you an answer in due course. Frankly speaking, if we want to be very serious, the minister must state within what time frame he is going to bring this statement really.

MR THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I was very clear in the first instance that we shall give a response within one week. In the second instance, I categorically put it that this is a cross cutting issue. We are consulting Ministry of Tourism, Uganda Investment Authority to give a well-deserved response. Mr Speaker, you can give us two weeks on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. But honourable members, you should also remember this matter came up in connection with the Commonwealth Summit, which is coming here next year. It was raised by a Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, and we said that since this is a matter falling under your portfolio, please take it up and then come up with a report. This is not a new matter that has come today or yesterday. I think we should leave it at that.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) (AMENDMENT) BILL,2006

THE SPEAKER: To give the background, yesterday the amendment bill to the Local Governments Rating Act was read and it went once the certificate of financial implication was not given. I asked the minister to make an undertaking that today he should produce it; otherwise, the matter would stay in abeyance.

2.49
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a withdrawal of the bill entitled, “The Local Governments Rating (Amendment) Bill, 2006” under Rule 114 for reasons that it was found necessary to have a second amendment of the Act, and it would have meant bringing two bills all in a succession. Conveniently, the government decided that we should have one bill. So, I am withdrawing this bill in order to have the second amendment incorporated so that I have one bill with two amendments for this House to debate. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under Rule 114, the owner of the bill can bring this application but it is up to you to give leave for withdrawal. You have heard the reasons. I put the question that the bill be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Bill withdrawn.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, yesterday I promised Parliament that today I would come with a statement in respect of the election of Youth Members of Parliament. This morning I made frantic moves to conclude my consultations with all the stakeholders, the Electoral Commission and the Solicitor-General, and I want to promise again that this process is in the final stage and definitely tomorrow I will come with a comprehensive statement in Parliament, Mr Speaker.

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I am looking for now is an assurance from the honourable minister that by the time he then completes his consultations, the Electoral Commission is not going to ambush the youth into an election within one week’s time when we have not fully got involved in the whole process of preparation. That is the whole assurance I am looking for.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I thought I have been very clear that tomorrow I would make a comprehensive statement giving the way forward as to when and how the youth elections will take place. So, I want to assure members and my colleague, hon. Alaso, that I will make a statement tomorrow.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The election of the youth members of Parliament is the work of the Electoral Commission, and it does not fall under the Ministry of Gender neither in the armpit of the Minister of State for the Youth. When hon. Alice Alaso put this question, she was putting it to get an answer from the minister who is responsible for the Electoral Commission and the elections at large. That is when hon. Felix Okot Ogong came up to give a statement. I would have expected the minister -(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague, for giving way. I want to inform you, as one of the members of the interest groups, that when workers, for example, are going to hold national elections, the parent ministry is always in consultation with the Electoral Commission. So, if the Minister responsible for the Youth is submitting a statement regarding the election of the youth, he is on the right track.  Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, but you well know that the Electoral Commission is an independent body. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we can explain this. The election of the youth is under a law that is administered by the minister who responded yesterday. So, that is why the minister has responded. Maybe he is in the knowledge of the problems of that particular law or rules that have to be made and that is why he is the right minister to deal with that particular subject. Anyway, what we are really concerned with is a solution to the problem of elections. Let us give him a day and tomorrow he will come and give us a statement, and see how relevant it is in respect to election of the youth.

MR BANYENZAKI: But, Mr Speaker, it is important that the date is announced and it is known by the Electoral Commission so that the people who are responsible start preparing themselves for that exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, let me now tell you.  Sometime, I think two weeks ago, the Chairman of the Electoral Commission rang me to find out when Parliament would convene because there were certain matters that had to be dealt with by Parliament in respect of the election of the youth, which has not taken place. I think that is why the minister who is in charge of the youth had to come in to make some explanation, which we are waiting for tomorrow. Let us wait for tomorrow and then we shall see what to do with this.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFUGEE BILL, 2003

2.55
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, the second reading was done before we went for elections and even the report of the chairperson was delivered. But I think it is necessary to update the House so that they are aware of what we are talking about.  

The proposed bill seeks to repeal and replace the current law, which is the Control of Alien Refugees Act Cap 62, which is considered obsolete not only in its substantive provisions but also in institutional framework and procedural provisions for the treatment of refugees.

In summary, Mr Speaker, this bill seeks to incorporate the provisions of the Constitution of Uganda law particularly those regarding the protection and promotion of fundamental human and other rights, and the respect of international law and treaty obligations. 

It seeks to incorporate relevant standards and principles of international and regional conventions and instruments relating to refugees, especially the 1952 UN Refugee Convention including its protocol of 1969 and the 1969 OAU Refugee Convention. 

It also seeks to consolidate our current policies, practices and procedures for refugee status, determination and humanitarian assistance/delivery and guidelines into law. It seeks to provide for other matters related to management of refugees.

My Ministry and United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) continue to receive asylum seekers from the neighbouring countries displaced by the civil conflicts. There are also continued individual asylum seekers fleeing persecutions from their governments. To date, Uganda is hosting 250,000 refugees in south western and West Nile regions of Uganda.  

Local settlement policy:

The government pursues a local settlement policy through which a refugee settles. Self sufficiency has been encouraged under the self reliance strategy, which seeks to ensure coordinated provisions of humanitarian assistance and support development programmes such as construction of roads, health units, schools, provisions for water and environmental protection in the hosting districts.

The structure of the bill:

In order to strengthen management of refugees in the country, the bill addresses several areas and these are presented in six parts: 

Part one is preliminary and addresses the title and the commencement of the new law and government’s role in matters of asylum. Part two, outlines the issues related to qualification and disqualification and sensation of refugee status.

Part three outlines the administrative structure for the administration of the refugees sector. Part four details the procedures for application of refugee status and the role of UNHCR.

In Part five, the bill outlines the rights and obligations of refugees in relation to the international instrument and a national context. Part six is a miscellaneous section, which deals with wide ranging issues. 

In sum, the bill tries to incorporate international standards and principles for treatment of refugees and represents the government’s position on respect for fundamental human rights.

Mr Speaker, I request you and honourable members to consider enactment of the Refugee Bill 2003 into law. Thank you for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the position is that the motion to have the bill read a second time was moved. He is only reminding us. Now, let us hear from the chairman of the committee.

3.01
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Sammy Ogwel Loote): Mr Speaker, the committee presented a report just before we broke off for the general elections, and I just want to outline a few things in order to remind the Members. I do believe the Members have come with their copies. However, there are a few copies around which can be given. 

Mr Speaker, a report was read and the minister in charge has already given the parts of the report.  I just want to proceed with the methodology.

The committee visited refugee settlements of Kyangwali in Hoima District, Kyakale II in Kyenjojo District and Nakivale in Mbarara District. The committee then attended a workshop organised by the Office of the Prime Minister, at which the bill was introduced to the members and the salient issues therein highlighted by various stakeholders. 

The committee also scrutinised the relevant documents before it proceeded to scrutinise the bill clause by clause. It then met with a team from the Office of the Prime Minister led by the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to clarify on issues that had been raised in the bill. It is from this procedure that the committee came up with this report that it now presents to the House.

Mr Speaker, the background of the bill is that Uganda has had a long experience with the problem of refugees, which dates back to the 1940s when it first hosted 7,000 refugees in Masindi, Mukono, Mpigi and Soroti districts. This was followed by a refugee influx from Kenya and Sudan in the 1950s. Another influx from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Rwanda and Burundi in the 1960s followed. The third way for refugees was in the 1980s from Sudan.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to beg that the chairperson of the committee simply presents a summary because when we adjourned last, we really put the whole of this report on record. There were details of it and we said it had been saved. So, if he summarised it, it would ease the work.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR LOOTE: Well, that was the summary of the methodology and I think the most important thing is to look at the current policy in Uganda which emphasises those issues on page 2, which highlight our current policies on the refugees and also what is in place for legislation. You will also look at chapter three as well as our observations and recommendations. At least we also found out that the refugees had access to public land. The public land is given to them so that they do not rely so much on the handouts. 

On page 5, you should be aware of the porous nature of Uganda’s borders bordering those countries, which have had a lot of conflict and probleMs And then on page 6, there is also crime against peace within these refugee camps as we discovered when we visited them. 

Also on that page, there is surrender of refugee status. The most interesting one was those who came from Tanzania and they were still there. Also on page 7 you find the refugee appeal board. I think we looked at that and the details are in the report. The time limit within which a person should seek asylum is on page 7. Also the heading of page 8 shows the course of the services of the interpreter at the hearing of an application for refugee status. Those ones are highlighted on page 8 and it goes up to page 9. 

On page 9 again, about refugees and politics, we observed that the refugees should not be involved in the politics of a particular country and outside the country; and then the extradition of refugees from Uganda highlighted on page 9. It goes up to page 10 and then finally our conclusion.

Mr Speaker, I beg to summarise and move that the report to be debated.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. The debate is open.

3.08
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and welcome you back from a very difficult election. I would also like to congratulate all those people who have made it and to thank those who have to go for a five-year recess. This bill was debated before we went for recess and I would like only to make a few comments to support it.

The first is that we, as a country and Africa as a continent, should try to avoid all that can make it possible to create a situation that will result into people becoming refugees in Africa. Issues like internal wars in the same country, interstate wars, discrimination against women, discrimination on race or sex, if we can do away with these, then we would be dealing with the causes of why people should leave their countries to go out to seek asylum.  

Mr Speaker, having said so, I would like to mention that in areas where we have these refugees, there is a big problem that they cause to the environment. They use a lot of the resources of the area to either put up buildings, to get materials for cooking food and by the time they leave the place, the whole environment of the area is very adversely affected. I would, therefore, appeal to the ministry responsible that in such areas, efforts should be made to ensure that the environment is protected, trees are planted to ensure that their stay there would not adversely affect the environment. 

Mr Speaker, as regards the refugees who are in West Nile, particularly those from Sudan, we now have peace in Southern Sudan and we would appreciate if there is a concerted effort to ensure that the refugees who come from Southern Sudan can now go back to their country. I would like the minister to assure us how soon this will be done. 

Mr Speaker, where these people have been staying, some of the areas were not gazetted as land that belongs to government and a lot of development has been done and as they leave these places, how do our people, the local people in West Nile and in whatever area that these refugees have been staying partake of these areas, which have been developed and are now being left open to anybody?  

I would also like to know how the people who want to voluntarily be repatriated are handled? Do they meet the cost of the voluntary repatriation or does the government meet this cost because this comes at their own request and maybe at the time when the ministry is not prepared for it? 

On page 10 of the bill, it is mentioned that a person does not qualify to be granted refugee status if - there are a number of reasons which are given. Now, if somebody comes to Uganda seeking to be a refugee and is already in Uganda and is not granted this status, what happens? Because when I read through the bill, it does not indicate as how such a person would be handled, it only indicates that the person would be refused a status of a refugee but does not effectively indicate how he will be handled. Otherwise, I support the bill. I thank you.

3.12
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee. Mr Speaker, as you noted, the Refugee Bill has been with us for quite some time, probably a year and more, and we are glad that finally the committee has been able to bring this report and helped us to get this law that is badly required in place.

I want to particularly note the fact that the committee was able in its report to point to the involvement of refugees in politics in this country, and that the committee recommended that everything should be done to ensure that refugees do not get involved in the politics of this country.  

We have just come out of the election period and we have widespread allegations on the involvement of refugees in the previous campaigns, both in the northern parts of the country, in areas bordering Southern Sudan and also in my own district of Soroti. We saw Congolese women from nowhere, we did not know how to call them, whether they had come as refugees or as soldiers’ wives but they were very actively involved in the local politics –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you very much, my sister for giving way. I would like to inform you that when our soldiers went to Congo – (Interjections) – but they came and I think they are married to Ugandans. I do not know whether you still regard them as non-Ugandans, but they are married to Ugandans, therefore, they are part of us.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Alice Alaso and the House that, during the last campaigns, we also witnessed a very strange scenario where one of the candidates invited a wife of a former leader of Sudan to come and lobby for him votes from refugees here.  

We saw Mrs Garang campaigning in Mukono and we are very much aware that there are so many Sudanese refugees in Uganda. So, was that in line with the policy or is this law going to help us to avoid such incidents in future?

MS ALASO: I thank you for the information, only that I do not know what finally would constitute the right of those sisters-in-law to vote in this country; whether it is by association with the brothers who brought them or that they really have to have citizenship rights as it were for them to get involved in the politics of Uganda.  

But, on a very serious note, I think it is a very dangerous phenomenon if refugees, who have a short time stake in this country, come around and get involved in determining the future of this country. I want to believe that with the passing of this bill, and with the provision that the committee has asked for some of these, I want to call them offences, will be brought to an end.

Let me take this opportunity also to call for a serious provision of finances to ensure that some of these laws are actually implemented. We –(Interaction)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, my sister for giving way. I think it would be proper for us to set the record straight in that according to our laws, a married woman acquires the domicile of her husband and that acquisition of domicile confers upon her such rights, which include voting. So, in this instance, if the Congolese women were truly married to our own, then that would confer to them a right to vote. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am conscious of the fact that there is a domestic relations bill in this House. I am also conscious of the fact that there are some laws in this country that define what constitutes a marriage. As of now, my limited understanding is to the fact that cohabitation, which is happening between these people and the Congolese women, does not constitute a marriage. I think that is why hon. Dora Byamukama is one of the key brains pushing for the passing of the domestic relations bill, because the domestic relations bill is the one law that recognizes cohabitation. I guess that is why she is pushing for it but –(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Alice Alaso for yielding the Floor. I think the point that is being articulated is very serious, and we need to be guided very properly especially for the many of us who stay at the boarder areas. It has often been reported that foreigners vote in this country and the example that has been articulated by hon. Alice Alaso raises my concern. 

But my point of clarification was, were those Congolese women registered, because if they were registered voters, then the point should be raised on whether our laws for registration of voters permit even foreigners? So, I wanted to seek clarification from my honourable sister if she went further to find out whether those Congolese women were registered or not. 

In my area, Kasese, where refugees came in from Sudan in the 1960s, and from Rwanda and Congo, many of them have been registered appropriately and have access to voting. So, hon. Alaso, what is the situation in Teso so that this House and the Ugandans can be informed? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is an interesting matter about people living at the border. How do you differentiate a Musamya from Kenya from a Musamya from Uganda, an Acholi in Sudan and an Acholi in Uganda? These are the problems, which we have to address. Are you going to differentiate them by their dressing? These are the sort of things that we have to address on this issue. The borders are causing us a problem.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think what is important for this House to note is that the committee also observed this as a very serious concern. I am only expounding the situation as it applied to the recent past, and if you get back to the report, you will actually find the committee expressing the concern of both direct and indirect participation. It, therefore, means that even if the Congolese women who are in Soroti just came there to dance during the campaign time, it was a very serious concern, as it would have a bearing on the campaign process and that is why I am raising this point.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker is the honourable member on the Floor in order to disregard the electoral process, which was very effective? The process of displaying voters’ registers, which lasted for, I think more than 21 days, during which period citizens, including hon. Alaso, were supposed to check whether the people on the registers and their photographs were citizens of this country or not? If that process was successful, which it was, where does hon. Alaso get this imagination that these Congolese women who were dancing suddenly became known and were on the register without being detected? Is she in order to misinform this House of a process that she should have participated in including her own party?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is a point of order raised, but I feel uneasy about ruling one way or the other because this debate is generating matters that are actually in court. Allegations of the Sudanese and the Congolese voting are some of the questions that are going to be raised in court. How do you know that one is Sudanese and not a Ugandan? So let us leave this issue because I see that it is going to prejudice the arguments that are going on. 

For instance when you say that the display of registers – if you challenge this and the other, then you are definitely turning this Parliament into a committee to assess the arguments that have been put in the petition in court. Let us not refer to the elections; let us refer to other issues other than the last elections because this matter has been dealt with in the past, where people said that this issue can be solved by national identity cards, because you may have a problem of a black Americans coming here, he goes to Masaka, and talks fluent Luganda. How will you say that he is not a Muganda or Ugandan?  

These are some of the issues that are involved in this and, therefore, because of what is going on in court, in respect of last elections, I appeal to you honourable members to let us concentrate on other issues rather than this one because it may cause us problems. Continue hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, given your guidance, I will leave that matter except that it was raised prior to the elections. It is actually in this report on page 9, so I am not just bringing it based on the previous elections.  

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate, but I am saying now it has been overtaken by the event of the petition, which is questioning that.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know who is a refugee in this country, because the so-called refugees, for instance the Somalis, are living in Kisenye, in urban area, in flats and on comfortable mattresses! Sometime back I read in the newspapers how they were being transported to the refugee camps and thereafter they came back, and these same refugees bring in their brothers and sisters everyday, especially using these buses from Kenya.  

Who controls the confinement of these refugees within the camps? How do we know who is a refugee and who is not? When you go to Western Uganda, the Rwandese who are supposed to be in refugee camps are not in the camps, they are living with us. Some have even acquired big chunks of land. Take an example of those who crossed from Tanzania and are already getting land titles and there is a problem down there between the so-called refugees and the indigenous people, they are fighting for land. Now who controls refugees in this country and who are the refugees?

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the member holding the Floor that actually in Oruchinga and Nakivale, refugees have acquired land titles and the minister is aware and I do not know how a refugee can acquire a land title with square miles of land. So the issue, which hon. Byabagambi is rising, is important and it should be addressed urgently.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that information. It has actually enriched my point. Mr Speaker, I think this is the only country whereby foreigners walk in and acquire property where they are supposed to be refugees. When you take an example of a refugee camp, let us go to Nakivale, where I am acquainted with, those people - how the government is treating them is not in the way our internal refugees are treated in Northern Uganda. I call them “refugees” really. If you are internally displaced you have left your county and you have left your home, what do I call you? Therefore, there must be some sort of control, which the government must put in place to know the kind of people who are entering into this country, whether they are real refugees or they have come to grab property in Uganda.  

I am sure that the Prime Minister is aware of that and he has been in Western Uganda where the indigenous people down there decided to take it upon themselves to evict some of the refugees from their land. Up to now we have never got any substantive report about those cases. I support the motion but I want the government to control those people entering into this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for Refugees and Disaster Preparedness for bringing this Refugee Bill, and I would also like to thank the committee for the report, though I read it some time back, but I can still remember some few things. This Refugee Bill is actually overdue.  

Mr Speaker, I have experienced both scenarios of being a refugee and also hosting refugees. When I was a refugee in Congo, we were thrown very far away in a camp, isolated; we were given chunks of land to dig for ourselves. After a year, the food from the United Nations was no longer there and we survived in a very hard way. 

Some of us who were qualified had no opportunity of being employed in the government or in any organizations, except in refugee camps, and our health services were just confined to the camps. But when we returned to Uganda and hosted the refugees, it became the reverse. The refugees in Uganda are given jobs, even better jobs than Ugandans, and yet in other countries the refugees are not employed and if they are employed, they are given half pay - the case is true in Kenya and in Congo. So, I think we also in Uganda should do the same because we cannot host people and not be treated the same. 

When it comes to health services, Koboko is at the border of Congo and Sudan and has been hosting refugees all this time. You find that the refugees share our health services and yet we get the same share from central government, the same drugs and the same staff. You find that the people of Koboko really suffer because they are sharing the little resources, and yet one time in the camps when there was Meningitis, they decided to immunize the refugees and left the Ugandans –(Interjection)- yes, the people had to rise and say, “Please, we shall send them away if you do not treat us.” So please, when we are hosting refugees, we should also think of the host people because their resources are shared and they are suffering.

On the other hand, because their food is always provided, the Ugandans become beggars from the refugees because they are given food. So I think in any area where the refugees get the services, if we offer our own services for the refugees, let the United Nations also consider supporting the indigenous people. For example, the Health Centre IV for Koboko could be properly furnished so that it can host the refugees and can provide the best services. Now if you go there, it does not look like a health centre. There are no blankets, you find the staff are very few, and yet it is overburdened with the problem of refugees.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say something on the integration of refugees among the indigenous people. The Rt hon. Prime Minister said that we need to integrate the refugees, but the moment we integrate them among us, they will grab our land as mentioned earlier. Many of our people have lost their land to these refugees. At first they come humbly begging for a small plot of land and you say, “Squat here.”  But after they begin moving slowly by slowly until they push you out of your own plot. So I think we need to have a kind of regulation on what properties refugees can acquire, and what they should not acquire. Otherwise, we cannot become refugees in our own area and the refugees become the owners of the land.  

In this Bill, I have not seen anything about disabilities. We know very well that where there is war, they escape, some run with wounds, others become disabled, and yet there is no specific article to consider the plight of the disabled persons when they are refugees and yet they suffer more than the able-bodied persons. I would like to see there a provision for persons with disabilities.

Then last but not least, I would like also the Bill to specifically address the issue of women. When women are refugees, they suffer more because they are the ones looking for food, they are the ones caring for the sick, and yet they are not catered for. And when it comes to social issues, like when you are brought to the camp, you have not yet been scattered to your respective places, you find that there is a social problem of age. I think we need to include this to cater for the health of refugees in our Bill. I am happy that we are now passing this Bill. I think we are going to be second to Tanzania because in 2002 I had the benefit to go to attend a refugees workshop in Mombasa and we discussed a number of issues. I am happy that we are really putting in place whatever we have discussed. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me start by thanking the governments, present and past, for implementing the relevant documents or provisions of the Geneva Convention and indeed the Constitution. This is good because we are all potential refugees. To some of us who have been refugees before, I think it is important that every country takes note of the human element of those who seek refuge.

Given the fluidity of the political situation in Africa, the laws we make should be as flexible as possible to enable our people, particularly the African people, to move to different places. Where there is prosecution, where there are problems, they should be allowed to go to the neighbouring countries while conflicts in those areas are being sorted out. 

As I have already said, we are all potential refugees and as you know, Mr Speaker, since the 1950s Uganda has had many refugees going out of this country and living in other countries. We have seen many refugees in London, Nairobi and many refugees in Tanzania. So, I think that when we are looking at this law we should not be too selfish to the extent of thinking that Uganda is an isolated place and, therefore, we should not have flexibility in having these other people coming and living here comfortably. 

I, therefore, recommend and agree with the committee’s work in some of the areas they have cited. I wish, however, to advise that when we are making these laws we should not give more facilities to refugees than the indigenous people. They should have access to the normal services like any other Ugandan, but giving them more than the indigenous citizens sometimes causes conflicts. It is here that I agree with the recommendation of the committee that where the question of land comes in, surely government and we the legislators must find an answer. 

For example, we have landless people or people with limited land in Kisoro, Kabale and Bugisu. But you find that when these refugees come, they are given big chucks of land and this area is not handled. I, therefore, request the relevant ministers, particularly the Minister for Lands and the Minister for Refugees, to work out a resettlement policy, which should help our people. 

It is amazing to find people evicted in Bugisu, Kabale and in other places - they have nowhere to go but refugees come and have land. So, there is need for harmonising this policy to make sure that the land that we have is given to Ugandan citizens as well as the refugees.

Thirdly, I would like to talk about the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would love to see the Ministry of Internal Affairs more serious about immigration. As the committee has pointed out, our boarders are not well manned; people are just flocking in, even those who are not supposed to be refugees come here and live comfortably. So, I would request that the Ministry of Internal Affairs be more vigilant. The refugee department should be fully equipped in terms of personnel to make sure that they do their work. Currently, as I know the minister responsible for that is over worked because of lack of technical and well-qualified staff such as sociologists and whatever, to work in that particular department. 

Lastly I suggest, as the committee highlighted on page 7 that we become very flexible about the time when a person should be a citizen of this country, if she is a refugee. If I want to go to Kenya and be a citizen and I apply, it should note that I am a refugee - I should be allowed, if I am an African and I want to stay in that country. Some people have stayed here for a year or two and they may no longer want to go back to their countries of origin, and some of them you will find are highly qualified, technical people and they want to live here. 

That is why you find countries like the United States, where people flock in, there are rules and regulations, but once you are there and they detect your capacity to help that country, you are easily given a job; you are given citizenship and you live there happily. That country’s interest is, “Does this person, who has come in, have capacity to help the United States?” 

I would suggest that we become very flexible on this matter and that for example all those that have been refugees in this country for over a year, if they want can become citizens. Let us go ahead and integrate them in, after all if you look at the migration of Uganda, where have we come from, we have moved up and down. So, what is the importance of having a country like Uganda, with laws and regulations governing the management of this population? This is all I wanted to contribute, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much. 

3.45
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only one small point I want to follow up on hon. Byabagambi’s issue of control. Way back in 1958, I was by then in primary 3, I saw people flocking in from Rwanda and some other countries. They came down here and settled as refugees. They stayed around, and now they have become citizens; nobody has ever asked them whether they are still refugees or how they have become Ugandans and they have never applied to become Ugandans.  

So, the question I wanted to raise: where is the control in this country? It seems this country is free for all; everybody who wants to come in may come and settle down. One starts doing business and nobody cares about them. Mr Speaker, imagine people who came in between 1958 and 1959, they are now citizens. Some of them are even members of Parliament –(Laughter)- so the whole thing is very funny. The situation is so queer that even people from India and other countries - you see a man just coming in and the following day you find him in Kikuubo with a shop –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my friend, for giving way but, you know, these people are no longer called refugees. I think they are the citizens now because you cannot differentiate them. Some of them have abandoned their names; they are now called Matovu, Musoke and so on. So it is very difficult now for us to know –(Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my colleague whether he is aware that there are different forms of citizenship in this country and that if a lady came to Uganda and she gives birth from here that son is automatically a citizen by birth, according to the law of this country? I do not know whether he is aware also that some of these people who came in the 1950s may have been born here and they therefore qualify to be leaders here. Can you really specifically name any Member of Parliament who is supposed to be a refugee? 

MR MWANDHA: I think either Mr Speaker or the minister should assist us to draw a clear distinction between refugees and illegal immigrants. Colleagues are discussing this matter as if the two are the same. And for purposes of understanding the crux of this bill, it is important to understand the difference between the two since even the report of the committee is talking about our borders being porous, people entering and going out. I do not know whether people who are entering and going out are also being treated as refugees. So, it is important to differentiate.

3.50
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing in for the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

The honourable members do know the difference between an illegal immigrant and a citizen. They know, but I think they are on another issue altogether. An illegal entrant is that person who enters Uganda from whichever country without using the legal documents of entry into Uganda, including a visa and others.

A refugee is a person who is expunged and enters Uganda involuntarily because he is running away to save his life from danger in his country. He enters Uganda to have a peace of mind and if possible settle, as the First Deputy Prime Minister does explain in the bill. 

And the honourable members are also aware that at the age of 18 if you are born here, you can choose which country you want to belong. In other words you cannot be an automatic citizen because you are born here. At the age of 18, you can decide which nationality you would like to belong, either your father’s or mother’s. They also know that if you enter this country and follow the regulations and laws of Uganda, the Citizens Act and others, you can become a citizen by naturalisation, which is provided for in the Constitution of Uganda. 

So, members are actually aware, but because of the recent elections and – they are still excited in that field, but that one should not divert the attention of the First Deputy Prime Minister who is piloting this – because there are undertones which we also know very well, but those are because of the excitement of the parliamentary and presidential elections which have been going on. 

Government is aware, especially the immigration department knows very well about the infiltration of refugees and other people into Uganda. But you must remember that we have got 263,000 refugees. Some of them are living in Kampala City and other municipalities. It is very difficult to watch and manage them. 

Uganda has the best policy in the world as far as refugees are concerned. They live in settlements; they do not live in camps. Camps are demarcated areas where a refugee needs a permit to leave in order to go to a market place - but a settlement in the true African setting. In fact, the First Deputy Prime Minister should in future be considered for the Nobel peace prize for keeping nationals of other countries peacefully in Uganda in settlements instead of encampments. And as a general, he knows what an encampment and a settlement are. In a settlement you are free to cultivate; your children can go to school, you can – but if a refugee is a doctor, do you want him to remain in Nakivale? Would he not be useful to your son in Mulago Hospital? Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give that information.

MR KALULE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for the information he has given me. But as I pointed out, my interest was on controls, because if we are not careful we might very soon flood this country with non-Ugandans. You will appreciate that if you carefully looked at our population progression, you would be surprised how fast it has been growing. I remember in 1959, Uganda had about six million people, but as of now, a period of about 40 years, we have already clocked 27 million. One of the reasons is because we are not controlling the inflow of people into this country. When you go to other countries, you do not just go in and automatically become a citizen; there are some controls but here we do not have any controls. 

Secondly, there is need at this material time to have a number of social workers in those areas where we have got so many refugees to harmonise their relationship with the indigenous Ugandans. Because we know of areas, which are a source of conflicts and if these conflicts are not controlled we may be heading for more trouble. So, I would suggest that this department of refugees takes keen interest in relationships between indigenous Ugandans and the refugees so that we ensure harmony within these societies. 

Otherwise I fully support the motion, but as I said, I am interested in seeing more controls on the whole issue of refugees, how and when they should become citizens and there should be a formal way for these people to become Ugandans. We are not against them becoming Ugandans but let us have a formal way just as other countries do. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But in which formal way did you become a citizen of Uganda?

MR KALULE: The formal way I am talking about, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you, which formalities do you have?  

MR KALULE: One of the formal ways I am talking about is that when a person becomes a refugee, he should not just become a Ugandan because he came in as a refugee and then settled down. You know, there is no formal registration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is there anywhere you registered as a Ugandan? Maybe you got a passport, yes, but rather than that which record do you have to call yourself a Ugandan?

MR SSENGO: That is exactly what I am talking about, Mr Speaker, that there must be a record so that you do not just come in and you become a Ugandan just like that.

3.58
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report and for having visited my constituency in the course of compiling this report. 

I have got one area of concern and that is access to land by refugees.  My constituency happens to host two sprawling refugee camps and while I have no problem with the Government policy of ensuring that refugees access land so that they can be self reliant in terms of food. I am as concerned as the committee is, that these refugees end up being more comfortable than the citizens. They have got big chunks of land, and yet the nationals are landless.  

I would, therefore, want to agree with the recommendations of the committee that the size of the refugees’ settlements is reduced and the land which is retrieved be given to the nationals.  It is in that light that I would want to recommend to Government that one refugee resettlement scheme in Kyaka county should be degazetted and the land be given to the landless nationals.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.00
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also want to add my voice to the issues my colleagues are raising.   It is true that refugees in Uganda have been given the hospitality that a human being deserves and I think that is good.  

While that is good, we also need to appreciate the fact that we have not been able to support our nationals to also feel the same way the refugees feel.  The refugees are basically in the hands of United Nations High Commission for Refugees with implementing partners. They have a big budget; they are able to give these refugees skills. They are given inputs; you know our people give them land, but they get all the necessary training that a human would require, including seeds, and even they are helped up to the level of harvesting and transporting.

Immediately refugees are settled, all the services are provided. Water, for instance in Adjumani District where the refugees are settled, the water coverage is up to 99 percent, yet amongst the nationals it is even less than 40 percent.  And unfortunately water coverage is calculated in the country, that is, within the refugee settlement within my district is put together with those for nationals and the average for the district is computed.  

It gives a very bad impression for development of an area where refugees are hosted.  Schools and health centres are built and everything is done for them; even salaries are paid to workers in the settlements. Actually, Mr Speaker, we need to look into that, because the salaries paid for people either teaching, working in health centres, or for services for refugees are different from salaries paid to our workers.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Speaker, I think there are two things, which we should be clear on.  One is a refugee.  A refugee is somebody who leaves home under fear of death and runs away into another country.  Now, let us put ourselves in that position of being a refugee.  Whatever you do for that person, whoever he is in a foreign country cannot be equal to what he would get in his own country.  That is point 1 and those of us who have lived outside our own country know what it means.  However well you are looked after, even living in a house and teaching like some of us were doing, you still feel homesick, which other people in that country do not feel.

Secondly, the honourable member on the floor knows that the United Nations High Commission for refugees has the mandate of looking after refugees and they try to make life lively for them. They cannot do it for citizens the way they do it for refugees.  Now, to be jealous of what the United Nations High Commission does for refugees is to be very, very unfair and I would like the honourable member on the floor to withdraw.  

The First Deputy Prime Minister invited me to Adjumani to open a school, which had been built by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. That school is open to all children, you know, and there are many places in Adjumani for refugees but where everybody else goes.  So, even if salaries are paid by foreign organisations like United Nations High Commission for refugees, please do not complain that they are paying higher salaries, because some of those are being paid on a different scale. They are not being paid on a Ugandan scale.  So, I really want us to be clear on this.

Lastly, let us not be jittery, you know this phobia against people coming in, taking our land and doing all sorts of things.  I am glad that Uganda is humane, but that does not mean that we should make them presidents of our country and everything, but being that we treat human beings who are in pain of leaving their own countries humanely is a commendable act. Other than making our First Deputy Prime Minister a Nobel prize winner, we shall submit Uganda for the Nobel prize.

MS SSENTONGO:  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank my colleague, the Minister, for giving way.  I just want to find out whether those refugees have special working conditions, which are not similar to the workers of Uganda, because if it is the case, we want to find the criterion.  You have just recklessly said that they are getting salaries according to the standards of the United Nations, but what is the criterion?  I do not understand, it defeats my understanding and I want a clarification on that.

MS ERIYO: I want to thank my colleague for his interjection.  I was not expressing any jealousy against refugees, if he heard me well. I was actually lamenting that we as a country are not able to provide our people with what they should have, and you can imagine a situation where people may get emotional because refugees are getting good services while they are not.  

You compare refugees to internally displaced people (IDPs) who do not even receive food for three to four months and yet the refugees are fed everyday, given free land, skills, inputs, and free education which is not in the IDPs.  It is not a question of jealousy, but a concern I am raising and if he heard me well, I even mentioned the issue of budget.  We as a country we have inadequate budget to support our people.

But I appreciate the fact that we have been able to host these refugees and make them feel happy and forget about their problems to the extent that some of them feel too good to go back.  Some of them stay in the refugee settlements but have been able to buy land and construct commercial buildings. They are in businesses because they know their families are being fed and yet our people cannot afford that.  If we as a country can also support our people to that level, I would be very happy, Mr Speaker.

Another concern I would like to raise here is that some of these refugees go to the extent of discriminating against nationals who are employed for instance in the schools in the refugee settlements.  We have a case in point where the refugees threw out a Ugandan who was a headmaster in a refugee school because they wanted their own person to be the headmaster of that school.  So, the bill should also address those kinds of issues.

On the issue of the porous borders and people coming in and settling at will, it is high time we gave our citizens identity cards for easy identification. It will be difficult for an adult from elsewhere to just come and obtain an identity card unless there are fraudulent ways of issuing them. National identity cards are the most important solution to this refugees’ problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.10
MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for the report they have produced.  As hon. Jessica Eriyo has mentioned about porous borders, it is my major concern and the committee indicated in their report that the immigration department is understaffed.  I would like to request Government to take immediate action on staffing of that department in order to control people coming in and going out at will, which is very dangerous to our nation.    

Mr Speaker, the problem is that the people who are bringing in refugees are our members; what I mean they are already Ugandans.  Like you find a Ugandan Munyarwanda, who you cannot differentiate from a refugee. These people come in and settle with their relatives who later on become citizens and buy land. In areas like Nakasongola where we have absentee landlords, they access the landlords who stay in Kampala, buy the land off them, then for us who are down there, just see them coming and settling in the area. 

We are having a problem of strangers in Nakasongola district who buy land, acquire land titles then mistreat our citizens who have been on that piece of land for a long time. I have a feeling that some of the people who come in are non-citizens, so there has to be measures on how to control them because it is not good enough for refugees to own land when citizens do not own land. I do not know the procedure that is followed.

MR BAGUMA: Thank you Mr Speaker and my colleague across.  Land where we have refugee settlements is Government land; it forms part of the land bank of Government. People who are displaced from their home and come for asylum in Uganda are only allocated pieces that measure 100 metres by 50 metres only.  This is about two acres and this land is not titled.  

Where, however, it is depicted that an individual with refugee status has bought land from a citizen outside the settlement, this matter will be tackled. And last year, the First Deputy Prime Minister conducted an exercise of surveying all Government land categorised as refugee settlements. This question of land is being handled especially in the Nakivale, Rukinga area and Bamwanja area where people went out of the refugee settlement and settled in villages in the neighbourhood.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, what could be the law to prevent a refugee getting a lease?

MR BAGUMA: Mr Speaker, whereas 237(3) of the Constitution and Section 41 of the Land Act indicate how a non-citizen acquires leasehold in Uganda, not freehold, not Mailo but leasehold and not customary, this non-citizen is not defined as a refugee; a refugee is a special status.  This is an alien in special circumstances and is defined under this law.

THE SPEAKER: Does it rule out the law you have quoted, because a refugee could be a Munyarwanda and he gets a lease from Ssekandi? A refugee is something, which is temporary because he may go back to Rwanda still having his lease in Uganda. What is the law?

MR BAGUMA: Sir, let me search for the law.

THE SPEAKER: But there is no law, people are just sentimental. A refugee may get his money and say, “Ssekandi, I want a lease”; and Ssekandi wants money, he gives it. What are you going to say, are you going to cancel that lease?

MS MASIKO:  Mr Speaker, I would also like an issue clarified by the honourable minister.  I am a member of the committee and when we visited Olukinga we discovered that some land had actually been taken.  In your statement you have just said that the Government is working on it to rectify the situation, but I would like to know how far has it gone so that the land that was earmarked for the refugees is protected? I just need more information about that issue.

MR BAGUMA: Mr Speaker, before Independence celebrations last year, Olukinga, Nakivale, Rwamwanja, Kyaka 1, Kyaka 2, Kyangwali were all surveyed.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information he has given. What I want to say is, if a refugee can have land as the minister has said that they are given two acres. I would like to tell you that in my district you find that the absentee landlords sell land to mostly Banyarwanda and I am wondering where they are coming from?  All the complaints I am getting in my office as an area MP are always the same complaints, that is why there is this influx of people coming in and they are not registered –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this term “Banyarwandas” has caused us a lot of probleMs  You find Ugandan Banyarwanda in Uganda and you find the Banyarwanda in Rwanda, so how will you tell that this is a Munyarwanda from Rwanda Republic and this is a Munyarwanda from Uganda?  

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  That is why I said in the first place that the issue of the immigration department being strengthened should be taken as a serious matter.  I said in the beginning that you could find a citizen who is a Munyarwanda with a relative in Rwanda but a refugee here who will come to settle with him and later on this person acquires land. You will not be able to identify him if he came in without being registered.  So, you find that he will easily be absorbed among our people. The ministry does not have proper channels through which to know who is and is not a citizen   acquiring land.  

As I was still explaining, I said in my district we are having the absentee landlords who are selling land to people in Kampala. They negotiate and sell from Kampala not knowing who is on the piece of land.  When the buyers go, they fence off their land leaving a person who has been on that land for almost 50 years with only a compound and a house where he is sleeping.  Some of them are being chased off; we have tried to control this situation but we are failing.  We are calling upon the Ministry of Lands to be very careful when handling land titles.  It is a serious matter, we do not know whether the people who are acquiring land are real citizens or not.  

Hon. Jessica Eriyo talked about refugees acquiring land and building commercial houses. I think this is becoming too lenient; a refugee to own land and build a house when our people are squatters is being too lenient. We should first think about our people.  Giving two acres of land to refugees when a citizen is crying out for an acre where to grow crops –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think, honourable member, that there is a very big problem of verifying who is a citizen of Uganda because you may think I am a Ugandan when I am not?  There is need to have an exercise to verify all of us to see why you call yourself a Ugandan.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think this is when I buy the issue of the honourable member who said that we need identity cards. It should be taken as a serious matter and the immigration department should be strengthened –(Interruption)  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker and honourable member, my information is in the form of a question. Has it ever occurred to the honourable member that it is a matter of time that the Rwandans she is bothered about will be members of the same country as she is when we become a federation of East Africa?  It is a matter of time; it will come; nobody is going to stop it and honourable members should start adjusting their thinking in that direction.  Thank you, Sir. 

MS TUBWITA: I would like to thank the honourable minister for his contribution but I would like to say, let us first solve the current problem.  We should look at the current situation before looking at what might come in the future.  

When we solve that problem, it will limit refugees from being so much involved in everything as real citizens, because if we do not control it now we might find that they may even get directly involved in the local politics without being controlled.  They will stand without being identified and you will find them leading this country. So, I think it is high time that control measures are put in place so that we can stop them from taking up big places in the country.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have dealt with the policy matter. We shall legislate when we go to the Committee Stage because that is where the actual making of the law is. 

4.21
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  From what has transpired, it is becoming clear that one of the biggest problems we have is to know who is a Ugandan first.  As we talk we do not know who is a Ugandan, and because that is not known, we do not even know who then is a refugee or an illegal immigrant.  Before we go into all these details, I would ask Government to establish the question of Ugandan citizenship so that every body knows that these currently are Ugandans, then it will be possible to enforce the law that we are implementing.  We are now putting in place a very good law but it will be very difficult to enforce because we do not know who is a Ugandan first, therefore, it becomes difficult to know who is a refugee.

Two, as I talk, it looks like it is very simple but I had the benefit of being in this very House to be sworn in as a deputy minister after somebody who was also a deputy minister but who only a few years afterwards went back to his own country.  It is true!  So, these are issues we are to face and if somebody can become a deputy minister in this country –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, since the deputy minister who masqueraded as a Ugandan left, is there any harm in knowing who he was?

MR KAWANGA: He did not masquerade, he was a deputy minister, we all know the late Rwigyema, and he was a deputy minister here.  So, this illustrates the kind of problems we have to handle and because of that, I know as a lawyer since I have handled certificates of titles of people who lived here for very many years, they got titles and they went back home –(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA: Mr Speaker, for the record it is not fair to claim that the late Rwigyema was not a Ugandan when he cannot actually be here to say otherwise. So for the record that information should be withdrawn from our record.

COL BUTIME: Just to follow up, Mr Speaker, what hon. Baguma Isoke has said, the hon. Member cannot prove to us that at the time Gen. Rwigyema was appointed Deputy Minister of Defence he was not a citizen.  

MR KAWANGA: All I am saying is that the situation is such that somebody can be both Ugandan and Rwandese at the same time.  However, be that as it may –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. What I told you really, a black American from Atlanta speaking fluent Rutooro could stay in Fort Portal and be regarded as a Mutooro.  How would you say he is not?  

MR KAWANGA: Therefore, it is in light of that that I am now talking about enforcement.  It is useless to put in place a law, which you cannot effectively enforce. That is why I am suggesting that after we have passed this law, whoever is responsible for enforcing it should make sure that the regulations put in place are tight. We should also have trained manpower and the facilities to effectively enforce it. Now in Uganda, it is even difficult to distinguish between economic refugees and political refugees.  There are times when our neighbours come in big numbers with their cattle in search of water and pastures. Are these immigrants? Do they ever go through any process of immigration to enter this country?

When we were in Karamoja the other time, we were told that the Pokot keep coming back under force. How do you handle such cases?  How do you document them to ensure that they go back?  What if they now came as refugees? How would you distinguish them from the ones who came looking for water and grass? Therefore, the actual enforcement is the problem. Do we have these facilities in the Immigration Department?  If we do not, then we are putting the law in place, which will have no meaning.

The kind of discontent that the honourable Member for Nakasongola is talking about arises from such issues. She sees people whom she thinks are not Ugandans owning land, when her fellow Ugandans do not.  However, these may be investors, or even just mere enterprising people, who came with their problems and work. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want would like to inform the Member for Nakasongola that not everybody who speaks Runyarwanda is a Rwandese.  There are Bafumbira in Uganda who are Ugandans.  When they go to Nakasongola and purchase land, they might be thought to be Rwandese.  Some of us who speak Runyarwanda and happen to come from that end get disturbed by some of the statements made in this House.  Surely, we are Ugandans. If I went to Nakasongola tomorrow to buy land, nobody would prevent me from buying it.  This is a problem, which I think must be solved by issuing national identity cards. In Kenya, they have national identity cards just as in Tanzania. Even Rwandese who have just gone back recently, have been issued with national identity cards.  Why not Uganda?  Thank you.

MR KAWANGA: I think the submission of hon. Mutuluuza makes the point. We must know who Ugandans are regardless of what language they speak. Even in Rakai District, people come in with cattle and Ugandans complain that Rwandese have come to take their land. These people could even be Ugandans living in Tanzania or Rwanda.  I support the motion.

4.31
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you Mr Speaker.  I congratulate the committee on their report. However, there are about four issues which they should also bring out clearly so that we conclude these issues appropriately.

We are all aware that the instability in this region has brought over 230,000 refugees in this country.  However, we are also under international obligation to protect and support the survival of these refugees.  From the debates in this House, I realise about three issues, which must be sorted.  

Refugees are people who run out of their country under the threat of death, and that is very clear.  However, in this country, we have what we call “economic refugees”.  These just come because they are looking for land and survival.  These cannot be compared with refugees who are in the camps.  I think the Government and the ministry concerned should find a way of sorting out these economic refugees so that we deal with them accordingly. 

There are illegal immigrants and these are quite many.  They come from Rwanda, Tanzania, Kenya and many other places without going through the immigration laws of this country. If we lamp them together with the refugees, it will be very difficult to sort out the issue of refugees.

We have what we call in science, “migrants”.  If I moved from Kigezi to Kibaale, I am not a refugee.  If I came from Isingiro to Nakasongola, I am not a refugee; actually, these are internal- however, people categorise them as refugees. People along the cattle corridor, move from Northern Tanzania, in Burundi, Rwanda, through the cattle corridor to Nakasongola, and for a long time, they have been here.  They even know these places more than the people who claim are Ugandans in these areas.  They have been there for a long time, only that they move depending on seasons.  

Therefore, I request the committee to look at these three categories of people in this country. We need to sort out the issue of the law on refugees.  Otherwise, it will be very difficult, because it seems we are lumping these categories and calling them refugees. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.35
DR OKULO EPAK: (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, I did not want to talk about this, but I think we have undergone a lot of change in this country.  

I lived in a period when Uganda was famous for being very humanitarian and kind towards refugees.  There were even days we were advocating for integration of refugees with the citizenry.  However, what I have heard in the debate here is evidence of a big change of attitude and probably even culture. 

For instance, on page four, “The committee was however concerned that the refugees in Uganda live very comfortable lives.” Honestly, I do not know what comfort is. For a refugee to live “a very comfortable life” is an overstatement. A refugee suffers very serious emotional strains and alienation.  Whatever you measure comfort by would have to be very questionable. Some of you colleagues who are making these statements probably have never been refugees in their life. 

I was a refugee in Kenya and a lecturer in the University of Nairobi and I was living in very good houses, driving my car and many other good things. However, I was never very comfortable. There are emotional and psychological problems, which a refugee suffers. You should not underrate these refugees by making this kind of statement. This really spoils Uganda’s good name. Uganda has had a reputation for caring for refugees and people who suffer having fled from trouble in their own countries.  However, the attitude I am getting from the young people here today is very shocking. 

The committee recommends that the refugee policy in Uganda should be revised with a view to making refugees prefer-What this statement is saying is that our policy should be absolutely cruel to refugees, that they should hate to be in Uganda and want to run back to the fire from which they fled.  This is outrageous.  I cannot imagine that we would be here as mature legislators, making such statements. If these papers got anywhere, they would surely embarrass this country.  Members should remember that we also have our refugees in other countries.

A question of refugees is a matter of international convention and international obligation. That is how we handle them, not under our own imaginations.  In any case, the term “refugee” is a status; it is not a wish. It is not a thinking. We should now be talking about some people with this status, not somebody who speaks Rwandese or somebody who is a Somali.  Unless those Somali and Rwandese have the status of a refugee, you cannot simply say they are all refugees. It is very unfortunate for legislators to be talking like this.

There is something serious lacking in this report. We have categories of refugees: Those who are destined to urban areas and those who are destined to rural areas.  This report has largely dealt with refugees whose destinations are rural areas.  There are huge numbers of refugees in urban areas and I would wish the responsible minister or the committee to tell us how this category has been treated in their work. I was a refugee just as my friend Prof. Kabwegyere with whom we were living in the same apartment. (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: One of the sufferings the refugee goes through is stigmatisation. You are stigmatised and abused. I remember one time I was seated with a few Ugandan friends in Ngong Hills Hotel. We were talking and somebody came and said, “Look at these fellows. How can you have Amin in charge of your country?  You are just here enjoying Kenyatta’s…” We walked away in shame. Stigmatisation, however comfortable you may look, haunts you. At the place of work even when you have a job, things are terrible. You are always second hand, even when you are a professor. You are hardly treated like any other person.  

In one case I remember The Weekly Review which carried a cartoon of a Ugandan woman, like Lawino with extended buttocks, following demonstrations in Nairobi streets by housewives who were claiming that these Ugandan refugee women had now taken over their husbands’ duties.  This was very painful. It was as if there was a swarm of prostitutes who had invaded the whole country.  These are things that hurt any human being in the status of a refugee.  

Lastly, in order to buy land in Nakasongola, you do not have to be a native of Nakasongola. We should get this point clear.  A landowner in Nakasongola wants to sell land and he meets a Kabwegyere who has the money. There is no reason the land should be bought by only a Nakasongola person. There are laws, which protect squatters and bonafide occupants. Leaders should be careful not to cause trouble. If a leader speaks on behalf of the population about land being taken by foreigners, with paranoia about Banyarwanda, we shall have a problem facilitated by a Member of Parliament, who may think that she is doing a good job when in fact she is creating trouble for her area.  Otherwise, I am sorry for the interruption. 

MS TUBWITA: Honourable minister, my statement did not mean that one must be a native of Nakasongola to own land there.  My concern was about absentee landlords and the people who come in to buy land.  How sure are we that they are citizens of this country?  I did not say that one has to be a resident of Nakasongola District.  My concern is how do we identify them. I talked of a category, which is coming in.  How do we differentiate a category of Ugandans and that of non-citizens?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you must concede that as of now, we have a problem of identifying who is a Ugandan and who is not.  It is a general problem, which we must address.  

DR OKULO: I thank Prof. Kabwegyere.  This statement was very unfortunate. Those of us who have been refugees know what it means to live comfortable lives in a foreign land. 

I thank Prof. Kabwegyere for bringing in the aspect of stigmatisation.  I do not see what would stop a non-citizen, an investor or even a rich refugee from acquiring land as a lease from the landowner or a willing seller.  Are you going to stop me from selling my land to anybody simply because of your own redirections?  We put land in the market and whoever has money is free to buy. 

We are not saying that all refugees are paupers. Some of them are the richest people in the world. They simply live outside their own countries for political reasons. Here we are looking at it in a mediocre way, claiming that once you are a refugee, you cannot afford to live comfortably. I think we should be a little more humane. 

A refugee is a humanitarian concern and it is addressed by international convention to which we have conceded. If the UN takes care of their refugees in any country and your own government cannot take care of you who are living in the neighbourhood of a refugee settlement, what reason do you have to be jealous?  You should be angry with your own government who cannot make your standard of living good.  This attitude is very dangerous.

We in Africa cannot even collect money for humanitarian support of own home people. We have to beg foreigners to come to our rescue through NGOs and relief agencies, because our own attitude is such that we are not kind.  We should develop some kindness. 

I grew at a time when refugees were really well received, well treated and well handled. They went to school and hardly anybody cared about this.  Of course, the question of politics has now come in. You wake up in the morning and find that a refugee is a very serious political person at your own expense.  These are now new developments but whatever it is, I think it should be handled at a political level. You have the power to vote and to de-campaign anybody on any other grounds. If you have missed to de-campaign somebody on those grounds then it is very unfortunate. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I did not want to talk about this topic, but I think we have lost our humanitarian feeling. Sitting here and listening to us saying, “Treat them as cruelly as possible so that they can run back to their own countries.”  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the bill gets the second reading so we may go to Committee Stage tomorrow.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, would you allow us to debate in light of the fact that we are prepared to go to Committee Stage tomorrow? I thought that we were terminating debate because we wanted to go to Committee Stage but if we are terminating debate to go home, we should allow ourselves to debate. [Hon. Members: “You have just come.”] Mr Speaker, I hear people saying that I have just come but that is not true. We have televisions everywhere in this Parliament and I have followed the debate right from the start. I want to make my contribution.  

THE SPEAKER: The general debate was to articulate the policy. The actual implementation of the policy is at the Committee Stage.  Therefore, anybody who has a policy to effect in this bill should be ready tomorrow when we deal with particular clauses. 

MR SABIITI: There are issues, which were raised by a number of Members of Parliament and procedurally I would have expected the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister responsible for Refugees to respond to these issues.

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with all these matters tomorrow. There are other reasons we are adjourning, which involve a   state function.  Therefore, we adjourn until tomorrow. I do not know what the road-shedding roster will be tomorrow but all the same we shall sit at 10.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until 23 March 2006 at 10.00 O’clock)

