Tuesday, 20 March 2012

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and I want to inform you that later this month, we shall be hosting the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting. Consequently, we may need to stop working on Thursday so that we can release both the Members and the staff to prepare for our guests. Some of them have started arriving, but the biggest number is arriving from 26th and onwards. 

We shall have to use today, tomorrow and Thursday to do all the work that is urgent, then we shall have a break, go for Easter, and then resume again after Easter. 

Early this month, I went to New York to attend a meeting on the status of women with a small delegation. The report will be brought here, but I just wanted us to discuss the emancipation of the rural woman. I also had an opportunity to be invited to Washington to meet Congresswoman, Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic Minority Leader. She was the first woman Speaker in the House of Representatives in the US.

I met Ambassador Cason, who worked in Uganda for a long time. I also met Louis Kwan, who came here to launch the Global Health Initiatives on behalf of Mrs Clinton, and I also met officials of USAID. Majorly, my interest was to increase interaction between the US House of Representatives and Uganda Parliament. We shall soon develop memorandums of understanding which will enable us to work closely together.

I am happy to report that I have just handed over nine ambulances - real ambulances this time, and not pick-ups. I want to thank the Minister of Health because they were from the savings they made in their ministry. They have assured me that there are another 21 coming. So, today, I handed over to Naguru Hospital, Dokolo, Kamwenge, Kayunga, Kamuli, Bundibugyo and Rakai districts. I have been assured that two others for Mubende and Masaka districts are in the offing. Another 19 are also being procured. I think all the districts of Uganda will be covered with ambulances. 

2.44
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I am rising on a matter of national importance, and this one concerns the money that was meant for the bicycles of LC I chairmen in the whole of Uganda, from Kitgum up to Kisoro district.

On 8th November 2011, we had some statements from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige seated in front of me here. Even the Minister of Internal Affairs talked about it. The problem was how money was given to bring bicycles for these LC I chairmen in the village. 

When you go to villages, my municipality has 52 LCIs. The question is, “Where are the bicycles that were meant for these LCIs who do not get salary even when they were meant to be given salary. They were also meant to be given bicycles to facilitate work in their LC I stations. 

As you are aware, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, was interdicted because of that problem. Procurement officers in the same ministry were interdicted. Some other people were interdicted.

The Ministry of Local Government promised to come back to tell us how far they would have gone with investigations. The Minister of Internal Affairs also promised to come here to give a statement, and as far as I am concerned, I am very sure the Director CID had those reports.

What I do not understand is, if the CID has finished the investigations and possibly the files have been forwarded to the DPP, what happened to these people? We come here and talk that people are stealing Government money, but when people are interdicted, you see them putting on weight and monies are not recovered!

That is one of the reasons people call this a rumbling Parliament. I want us to make sure that we look for this money. If somebody took the money meant for bicycles, what has happened?

I am at pain and I am very sure that the whole country is at pain to see people taking bicycles meant for LC I chairmen back in our villages. I want the intervention of this Parliament in order for the Minister of Local Government to tell us.

MR SEMULI: This is a very serious issue, I was moving around in Buwekula, the chairpersons are now getting demoralised. The last time the Minister of Local Government was here, he promised to show us where we they have reached. What is disturbing the nation -(Mr Sanjay Tana rose_)

THE SPEAKER: He is just giving information; you can only seek clarification from hon. Bitekyerezo.

MR SEMULI: The last time the Minister for Local Government was here, he informed the House that he will be back to show us how far the Government has reached in handling this issue.

What is disturbing the nation is that this House is working, but not completing the process. What the nation wants to hear is how far we have reached in terms of implicating the people concerned. This business of saying that we are fighting corruption when at the end of the day the person is not legally implicated, we will be doing nothing.

MR TANA: I would like to seek clarification from my colleagues who have submitted. Both of them have referred to LC I chairpersons in their constituencies and in Uganda. To the best of my knowledge we do not have LC I chairpersons on the ground. There was supposed to be an election held for LC I chairpersons, which LC I chairpersons are they referring to?

THE SPEAKER: These LC Is are the ones who were there before the elections. Since we have not held the elections, they are the ones entitled to those bicycles. They were promised those bicycles.

DR BITEKYEREZO: One of the reasons you see me rising is, if somebody stole bicycles meant for LCIs and you hear that a person has died before the investigations are concluded - I want this Parliament to task the relevant ministries so that we know those who are implicated in taking the bicycles. They should be properly prosecuted and the money is recovered. This may prevent some people from dying.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a matter for debate. He was just raising an issue, which I want the Government to respond to. What has happened to the issue of the bicycles? I think the country needs to know. When I go to the village, they say, “Where are our bicycles?” 

2.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we are all aware, this Parliament, through the Committee of Local Governments, investigated the disappearance of $1.7million, which was meant to purchase the first batch of bicycles. The House later on directed that those officials who had been involved be interdicted and prosecuted. 

The Head of the Public Service, indeed, interdicted the Permanent Secretary, and the Acting Permanent Secretary interdicted the officials involved. The accounting officers in other ministries also went on to interdict the officials who had been involved. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister also tasked the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Director of CID, together with the DPP, to carry out criminal investigations with a view to securing criminal prosecution. The report of the CID, as far I know, is not yet out. The last time I wrote to the Director of CID asking for this report was two weeks ago, but to date I have not got a response. I would like to request that my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, be given opportunity to comment on the progress of the investigations by the CID because although I am the Minister of Local Government, I do not have direct control over CID.

On the balance of the money of $2.5 million, I would like to say that I brought a statement from Bank of Uganda to this House to show that this money was still on the account. I would like to report that up to now, this money is still on that account. If the House wants more proof, I can bring it.

I would like to add that the Ministry of Local Government has advertised for the procurement of bicycles using that balance of $2.5 million. Of course, it is not enough – the Attorney-General was directed by this House and I also wrote to him to embark on the proceedings to recover the $1.7 million, which was stolen. I can report that the Attorney-General has written to me in affirmation. Since the Attorney-General is present in the House, he can explain the steps he has taken in recovering this money.

Madam Speaker, as soon as the procurement process for the bicycles on the value equivalent to $3.5 million is done, we shall sit in Cabinet and in consultation with the Committee on Local Government; we will agree on how these bicycles will be distributed to the LC I chairpersons. In the meantime, the recovery of the $1.7 million is still going on; it is being handled by the Attorney-General.

As already said, the interdiction of the officials was done by the ministry. What is remaining is the report of the CID to enable the DPP determine whether they should be prosecuted or not. I do not have powers to take a decision to prosecute any person. The people who have the powers are represented in this House by the line ministers – my colleagues can make comments if they are required to do so. That is all I can give so far.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the interest of the population and in view of the fact that we are going for a recess on Thursday, can I ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us the status report by Thursday? Okay, let us hear from hon. Yona Musinguzi. Only two minutes, please.

2.58
MR YONA MISINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to represent the views and complaints of the defunct KCC staff with whom I worked as a councillor before joining Parliament. A group of these councillors has called me to several meetings to request me have their problem voiced over to this House.

According to them, there is too much unrest and many of them have been mistreated. That is why they are seeking help from this House –(Interjections)– please, allow me present my views.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the problems of the former KCC workers rotate on what I may term as the organisational starting salary structures. They were called in a meeting by the Executive Director on 7 March –(Interruptions)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is, I raised this same matter of KCC vis-a-vis KCCA in another form here as a matter of national importance. My point was about the fate of the old and new structure, but the ruling was - the salary gaps; the high, low and middle; and the irregularity in the whole system; and I recall that hon. Muruli Mukasa made a pledge to give a statement on the status quo of the timeline. 

I imagine that what my colleague is raising is exactly the same. I do not intend to stifle what he is saying; I just wanted to give that information.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you very much my honourable colleague. Yes, most of the time we have been talking about the salary structure, but I am talking about the starting structure. The KCCA Act mandates the Executive Director to communicate and implement only lawful decisions taken by the authority. This structure is meant for the council of the Authority. But you realise that the Executive Director did not involve the Authority in designing this structure. She just designed her own structure without the recommendations of the Authority and submitted it to Public Service.

In the circumstances, may I know from the Minister of Public Service if this structure has been approved or not. I am saying this because according to her letter, she called a meeting with the workers on the subject to approve the KCCA organisational structure. I have a copy of that letter with me here. 

The workers of the defunct KCC have been left in suspense yet we have to appreciate the fact that they also did some work. The Executive Director came with her team, the so-called consultants. We all know their problems. They are consultants; they came and did their work, but to tell you, these people came into offices of the former members who were already there. You know, having a thousand supervisors on you; rotating around you, assigned the same duties, performing the same work in the office,; and he is a consultant. That is not to talk about their earnings. 

We all know about their earnings and all its problems. The former workers are complaining that the consultants – even after their work of consultancy, were given appointment letters. I have a copy –(Interjections)- I have numerous appointment letters of the same people who came under the guise of consultants and ended up becoming officials of KCCA without following proper procedures of getting jobs in a public institution. 

This has caused too much unrest among the workers. Actually, to be a consultant, you should have experience of 15 years. One of them whom I know graduated in 2010. He got a pass degree from Makerere University. He cannot even enroll for LDC. He cannot even be employed in Public Service. (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for you to conclude. Go to the prayers. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, as a result of this unrest, two people have committed suicide. One of them was a PhD student. He jumped from the first floor of DAG hall and killed himself. We have buried him. The other person hanged himself. Two others have run mad. 

My prayers before this House are; the said organisation’s salary/staffing structure be subjected to proper procedure before implementation. 

Secondly, absorption of the former KCC staff into the KCCA structure through a validation exercise;

Investigation of the secret and irregular recruitment of more than 500 employees, who have not gone through the right procedures.

Workers pray that since the consultants have finished their work, they should go back to URA, since most of them are from there. They are actually earning double salary both from URA and KCCA. 

The so-called consultants should be investigated – 

THE SPEAKER: There is some information from the former VP.

MR BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter that is being raised by my friend is a very important matter. Some of us who saw the city of Kampala in the 60s know how it looked; beautiful greenery, and every house on two acres of land; but now, it’s 50 by 100. (Laughter) 

Recently, we have seen chaos between two administrators fighting each other and we the grass, suffering. I do not know who is in charge of KCCA. Is it the Mayor, elected by the people of Kampala and his council or somebody appointed?

Because of the importance of this matter, I would propose very strongly that we need to put up a body of this Parliament to look through all these affairs; to find out whether we made a bad law or a good law;to find out whether it is important to regularise the matters of the two groups of people that manage KCCA; to also find out if this salary structure, which I hear is very big, is necessary to run the city of Kampala or is it put there for some people to get rich quickly?

Madam Speaker, I urge, if it is possible, to have an ad hoc committee, but not the social services committee, to look through these affairs quickly, and we come up with something conclusive. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had requested the Minister for the Presidency to come with a statement, and I know that he sent a statement to my office, which I sent to the Clerk. Before we set up an ad hoc committee, let us hear from the minister, because there are questions we asked him to answer. I will put it on the Order Paper, we debate it and then we take a decision, having heard from the minister. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. In our committee, we are handling almost similar issues. We have asked the Minister for the Presidency to present to the committee a report concerning the progress they have made, because when we appropriated their budget, they said they were having a transitional team. When he appeared before us, we asked him how long this transitional team would take. The Minister for the Presidency said the structure from Public Service had not been approved. So, we have asked him to present a report. I do not know –(Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the House is; much as the chairman of the Presidential Affairs committee says we had given the minister some time and he said the structure was not approved, I have here two parallel structures approved by Public Service without the involvement of the Authority.

When you read the Act, you find that the Authority is very clear. Much as everybody here has been made to believe that the Lord Mayor does not head the Authority, it is a big lie. The Act is very clear that the Lord Mayor heads the Authority. 

I want to lay on Table the two parallel structures. There is one which is headed by the Executive Director and the other which is headed by the Lord Mayor. These structures were made by the Executive Director without approval by the Authority. I do not know whether this is how we are going to run the Authority, and it was approved by Public Service. 

This is the new Kampala Capital City Authority structure, February 2012 final copy by the Kampala Capital City Authority management, which has not been approved by the Authority itself.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay it on table. 
There is also another parallel structure here, which details the structure which will be headed by the Lord Mayor, dated 15th March 2012. It was also given to the Lord Mayor and they are about to implement it.  I beg to lay it on Table.  Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Thank you very much, my honourable colleague for that good information. Our committee would like formal interaction with the honourable minister and definitely, there are specific questions we are going to ask him.  Where are you putting the old staff?  Where are you putting the transition team? Who is going to recruit the staff that is coming in?  

I think in the interest of informing the august House, and maybe seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, it would be better for us as a committee to first interact with the minister and then have a formal report laid before the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know when we approved these committees, we gave them responsibilities. The Committee on Presidential Affairs is in charge of Kampala. So, I think let us not do their work. But the information you have brought is important and they should all form the issues that you are going to raise with the minister and then give us one report. I think that is only fair.

MR MUSINGUZI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee has been very clear to us. He said they are more or less handling the same issue. I would move that we support what hon. Bukenya, our former Vice-President, has suggested to this House that we set up an adhoc committee to look into this issue forthwith.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we gave the Presidential Affairs committee the responsibility for that docket and if they fail to satisfy us, that is when we shall set up an adhoc committee. But this will be a vote of no confidence in the committee even before they have done their work, and it will set a very bad precedent. So, let us hear from the minister and we close. 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The issue of two structures is not very clear to me because I would like to refer you to the Act, where there is a political structure and an administrative structure headed by the Executive Director. So, we cannot say that there are two parallel structures, because they are not the same. 

Secondly, the Ministry of Public Service has approved the structure of Kampala City Authority and the guidelines have also been issued on how to handle the outgoing staff that belonged to Kampala City Council. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should give this committee time to take into account what has been laid and the concerns brought by hon. Musinguzi, and report to us immediately after the recess, which will be the week after Easter. So, we are giving you exactly two weeks.

3.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso):   Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to present a petition for consideration by this House from councillors of Kiira Town Council, seeking the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the mismanagement of council funds, and investigate the circumstances under which the Ministry of Local Government and the district administration failed or refused or neglected to take appropriate action against officials implicated in the mismanagement of public funds in Kiira Town Council and matters incidental thereto. 

The subject matter of this petition is, “The gross mismanagement of council funds and affairs by the Accounting Officer of Kiira Town Council and/or his subordinates, and the continued failure, refusal or neglect by the Chief Administrative Officer, Wakiso District, and the Ministry of Local Government officials, to take appropriate action against the implicated officers, hence abdicating their roles as specified in sections 64(c), 95, 96 and 98 of the Local Government Act, 1997.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to read the subject and the prayers; do not go into details. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGADA:  Yes, I am finishing the subject matter and then I go to the prayers.  They are thereby contravening Section 90(a) of the Local Government Act, and Article 164(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the petitioners pray that: 

    1. Parliament intervenes in matters pertaining to mismanagement of council funds and all other issues in Kiira Town Council.

    2.  Parliament investigates into the circumstances under which the Ministry of Local Government and the district administration either failed, refused or neglected to take appropriate action against officials implicated in the mismanagement of public funds in Kiira Town Council. 

    3. Parliament recommends appropriate action against the offending officials.

    4. Parliament gives any other remedy it so deems fit.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that petition is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny and report back.  In the meantime, I would like to announce the presence of students and teachers of Ssekanyonyi Secondary School, represented by hon. Kaddu Mukasa; you are welcome. We also have 25 workers of Kampala City Council Authority represented by hon. Nsereko; you are welcome. We also have residents and councillors of Kiira Town Council represented by hon. Ssemujju Nganda; you are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, now that we have quorum, I would like to announce that tomorrow morning at 9.00 O’clock we shall have a briefing for the IPU in the Conference Hall. So, you are all invited. Let us go to the other item which requires numbers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I agree with you that our Presidential affairs committee will handle KCCA matters. But the staff of the defunct KCC were appointed by the Public Service Commission, and the District Service Commission had a delegated function to perform on its behalf. Now, the Minister of Public Service calls those staff members “outgoing” yet they were appointed by the Public Service Commission. The minister should come out clearly because people are dying – you have heard that two people have already died – and I am not sure how many would have died by the time the committee finishes its work. How are you handling the former staff in the interim? That is the issue I would like clarified so that the affected people can sleep well.

THE SPEAKER: May I ask the senior minister to respond to the Leader of the Opposition.

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Public Service by itself does not make appointments; it is the Public Service Commission. Once the commission has interviewed the candidates, the names of successful ones are sent to us and we issue letters of appointment. So, it is not correct that we ever appointed anybody. What we have been working on was the structure and the terms and conditions of service, but not making appointments. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Public Service did not understand me. I want to repeat what I said: KCC staff are employees of the Public Service Commission; now you have formed KCCA which is an authority. Now, what happens to the former KCC employees since they are public servants? There is supposed to be a manner in which they are to be treated by the Public Service Commission, which you head – not necessarily because you are the one who interviewed them. What are you doing for them in the interim since you call them “outgoing”. 

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those people are “outgoing”, but they have not yet gone. (Interjections) The arrangements are being worked out. These people are still around; please, give the system some time to sort out these things. (Interjections) Please, give the minister time to sort out these problems and they will be sorted out. You have incoming and outgoing staff; what is difficult there? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the concern of the Members is to know what the fate of the KCC, not KCCA, those whom you employed as KCC before we incorporated KCCA. They want to know their fate. Where are they going? How are they being handled? How are they moving into the new structure? How are they falling out? That is what the Members want to know.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not the minister responsible for Kampala, but I have -(Interjections)- I am a Member of Parliament, but I have information on the law that this Parliament passed with regard to the staff of KCCA. The law which we passed is that once the Authority is formed, which was done, the existing staff of KCC would be –(Interjections)– listen, please - would be revalidated. That is the term in the law. What does that mean? It means that the existing staff are saved, but they will have to re-apply for the jobs which they occupy now. That is the law which we passed. Now, if they re-apply, the Public Service Commission will examine their applications. Those who are found wanting in terms of qualifications will definitely be relieved of their duties. Those -(Interjections)- I am just explaining the law. You can go and read. 

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue before this House is very pertinent because it touches people’s lives. The way this issue is being explained is as if it is a by-the-way. People have even committed suicide. One of our colleagues, Gerald Kabuka, committed suicide because he was mistreated. If you say that these people will be subjected to interviews, some of the positions have already been taken. Then, how are they going to be treated like the question has arisen? We have seen the structure which is not even linking the political structure to the technical structure. How are the two bodies now carrying out activities in the city? 

Secondly, if the structure which is being approved by Public Service has not even been approved by Council - I would like a clarification from the minister -(Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Thank you. I was a member of the Local Government Committee for five years and my sister was the Deputy Mayor, I think. Madam Speaker, you have guided us so rightly that we need to sit before the Committee on Presidential Affairs and look into these issues. I would like you to guide me. Wouldn’t it be very useful for the former Deputy Mayor to go before that committee and give us the details? What she is telling us is very useful, but she needs to give us the details of the management of KCC that time. I think let us not take this lightly. We have people who know more about KCC and those who are now in KCCA. We should use their experiences so that they tell us how we should proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, every Member of this House is a member of every committee. You are free to go there, except that if you are not among the 25, you do not vote. You can go and give your views and come out. So, I appeal to those who have information to improve KCC and KCCA, to please take it to the committee. I have given them just two weeks and you should not even go for Easter you people. I am just giving you two weeks to solve the issue of KCCA, please. 

Honourable members, I am giving you two weeks to come back with a report, having read the documents, interviewed the minister, interviewed Yona Musinguzi, interviewed hon. Namayanja and everybody else who has information that will solve the issues of KCCA.

Honourable members, as we go to item No.3, I want to inform you that the students of Dabani Senior Secondary school, represented by hon. John Mulimba and hon. Nekesa Oundo, are in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

PROPOSED AMENDMENTS IN THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

COMMITTEE STAGE

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we broke off last time, the Committee of the Whole House was considering Appendix C and we had proposals. With your permission, I will run through it to refresh the memory of the House. In Appendix D, we had proposed the following:
 
“Rules of Procedure for the election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly.

(i)`We had proposed to insert the following before the definition of the word, “Election”. “Assembly” means the East African Legislative Assembly established by the treaty.
(ii) `“Candidate” means a person who is nominated to stand for election to the Assembly. 

(iii)`We propose to delete the interpretation of the word “Election” and replace it with the following; “Election includes the process of nomination and voting of candidates to the Assembly”.

(iv) “Nomination” means nomination as a candidate to stand for elections to the Assembly.

We had proposed to re-draft rule 3 as follows: 

“Election of Members of the Assembly;

(i) `The election of Members representing the various political parties represented in Parliament to the Assembly shall as much as is feasible -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is refreshing the Members about where we stopped.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: “...be based on their proportional party membership in Parliament and shall take into consideration gender, the youth and Persons With Disabilities.

(ii) A person shall be elected to the Assembly who is independent of a political party or organisation”. 

We also proposed to re-draft Rule 7(1) as follows:

“Nomination of candidate; 

Nomination of a candidate shall be made on any nomination day by each party or organisation and other shades of opinion represented in the House nominating a candidate and tendering the nomination in writing to the Clerk indicating the following:

(a)	a statement specifying the name, educational qualifications, address and occupation of the candidate

(b) a statement under oath by the candidate stating that -
(i) 	a candidate is a citizen of Uganda;
(ii) 	the candidate qualifies to be a Member of Parliament;
(iii)	the candidate is not holding office as a minister;
(iv)	the candidate is not an officer in the service of the East African Community; and
(v) 	the candidate has proven experience or interest in consolidating and furthering the aims and objectives of the community.

(c) Upon nomination, the Speaker shall proceed to put the question. We propose to insert a new rule as follows:

(i) 	the ruling party shall nominate six candidates from among its Members;
(ii)	the Opposition shall nominate two candidates from among its Members;
(iii) a person independent of a political party or organisation shall be elected as a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly; and
(iv) all nominations shall as much as is feasible, reflect and take into consideration the youth, gender and Persons With Disabilities.”

Madam Chairperson, this is the very last. We had proposed to introduce a new rule as follows:

“Rules applicable to Independents;
(i)	a person wishing to stand for elections independent of a political party or organisation shall tender his or her duly filled nomination forms to the Clerk.

(ii)	a person wishing to stand as an Independent under sub-rule(i) shall be nominated by a Member of Parliament”.

“Rules for campaigns and voting

(i)	a person nominated to be elected as a Member to the Assembly shall give his or her consent to the nomination;

(ii) 	a Member making a nomination shall move a Motion that so and so be elected as a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly, and shall in not more than five minutes give a brief statement of the background of the nominee;

(iii)	a person nominated under sub-rule (ii) shall be given five minutes by the Speaker to speak about him or herself;

(iv) 	voting of the Members of the Assembly shall be done in the Plenary; and

(v) the Clerk shall ensure that the relevant materials for voting are in place”

We propose to re-draft sub-rule 10 as follows:

“The Speaker shall announce in the House the elected Members to the Assembly”. 

At the close of the last session, Madam Chair, debate had been concluded and this matter was due for voting. I beg to move that you put the question.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before we move to voting, the Chairperson, hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, presented and stated that the ruling party may present or shall present six and then the Opposition two.

They are supposed to be nine and then he left it vaguely there that the Independents “may” - he did not say “shall”, but “may”  - also be represented. Then he said, in carrying out all these designations or elections, consideration shall be given to Persons With Disabilities, the youths and the women. 

Just in case, honourable members, the NRM, the ruling party now, presents six men or six males and the Opposition also presents two males - I am giving a scenario that may happen; it may not be today or in the future - who gives in for the women, the PWDs and the youths, because we have said, “Shall put into consideration the PWDs, the females and the youths” but the Opposition has two slots, and it has not put into consideration, the PWDs, the women and the youths. 

So, in this case, Madam Chairperson, before we leave these questions unattended to, I think, as Members of Parliament seated here today, we need to come up with a proper formula as to how we arrive at that. Whether it is the ruling party that gives in or the Opposition that gives in or the Independents, other than leaving it vaguely today, and we end up coming up with a situation where we have to run to the Constitutional Court to interpret certain matters that we can debate and put to rest today. Thank you.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the concern of the committee, but I wanted to propose that if we are to have a democratic process and if we are to elect from here in Parliament, probably the ruling party should bring or should nominate eight candidates. When we come here in Parliament - we select only six - then the Opposition should also be given an opportunity to select four or three and then we elect two out of that number. The same applies to the Independents -(Interjections)- Madam Chair, I beg for your protection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, honourable members.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Chairperson, the reason I am proposing this - I am wondering, if we are to elect the Independents, how then are we going to sit here in the House and elect only Independents, and then we leave the other positions? So, I am proposing that the different parties come up with a number and then we come here on the Floor and elect depending on the number of slots for each side.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, of course, I was not here when you started the debate, but I had made some proposals to the Attorney-General and the Rules Committee about the structure of the ballot paper.

What happened to my proposals hon. Odoi? My proposals would state, “Select this number from Category A, this number from Category B, this number from Category C.” That is what I had proposed to you. What happened to my proposal?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, we had consultations -(Interjections)- and we sent them to the drafting committee. We reduced most of the ideas into the rules which I have just read. With the exception of the numbers, the parties agreed after much consultation that the primaries should be conducted at the party level and the elections should be done here. (Interjections) That is what is contained in the final report. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I think we are running into the same problem that took us to court, because the Constitutional Court ruled that there were no elections when we elected the last team of EALA. That is what the court ruled; that there were no elections. Actually, they crossed our action because of just coming to say names. That is what we did and the court nullified it. Do you want us to go back to the same thing, now? The court crossed our work. Let me tell you; the court crossed our work and  nullified the elections - yes; nullified the elections of EALA. 

MR BAKA MUGABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a point of guidance. (Interjections) We have been debating these rules, especially this particular rule on election of EALA for the last two weeks. I seek guidance from you, especially in view of the proposals you gave to the chairperson, which you do not seem to be seeing. 

From what I know, NRM had seven slots. They have now been reduced to six. Now, Opposition has two and our biggest problem in this House was Independents. A slot has been created for them. The problem now is on how we nominate those Members. What hon. Seninde has just said is to the effect that we should nominate 8, 10 or 15 instead of 6 from the ruling party, and the Opposition nominates 3 or 5, instead of 2. So, how do we proceed, Madam Speaker? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you know, I thought that the advice I had given to the chairperson of the rules committee about creating categories and giving an option of selecting from that group, whereby if they are 20 you select three, if they are five – you know, that would solve the problem for all; even for the Independents, you can bring ten. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson -(Interjections)- the assignment we shared with you, together with the chairperson of rules committee - if I can be protected-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order Members; listen to the Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI: The only unfortunate part is that practically, for the whole of last week, I was not available, but hon. Mwesige stood in for the office of the Attorney-General on this matter, in my absence, and in the absence of the substantive Attorney-General who was also in Arusha. 

I wish to say one thing; to the best of my recollection, the issue that was raised in the Constitutional Court in the case of Jacob Oulanyah vs. the Attorney-General, was that there was no election because no question was put. What happened is that both sides brought names and the Speaker simply said, “Let the names be gazetted and published,” without putting the question. 

To me, there would be no contradiction whatsoever, if the nominations came and the Speaker put the question to those nominations. That would amount to an election. Why? Because - and I may wish to refer to the case of Prof. Peter Anyang Nyong’o and 10 others vs. the Attorney-General. In summary, the ruling is this: “In view of all the foregoing, we find it very unlikely that in adopting Article 50, the parties defeated contemplated, let alone intended that the National Assembly would elect the Members of the Assembly other than through voting procedure. Needless to say, an election through voting may be accomplished using such diverse procedures as secret ballot, show of hands or acclamation. The electoral process may or may not involve such preliminaries as campaigns, primaries and or nominations. An election may be contested or uncontested.”

To me, that is a summary of the position about whether there needs to be an election. I think this clarifies the worry you have on the issue of election. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I rise to seek guidance from the Chair on two issues. One; Parliament adopted rule 11, which is Article 50 of the treaty. Actually, what we are dealing with now is that after adopting Article 50 of the treaty, we are now proceeding to make an appendix, which seems to amend the rule. What am I saying? Rule 11, the way it is, when you read it and apply the strict rule of interpretation, it is very clear. It says, “The nine Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament not from among Members of Parliament representing as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda.” The import of Article 50 is that it is mandatory for political parties within this House to be represented. It is qualified by the words, “as feasible as possible.”

What does that mean? That today, we have six political parties in this House; so, it is feasible for them to be represented. (Interjections) Madam Chairperson, I should be protected. This means that today, it is feasible, tomorrow, if there are more than nine political parties in this House, it will not be feasible for them to be represented. What are we supposed to be dealing with, Madam Chair, at the moment? It is only for us to prescribe the remaining three slots; the Independents and the two Members of Parliament. How do we have them catered for? I am fortified by the case of Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya vs. Attorney-General, and the rules of statutory interpretation that, where a statute is clear and unambiguous, you give the little meaning of the statute irrespective of the consequence of the rule. What we are dealing with here is very clear. We are landing into all these problems simply because we are running away from Article 50, which we adopted in rule 11. Otherwise, you cannot amend a rule by an appendix because we are talking about what the rule is saying. When we come to the appendix, we are running to the proportional representation. The import of Article 50 is very clear, that as long as it is feasible, then the political parties should be represented. But in future, should it not be feasible, then we should have a sub-clause which should say that should it not be feasible, then the sub-rule shall go in abeyance and the political parties in the House shall choose those who shall have an opportunity to be represented. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You see some ideas may be popular, but they may not be popular with the law. I would really like to seek the indulgence of this House, especially the lawyers who are privileged to have expertise in the interpretation of the law. Madam Chairperson, I think your Office is aware and so is that of the Attorney-General, that there is an injunction against us to elect Members to the East African Legislative Assembly. 

But what we should keep in mind is: Why did the Democratic Party go to court? Mind you, before an injunction is issued, any lawyer worth his salt will tell you that you must have what we call a prima facie case; an arguable case. On that ground, an injunction was issued against us not to elect our representatives until we amend our rules to conform to the Treaty –(Mr Okot rose_)– hon. Felix Okot Ogong, I have known you for being patient and reasonable; I do not know about this particular occasion. (Laughter)

Having said that, some of these issues are not just about voting; it is not about numbers; it is about what the law requires us to do. Anybody who thinks that it is about shouting and numbers – I am telling you, we are going into the same problem. 

I want to say that we are all bound by the decision of the East African Court of Justice. So, may the Attorney-General explain to this House why an injunction was issued against us and what case is pending against him in the court? Once that is explained –(Interjections)- in answering this, he cannot get advice from hon. Tinkasiimire because he is disqualified to give that advice. 

Madam Chairperson, there are many professions in this House. I would like a doctor, like hon. Dr Mallinga here to vulgarise his profession just because he wants to achieve a political point. I would like to see an accountant who can vulgarise his profession because he wants to make a political point. I want an engineer here who can vulgarise his profession because he wants to achieve a political point. I want a teacher who can do that – (Interruptions)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I rise on a point of order after carefully listening to the submission of the honourable member. In my own right as a representative of the people of Buyaga West Constituency, I am wondering whether the honourable member is in order to mislead this House that when it comes to matters of representing my people; a person of my calibre who is not learned in matters of the law has nothing to do as far as legislating is concerned.

Is he in order to go ahead to mislead this House and intimidate whoever is not a lawyer in this House that we have nothing substantial to offer particularly to this discussion?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I appreciate that this matter has engaged our minds for all this week; actually, the last two weeks, and it has raised tempers. But I appeal to you to tolerate one another. 

But having said that, I want to say two things: On 25 August 2011, I wrote to the Attorney-General to do two things: One, to seek the views of the East African Court of Justice on whether a Member can come for a third term in EALA. He did not. Instead he wrote to me and gave me his own opinion. So, I wrote to him and said, “Attorney-General, I am not interested in your own opinion; I have my own opinion, but I want the opinion of the court so that it is binding on all East Africans”.

In the same letter, I addressed this issue of the composition; that was August last year. I was working and thinking ahead. He declined to seek that opinion. Now, we are in court. On the 29th February, I think there was a hearing on this very matter. What is the outcome of the case? We may take a position which is going to be at variance with the judiciary. I want to know what you said when you went to Arusha. When is the judgement coming from Arusha on this issue, so that we can stand over this matter, receive judgement and then proceed? That is what I want. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, two cases, as you have actually said, are in the East African Court of Justice. One by Mr Mukasa Mbidde seated up there, and there was an injunction against this Parliament that we do not elect unless we have amended our Rules of Procedure to conform with the East African treaties. In my understanding, our exercise is to exactly do that. In other words, if we do amend our Rules of Procedure to conform to the East African Treaty and other relevant laws, if I may add that, then that case naturally collapses.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank my colleague, the rightful Attorney-General –(Laughter)- I would like to seek clarification on two issues; hon. Ruhindi stood there about half-an-hour ago and proposed that only six names be nominated, and the question be put for approval; two from the Opposition and one from the Independents. What he has just said is that the process that we are trying to fulfill now is to conform with the various court rulings. There is a ruling by the Ugandan courts of justice. Olanya v. –(Interjections)- yes, a constitutional ruling on the same matter. There is the one he has just quoted - Nyangatom; there is one of Mbidde – because there was an obiter dictum in the Mbidde case. Before the injunction was issued, there was an observation made. What am I trying to say? The various shades of opinion must be allowed to come for election. 

So, I would like to seek for clarification as to why the Attorney-General is objecting to your formula because your formula was clear: Bring 10 Members of the Opposition; one for CP, one for FDC, and one for DP, comes and of all the various parties; they come and are elected here. The ones that go through shall have been given an opportunity as well as the ones from NRM; it solves their problems of saying that so and so was favoured; so and so was not favoured - let them come and category A (NRM)- 10 names; category B (Opposition) - 10 names; and category C (Independents) -10 names, and it solves everything. We fall within the conformity of the Treaty and judgment, and it will be easily solved. So, Madam Chairperson, I beg to seek clarification from the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, Attorney-General, if you do not accept my formulation of the Order Paper, I want to propose that you seek a Certificate of Urgency from the East African Court to have this matter heard expeditiously, and they give us a position. (Applause) We cannot go on like this, because I wrote in August last year on this matter. 

Can you seek for a Certificate of Urgency to have the matter heard expeditiously so that we do not have to go back and forth?

MR RUHINDI: But, Madam Chairperson, we all know how courts operate. I do not know whether that procedure will bring us the desired results. 

First of all, hon. Tanna, I am not the one who moved the motion on the six, two and one. That motion came from the Committee on Rules and Discipline. Secondly, Madam Chairperson and hon. Tanna, I did not object to the proposal of the Chairperson; I only clarified what amounts to an election under my understanding of the court ruling and the law. 

Having said that, to me, the best is to do what the court that has actually said, to comply with the East African Treaty and the relevant laws. But to say that we stand this matter over and the Attorney-General goes to seek for a Certificate of Urgency, that is another lengthy process and we may not actually get there.

So, Madam Chairperson, the other issue; I am not quite sure on the timelines, because I have not cross-checked on them. The other issue of the Legal Brains Trust Ltd, which took us to court –(Interruption)

MRS ANYWAR: I rise on a point of order. The Attorney-General is trying to explain the issues we raised here, which in his capacity, he is supposed to satisfy this House. You have directed and laboured to even write to have him clarify and guide this House as far as the legal implication is concerned. 

Is it in order for the Acting Attorney-General to shy away from his responsibility and say that undertaking what he has been directed to do is a lengthy process and, therefore, we should go for a short-cut which is not giving this House the right information that we are asking for? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the life of the East African Legislative Assembly will end in June, and this is March. We have got April, May and hon. Attorney-General, Brain Trust took you to court because you had failed to go and take the issue to court yourselves. You were dragged to court in Arusha. 

If your senior minister had adhered to my instructions of August last year, it would have been done by then – August last year, that is when I wrote to him on this matter!! 

I am sure that as Attorney-General, if you applied to the East African Court on this matter with a Certificate of Urgency for interpretation, it can be done in one month. (Applause) I do not want to do shoddy work; we take a decision and the judgment comes and it is saying something different and we have to do it again. I want you to go to the East African Court of Justice. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: I was on the Floor and I would like to conclude. May I conclude and then you can have your opportunity hon. Kasule Sebunya?

I just want to inform this House that actually, the injunction is premised on the grounds that we shall amend our rules and conform to the Treaty. Even if we amend them, until we go back to the East African Court of Justice and say, “Yes, we amended our rules this way, the court will examine…” – What we are seeking to determine is whether it conforms to the Treaty. That is only when the injunction will be lifted. Otherwise, the injunction will still be binding on us. 

So, honourable colleagues, I implore you - and hon. Banarbas Tinkasimire didn’t get me correct. We would like to be quite professional and guide our colleagues, like I would like to respect Dr Mallinga whenever he talks about issues of medicine. I know that he has more expertise on that. My view is –(Interjections)– and you don’t have to listen to me. I am getting confused, honourable –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Really I don’t intend to interfere with your submission. I am not a lawyer and so I take your advice seriously. But you made a statement that when we have made the rules, we have to go to the courts to determine whether our rules are in conformity. I am really getting lost. Must we take the exercise books to be marked and then come back? You need to guide us more on that.

MR KATUNTU: Actually, that is the case, because this injunction will apply until we have conformed to the Treaty. It is court that is going to lift it. And by the time court lifts it, we need to have satisfied the requirements to conform to the Treaty. 

So, the learned Attorney-General is being unfair to this House because he is not telling the Members why Mr Fred Mbidde took us to court. You are not specifying why because some of our colleagues actually don’t know why we are in that court.

Anyway, to inform this House, we are in that court because Mr Fred Mbidde made allegations that his party is not represented yet it has Members in this House. That is the reason, but you are not telling our colleagues that and I am sure you are doing it deliberately, which is bad because they will make the same mistakes. 

I would like to say that as far as I am concerned, as the Shadow Attorney-General, I have done my duty. What is left is for you to take a decision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Attorney-General, what do you say about my proposal? I said I want an interpretation of the East African Court of Justice judgment on those two issues; the term limits in the Treaty and what constitutes conformity to this Act. I want a ruling on that.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in this House, we are used to terms such as assurance. But I cannot give an assurance that we shall get judgment from the East African Court of Justice on those two cases in the time you want it because I do not manage the East African Court of Justice.

MR SEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I fairly know hon. Fred Ruhindi as a lawyer of high repute. Yes, he is not a member of the East African Court of Justice. But your guidance on this matter was that he writes to the court to seek an opinion. So, is he, therefore, in order to defy your ruling and purport to be a judge in the court that must write and determine when the session should take place and answer to his prayers?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have already challenged the Attorney-General on why he has not done my work since August last year, because I wrote to him in that month after anticipating this problem. And you know that I cannot go to that court myself because he is supposed to be my agent. That is why I wrote to him, but he declined. Now we are here asking many questions on how many? Who is entitled?

MR ODOI- OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move a motion that this matter be stood over until the Attorney-General reports to the House with directives from the East African Court of Justice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that this matter be stood over until we get the opinion of the East African Court of Justice.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I respect your ruling and I will take up the instructions you have given to me. Two, I would also like to request that in the meantime we consider those other options like the ones you had proposed. If, for instance, we find that that is also worth following, we can still come to the Floor of the House. I am saying this because my worry – yes, I am going to write; I will even travel to Arusha; but I would like us to give ourselves enough time within which to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But Attorney-General, I still believe that as a party to the Treaty, you have a right to apply for a Certificate of Urgency in that court. The decision to hold elections in April was an agreement of the Speakers of East Africa only; otherwise, we have up to June this year. So, please solve the matter for us.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, I appeal for time to enable my side go through these issues before coming back to explain the circumstances and the way forward as far as we are concerned. That is the best way – we cannot discuss everything here when we still have other business to attend to. That is why I am asking for this time and we shall come back to explain more of these issues. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Prime Minister, I will give you the time, but I have also given my own instruction, which stands from August last year, and I want them done. Those were independent of yours. (Applause)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.25
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered proposed amendments to Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure and stood over the same for future determination. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.27
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.27
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that this House recommits rule 202 for amendment as follows: I beg to move that we amend sub-rule (5) of rule 202 to read as follows: “No person may carry into the galleries a briefcase, firearms or any other lethal weapon.”

I beg to move that we insert sub-rule (8) after sub-rule (7) to read as follows: “A member of the press or media accredited to Parliament may be admitted into the press gallery with an electronic device for recording and coverage purposes.” 

Justification: We need to enable the press in Parliament to comply with technological advances and modern reporting practices.

Secondly, I am duly informed that the House of Commons in Britain lifted this restriction in October 2010, and by following suit, we shall be making this Parliament a leader in innovation and democratic practice in our region.

Thirdly, it is common information that Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) already covers our discussions in Plenary and by opening this to other media houses, we shall no doubt be making the Ninth Parliament more transparent and accountable to the Ugandan public, which elected us to represent them here. (Applause)

And finally, it is my considered opinion that it is in our favour as Members of Parliament, and it is to our advantage that we are properly recorded and covered by the press using most modern gadgets, instead of leaving them to continue using short and archaic methods which are prone to error. 

I beg to move. 

4.29
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion raised by my Colleague, hon. Magyezi. As he has ably explained, this Parliament should join the modern trends of parliaments across the globe that are embracing the fundamentals of freedom, of not only expression, but also information. 

We would like our population - our voters, to enjoy the right to know, and to know what is accurate and appropriately recorded and reported by the media, and this can only be done when there is ample access to the source of information, which is in this House. 

I am aware that there have been some concerns about issues related to privacy, but which I think can be handled through administration and also through provision of a regulatory framework within, not only the Act, but also the Rules of Procedure. 

MR KAKOBA: Thank you. I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that this is very important. These concerns of privacy have been around, but as someone who has ever been in the media world for over 10 years and now a politician, I know that the issue of privacy touches on both of us, the media and the person. 

As public figures, it is paramount for us to make sure that we conduct ourselves in a manner that befits public figures. (Applause) That should be the cardinal point. So, the issue of privacy should not be a matter that should stop journalists from coverage, because it is international practice everywhere now and we should support it. I thank you. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much, hon. Onyango. I think we can achieve a lot by developing proper partnership with the media houses, to ensure that there is responsible reporting because it has been stated that we do have such a practice in the committees. Where we think we do not need media coverage, we say so and we would converge in camera where necessary. But this should not be a blanket –(Interruption)-

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother, for giving way. The information I want to give is in breaking the monopoly of UBC, whose capacity is already impaired by loss of some of its gadgets. (Laughter)

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my honourable brother, for giving way. I am happy that as we are here debating, UBC is airing everything live. So, when the honourable gets up and says the monopoly is already impaired, that is not true. 

However, I want to add my voice to those of all the honourable colleagues, that let the media flourish.  (Applause) So, I am with you, but UBC is not impaired at all. (Laughter)
 
MR MULONGO: Let me conclude. I would like to say that given the precedence laid by our parent media institution, UBC, and given the spirit of liberalisation, it is only fair and correct that we allow all the media houses equal and befitting freedom of access just like UBC does in relaying the information accurately from the Chambers. 

4.35
MR BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, this issue was thoroughly debated last week. But since then, I have established beyond reasonable doubt that the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association is a very well organised media group, which has an executive committee and in that committee, they even have a chief whip, who is in charge of ensuring that they have ethical standards which they follow. 

What does this mean? It means that our journalists who are accredited to operate from here have standards along which they operate and I have been assured that they will be able to professionally handle their exercise of duty. Therefore, I stand to support the innovation that the journalists come in with their equipment and let the media flourish. (Laughter)  

4.36
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to correct the impression that has been created in the media that Members who did not support the amendment were against press freedom. On the contrary, we support press freedom and the amendment which has been brought today is a fair one because it defines the kind of gadgets and instruments which the press will come with to Parliament. Apart from the weapons which have been outlawed from being brought to the House, the rest of the gadgets which the members of the press will bring to Parliament are their tools of work. So, I have risen to support the amendment moved by hon. Magyezi.

4.37
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like an un-highlighted factor in a number of jurisdictions like ours, constituted by an Act of Parliament, it is only right and befitting that we as politicians have a bond with the media. When I was in my hotel room in Nairobi recently, I was very happy to watch a live deliberation of even the committees of Parliament in Kenya. In fact, we should further enhance our working relationship with the media and it is on that ground that all Members of Parliament should come out loud and support this amendment.
 
THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, no one is speaking to the motion for recommittal. You are going straight into the amendment.
 
4.38
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the question be put. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, I put the question that this House do recommit Rule 202 as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

4.39
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to recommit rule 157, which is on the Committee of HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. It was resolved that the “related matters” be deleted because it is ambiguous, which I also agree with, but we could specify to say that: “HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria” because those three go hand-in-hand. I beg to move.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, the House rejected the proposal of the committee to delete “and related matters.” So, the Committee of HIV/AIDS is still called the “Committee of HIV/AIDS and other Related Matters.”

MS NAJJEMBA: Madam Speaker, I beg to inform Members that once you are not specific with what you mean, you are bound to be misinterpreted. When I was talking about HIV/AIDS and related matters, some people thought other things. So, I would like us to be very specific and say, “HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.” When you look at MDG VI –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much my colleague for giving way. Surely, I appreciate the concern of our colleague about specifying the related diseases, but the danger we could easily run into is specifying the diseases with those that are being handled directly and separately by the Social Services Committee.  Why we would like to retain “related” is that only those diseases that are a consequence of depleted immunity – the eight - is what we would like to emphasise. And the bracket could be long because even the nodding disease could join them. So, given that, we are even better and safer to maintain “related.”

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I just want to remind you that we had this very debate in the Eighth Parliament on how to formulate that committee. And we ended up saying that let us leave it as it is, “related matters”, so that we don’t leave out any other diseases.
  
MS NAJJEMBA: The Committee on HIV/AIDS has been touring Western Uganda, and during that tour, we discovered that there is a problem with TB, in that there are no drugs and most people suffering from it are just dying. In all this, the doctors here can help us. You know that those two go hand-in-hand. So, if we say that we should leave it as “related matters,” we are going to leave out TB, because there is no committee here that is following up the cases of TB, and yet it is a big problem; people are dying and the drugs are not there. I would like my committee to follow up with that. 

THE SPEAKER:  Let us hear from the doctors: Dr Bitekyerezo, Dr Lulume and -

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I somehow agree with what hon. Najjemba is saying, but I have an addition. I want to re-echo the words of hon. Abdu Katuntu, and this is where science comes in – and I will speak as a doctor. HIV and TB are almost inseparable because these days TB is very common in HIV patients. On top of that, we have a very common cancer called Kaposi’s sarcoma that is almost pathnogemonic –(Laughter)- with HIV. I am of the view – and again, we have found out that once an HIV patient is attacked by Malaria, they tend to die very fast. So, I am of the view that on top of what hon. Najjemba is saying, let us also add Kaposi sarcoma because it will help us to cater for the Cancer Institute. (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would beg to differ; the nomenclature of this committee –it was fortunate that it was not stated as “HIV/AIDS and related diseases”. Otherwise, it would have had a cascade of many diseases, including pneumocystis carinii -(Laughter)– CMV and a lot of other diseases. So, the nomenclature was suitable by simply saying “other related matters”. These “other related matters” include the social effects of HIV/AIDS; they may not necessarily be diseases. I would implore the Members on this committee to spread their wings to involve the matters that are not necessarily diseases, but the effects of the diseases. Therefore, I second the nomenclature to remain as it was. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, the Shadow Minister for Health has said it all. First of all, HIV/AIDS is just an immuno-suppression; nobody dies of AIDS, but the immuno-suppression allows very many other infections to take advantage of the victim. And now if you attempt to amend, as you have proposed, we would have grossly limited ourselves to just focusing on TB and Malaria, yet there are very many other opportunistic infections that the individual gets.

Secondly, when we talk about “related matters” we are also talking about the psycho-social support that is given, not only to those infected, but also those affected by the HIV/AIDS. So, I think our current position is much better than limiting it to HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria.

DR OKUONZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to give some clarification. I know that the term “HIV/AIDS and other related matters” was written perhaps 10 years ago. During that time, there was not much knowledge about HIV, and even in medical communities, we have had a lot of confusion about the terminology. Many people left the words “other related matters” to cater for the areas that we did not know that time. So, when my colleague brings in the matter of “TB and Malaria” - I could understand the relationship between TB and HIV/AIDS. But I find it difficult to bring in the connotation of “other related matters” and “TB and Malaria”,because you can as well bring all other diseases, including nodding disease. I had not gone to this committee; if I had, I would have told them to leave it as “HIV/AIDS” because the matters related to HIV are fairly well known now and can be discovered from time to time. But since I would be safer as a professional to leave “HIV/AIDS and other related matters” as it is, I will let it be. If I had the authority, I would have removed that “other related matters”.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okuonzi, I think we shall ask you to go and support the committee so that you can give them all the information you have about all the diseases relating to HIV. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. HIV/AIDS, as it has been clearly put, is a syndrome which is a combination of very many symptoms and signs, and a lot of complicated names have been given. They also include molluscum contagiosum –(Laughter)- I think the initial fear by hon. Najjemba was the aspect of “other related matters”, which had been dropped and that is why she came up with an amendment of adding TB and Malaria. But I wish to remind Members that in the last Parliament, hon. Seninde brought a motion on the Floor that we create a committee responsible for Malaria, and she was seconded by Gen. Elly Tumwine. The House resolved that Malaria should be handled by the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters. That is on the record of the House. But I agree with most of the Members who have said we should not just limit it to TB and Malaria, because there are many other illnesses associated with HIV/AIDS, and so, we should not limit the committee to looking at one specific aspect.

Much as I agree with Dr Okuonzi that a lot of information is now known about HIV, we also know that scientists are still finding out many other issues about HIV/AIDS. Personally, I would think that “HIV/AIDS and Related Matters” still remains appropriate so that the committee has sufficient scope to look around all matters related to HIV. So, I want to beg my sister to concede so that the original name is contained. 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that we have it as “HIV/AIDS and Related Matters”, I am comfortable with that. My only problem was removing the “related matters”. But since we have it, I concede. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me request all Members who have information relating to HIV/AIDS to go and support the committee so that they can pick up whatever is related. Further recomittal?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, I had chosen hon. Mawanda and then hon. Amongi.

4.56
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I would like to recommit Rule 159, sub-rule (2), paragraph (l). Whereas this committee took a decision disagreeing with the report of the committee which had proposed to amend rule 159(2) paragraph (l) as follows: “Replace paragraph (1) on finance as follows: “(1) Finance, Planning and Economic Development covering - (1) Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its agencies. 

(2) Office of the Auditor-General,” and further move the Office of the Auditor-General to the jurisdiction of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - 

THE SPEAKER: What are you saying?

MR MAWANDA: The House moved the Office of the Auditor-General to the jurisdiction of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. So, we would like to recommit this again to the Committee on Finance. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to state as follows: Sessional committees are sectoral committees relating to sectors under their jurisdiction. The Office of the Auditor-General falls directly under the Finance sector. This position is best explained by the 1995 Constitution, where the Office of the Auditor-General is under Chapter 9, which relates to Finance. This chapter also covers Bank of Uganda and the Consolidated Fund (The Treasury), which are all under the jurisdiction of the Committee on Finance. 

Furthermore, the National Audit Act of 2008, does not provide that the Auditor-General shall be an officer of Parliament as is done in other jurisdictions. Therefore, the argument that since the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs would be best placed to oversee this office, is not correct.

Even so, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is currently congested with several votes, which are all legislative in nature. The Parliamentary Commission, which reports to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, does so because Parliament is a legislative body. 

Until the law is changed, it would be procedurally wrong to categorise the Office of the Auditor-General as one that falls under the Legal and Parliamentary sector when for all purposes it belongs to the Finance sector.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that Rule 159(2), paragraph (l), be amended as follows: Replace paragraph (l) on Finance as follows: 
“(l) Finance, Planning and Economic Development covering Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its agencies.

(2) Office of the Auditor-General.”

The justification is that the Ministry of Finance has several agencies under it that should be monitored by this Parliament. Secondly, the Office of the Auditor-General is an independent institution established under an independent law, with its own vote. I beg to move.

5.00
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I stand to support the amendment as proposed by my honourable colleague. I think the Office of the Auditor-General should under no circumstance be moved to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This is because if you look at the functions of the Auditor-General as provided for in the Constitution under Article 153, the office deals with matters of accountability, and specifically talks about auditing public accounts of Uganda and all public offices including courts, Central Government, local governments and all others, and reporting to Parliament. Therefore, I would find it quite funny if we had this committee placed under the docket of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Whatever is contained under the functions of the Office of the Auditor-General is doing accountability and, therefore, this should be placed under the accountability committees and for that matter it should be better placed under Committee on Finance. I support the motion, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the finance committee and this committee has been overseeing the work of the Auditor-General since I joined this Parliament, and I think, even before I joined this Parliament.
 
When I was joining the finance committee, my party asked for my CV and the same was done to other members of the committee. The finance committee specifically deals with matters related to finance and the Auditor-General audits public finances of this country. I wonder why we begin proposing that this function of overseeing the Auditor-General’s Office goes to Legal well aware of the competences that are in the Legal committee. 

I do not honestly believe that this committee is rightfully able to handle matters of the Auditor-General’s Office, when the finance committee with some competent Members who know better what takes place in the Auditor-General’s Office are there. Therefore, I would like to invite my colleagues to support the proposal moved by hon. Mawanda -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Legal committee.

5.03
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Bakka): Madam Speaker, first of all, I wish to put it on record that I support the amendment, but also disagree with hon. Musasizi that the Legal committee does not have the competences to handle this office. 

We have the competence because we are endowed with all professions on that committee; not only lawyers, who are competent, but also other professions. 

When this issue came up, we consulted in our committee - my Chairperson is here - and we actually wondered who brought this proposal, because as a committee, we are heavily overburdened. We have nine votes we handle. Our sector is very big, that is why we urged this House to support the idea that we withdraw the Human Rights affairs from our committee, which was granted. 

I know the background to this amendment could have been that the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament and since the Legal committee is the one which takes the Parliamentary Commission, therefore, it follows that the Auditor-General would fall under the Legal committee. I think for harmony and in view of our situation in the Legal committee, we do agree that the Auditor-General be reverted back to the Finance committee because that is where they have been reporting and that is where they have been coming for their budgets and all that. So, we do not have any problem with that and as a committee, we support the amendment of hon. Mawanda

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that Rule 159(2) be recommitted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.05
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to also plead with the Chair so that I introduce a new rule immediately after 40, to be 41, which will mandate reports from relevant ministers who attend on behalf of this country, UN specialised meetings, and present status reports.

I want to speak on the annual report presented by Ministry of Gender, which is supposed to be reporting on the implementation of the laws and international conventions, especially the convention on the elimination of discrimination against women, which is supposed to be presented annually at the UN meeting.

In most countries, this report is presented to Parliament, debated and adopted before it is taken to the UN specialised meeting. We do not have a rule that would permit a minister to present the status report before they go to New York to present at this UN specialised meeting. This would also include UN Security Council meetings and in most cases, they talk on behalf of this country report. 

In the case, for example, of Kenya, South Africa and other countries, they even get reports from Parliament what they call - they get like certificates from Parliament to show that this is actually a status report of that country. So, I want to introduce 41, which will read as follows:

“Reports of UN specialised meetings - Any minister who is responsible for reporting to any UN specialised meeting shall submit before the House the country status report for debate and adoption prior to presenting such a report.” This is to enable this Parliament to debate and adopt that country status report before it is presented at such a UN meeting. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Does the chairman have a problem with that? That is a new -

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, if I were in court, I would have said this is trial by ambush. This is the only new matter coming to the Floor of the House. We had broadly consulted in respect to the previous two. Now, I am hearing of this for the first time and I cannot -

THE SPEAKER: Is it fatal to the work of this House?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: But would it be recommittal when it is a fresh matter? That is the problem, because I thought recommittal would be matters that the House had pronounced itself on.

I would request that you let the committee study this and since the review of the rules is a continuous process, we shall get back to the House together with Appendix D on EALA elections.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, maybe the honourable member did not give the background. For instance, with the CIDO, the government has reported seven times since 1985. Not a single report has ever come here! Yes, they have voted seven times and this House does not know what the government is reporting. So, what term is there to say,”Bring the report to this House?” 

In fact, there was another area. I had wanted the Minister of East Africa to be giving us a report every six months so that the country knows where we are on integration. I did not capture that in your proposals. We had wanted him to report regularly so that we can know about the integration. 

5.10
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the motion from hon. Betty Amongi talks about UN, but I was thinking that it should be broader than the UN. It should be international bodies. I am bringing this because there are so many protocols and treaties which have been ratified, and Parliament has no idea as to which treaties have been signed, ratified or require amendment. We need regular reports from the line minister about the status of all those protocols which have been signed. We are not only targeting the UN, but all international organisations to which we belong as a country. Thank you.

MR KAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to get some clarification. I agree, these international instruments are very important and we need them because there are quite a number of them which have not been reported in this House. However, I want to clear my mind regarding whether this should be the work of the House in general or it should be the work of the committee. I am aware we have a number of committees which are in charge of different ministries. For instance, when it comes to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, there is a Committee on Foreign Affairs. My own thinking was that probably, we should require the committees to demand and make sure these reports are made regularly. Otherwise, there are so many international organisations. Just to single out one like the UN may bring a problem. What about the others? If you are to consider it as a Whole House, then I would rather go with what the chairman has proposed, that we give it time, look at it, then come up with a comprehensive amendment.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I fully appreciate the need to have such an amendment. It is a beautiful idea, but I am rising on a point of procedure. I thought recomittal is to deal with matters that the House considered during the time of the Committee of the Whole House. Now that we are having a recomittal on other aspects which were considered by the House, this new matter and several others require substantive motions to come for amendment. I believe, what we are doing here is not really coming up with Rules of Procedure which are not cast in stone. It will be a continuous process when we identify a need to amend at any one time. We will have the committee on rules again coming on board. So, I beg that this matter plus the others, which I am sure Members over time will come up with, could be considered on their own merit, but not as a process of recommittal, because we did not consider it as a Committee of the Whole House.

5.14
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I find the proposal by the honourable member having merit, because I have attended some of the international meetings where we attend as Members of Parliament, and a minister makes a report and you seem not to be aware of the contents. Therefore, for us to entrench this practice in the rules requiring the ministers to report, I think is good, and I would expect my Government to support this as it strengthens your work also, well aware that there are two legal regimes which govern international treaties and protocols in terms of having an effect of law at the country level. In our case as Uganda, we have what we call dualism as opposed to monolism, in a sense that a protocol - a treaty, which is agreed to at a regional or international level cannot have an effect of law unless it has been domesticated by the national parliament. If there is insufficient involvement of Parliament, you will find that we shall not be aware of the kind of protocols and treaties which are being ratified at that level. Therefore, I think the amendment is good. 

But in terms of procedure, I agree with hon. Epetait that in the course of debate last week, there are matters which came up and we said they should be sent back to the committee. For instance, the matter of the report of the National Planning Authority. It was raised, but because the committee had not substantively looked at the proposal; we resolved that the committee looks at it and maybe at some other time, brings the amendments. Similarly, I want to propose that since this is an important issue, we give the committee time to study it and at an appropriate time, they can bring the proposals and we consider them as a House. But I find the proposal having merit. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, since you are due to come back to us on the rules of EALA and the issue of the National Planning Authority, can we ask you to pick up all these issues; the one on the EAC statement and the one on the country reports, so that you come back to us comprehensively.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged. 

5.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Rule 159, paragraph (3) on Presidential affairs, I would like to add sub-paragraph (9) to cater for Kampala Capital City Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: I understand it was done. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged. 

5.17
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that this House recommits a proposal to form a new committee to be known as the “Committee on Value-for-Money and related issues of this Parliament.” I beg to move and I would like to justify even as you clamour about rejecting it; listen to me, dear colleagues! This committee, if approved by this House, will be an accountability committee. value-for-money audits, gender audits, environmental audits, procurement audits, audits of treasury memoranda and audits of Government investments, are key to the development of this country. I would like to call the attention of this august House to sections 13(1)(b)(d)(e) and (f) of the National Audit Act, which provides for these audits. 

Madam Speaker, we might also be aware that Article 163 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the Auditor-General to submit his reports to the House. Currently, these audits are not explicitly defined in our Rules of Procedure of 2006. 

I want to give an insight to this House on the level of involvement of the current accountability committees. The Public Accounts Committee, COSASE and the Local Government Accounts Committee have a huge backlog at the moment. Even if they were given two terms in Parliament, together with the value for money audit and the backlog on the reports of the Auditor-General they would not be able to complete this work. So, if we maintain that these committees do this work, it amounts to breaking their back. 

We are working extra time. I have just come back from a committee meeting. I have hardly had any lunch just to try and see that we put our hands together and get the work done and reports presented to this House. So, I would like to plead with this House. Out of the 30 value—for-money audits, only one or two have been disposed of. So we have a backlog, even for the value-for-money audits, of 28 reports. They take time. These are audits that you have got to look at critically. Moreover, the Office of the Auditor-General felt the necessity to build capacity within their office for value-for-money audits. 

I know there have been a lot of issues on gender where the females have felt marginalised, and these are constitutional matters. As a gender activist, someone who feels there should be gender equality, I speak with a lot of passion when it comes to gender issues and interpreting them in our consideration of the Auditor-General’s reports. So I look up to you, dear friends, to support this proposal because it is brought with all the honesty it deserves. It comes here with good will. 

I think the onus is on you to see that we, as Parliament, dispose of as much business as possible. I see no harm in forming a new committee. We have done this before, and even as we consider the Rules of Procedure we are doing this; we are bringing on board new committees. Why wouldn’t we put importance on the function of accountability by building our accountability muscle as Parliament? 

Madam Speaker, I wish to rest my case and request humbly that members of both sides of the political divide support this proposal for the creation of a new committee. Thank you very much.

5.24
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion moved by Eng. Amuriat, chairman of COSASE. Whereas it is very important to do environmental audits, gender audits and all the other audits, it is also very important not to abuse our rules by creating other committees that will conflict in the course of the execution of their duties. 

I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee. We receive reports from the Auditor-General and most of these audits are done. I implore the whole House that our committees must work; we must not be lazy. That is the work we are supposed to do as committees. I do not see the significant variance that will come in this House by mere creation of a committee that will do another job supposed to be done by another committee –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is on the issue of value-for-money audit. The honourable member suggested that we set up an independent committee. To me, it would be a replication of the other committees. 

Secondly, I am a member of COSASE and hon. Amuriat is my chairman. We are already handling work of value-for-money audits from the Auditor-General. It would be of no use again to set up another independent committee to look at the value-for-money audits. Thank you very much.  

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, while we were looking at this matter, we looked at the Constitution. We looked at Article 163(3) (b) in respect of the Auditor-General’s work: “conduct financial and value for money audits in respect of any project involving public funds”. As hon. Kyamadidi put it, if we begin balkanising the work of Parliament, it shall cease to be related. 

Matters coming from the Auditor-General go to PAC. Even if it is value for money or financial matters, much of it must be in one way or another related. For purposes of following up on each other, one committee is ideal. I think the problem is administrative - how that committee does its work. 

Finally, I think this Parliament should look more at supporting the technical people who do the work. (Applause) We seem to be saying that we are going to do this, forgetting that there are actually people who are involved in producing this work and we need to support them. We need to give them money so that they have enough personnel and enough resources, and then we can look at the work from a professional policy point of view. 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, my colleagues, for that information. As I wind up, I agree with my Attorney-General that we need to invest more in our technical staff. Often, what I have seen in our committees is that our personnel may not be well facilitated to do the work they are supposed to do. Instead of creating more committees, let us look at facilitating them to do the job.

For the committees, let them also work. Most of the committees are not doing the work they are supposed to do. 

5.29
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week we debated the same matter and Parliament pronounced itself. The Leader of the Opposition at that time came out and told us that he had consulted and the members who were moving that amendment were not around. So Parliament took a decision and he had lost interest because hon. Oboi was not here.

Having said that, the Constitution is clear that the work of the Auditor-General is to carry out value-for-money audits on all public funds. The moment you create another parallel structure, it is costly, and we are avoiding costs. Most of the people have been in the – (Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: I thank you so much, hon. Kakooza, for giving way. Whereas it would be good to have as many committees as we can for value for money, one time I asked this Parliament and I actually thanked them for creating many districts and constituencies without considering where they are going to sit. I now see another scenario coming up with the committees. 

Madam Speaker, when it is time for all the committees to sit, you will find us rotating; you are here but your committee is there and the rooms are not enough. For that matter, let us first wait until we get the space. When we have enough space for all of us for those committees, it will be formed. I thank you. 

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you for the information, hon. Naome Kabasharira. The work of auditing is already done by the Auditor-General. 

Secondly, the Local Government Accounts Committee goes to the relevant districts with a document from the Auditor-General to verify what we call physical verification account, and they come and report to Parliament. I now see a scenario of duplicating the same work which is already done, which I also think does not give meaning. 

Auditing needs professionals and experts. When we passed the Auditor-General’s Act, we even created his structures so that he recruits experts within that field. I do not see how, if we created another committee and hired other experts, it will be cheaper; it will instead be more costly than necessary. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the gentleman that I am may tell me it is time to withdraw this. However, I would like to call the attention of this House to the fact that nowhere in the functions of the Local Government Accounts Committee, PAC or COSASE do you find value-for-money, gender or environment audits and all the other audits that I mentioned before included. I want to implore the House to deliberately include this as functions of those respective committees, so that it is clear to the committees that whereas they are considering the financial and management audits, they also have got a role to consider value-for-money and gender audits. I beg to move.                 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would appear that members agreed that this matter was important but it may require a separate committee. Can we task our rules committee to find a home for it across the board – a home for all these audits?

5.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, it is true that the member may not have seen it clearly. First, the Public Accounts Committee was divided and we got the Local Government Accounts Committee, COSASE and Public Accounts Committee. The moment you appropriate money for the Ministry of Education, for example, for building classes and then the Auditor-General does the value-for-money audit for schools, that report will definitely come and fall under Public Accounts Committee. This means that there is definitely a home for them. 

The only thing that we are seeing is that - by the way, the world over, it is only us who are still on financial audits - people are moving away from financial audits to value for money audits. That is why there is a lot of investment in value-for-money audits. Parliament should also move away from financial audits to value-for-money audits. 

What I can see members complaining about here is true, that they may be constrained on time and we must find a way to help some of these committees to be able to do their work. That is the most important thing. This is the reason why at that time, I had moved a proposal that we make members be on one committee each, but I was defeated – (Interjections) - Yes, and hon. Kyamadidi was the first one. 

When you appropriate a budget or when we were doing the budget, we all put our energy there. The budget has been spent and we need to know how it has been spent. That is why we should call on accountability committees to be heavily involved and supported to do it. 

Having said that, I want to thank my member for accepting to withdraw. In fact, the value-for-money audit is taken care of; the only thing is that maybe at an appropriate time, we can decide as Parliament on how best we should help. We could maybe create a committee to specifically assist them to clear the backlog, purposely for that. It could be an ad hoc committee. It could help them clear the backlog and they come back to the drawing board. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to say that it was not just about financial audits. The honourable member talked about environmental audit and gender audit; so it is much bigger than the financial audit. This is the reason I want our committee to really look at this issue more carefully and try to place them in their relevant sectors so that all these audits are done. I thank you. The only matter, therefore, for recommital is rule – (Interjection) – Oh, there is another recommital.

5.37
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I thank you very much. On Thursday I received a document that this House needs to know about. I had gone to pick it where I had left it but the person who kept it has not obtained it. 

Under our laws of Uganda, Cap 342, the Stamp Duty Act, under section 10 the Minister has power to vary taxes. I looked at several variations which were done by several ministers for finance on matters that Parliament has already passed in the Finance Bill. When I consulted the legal experts, these variations can only be legal through a statutory instrument before the budget is passed; any variation done after the budget should come for the next budget. 

The ministers have issued statutory instruments to vary stamp duty on capital shares of banks, land transfers and imports. For individuals, even those buying land in this country, the ministers have been issuing statutory instruments to vary stamp duty for them and it is quite a substantial amount of money that the Government of Uganda has lost. 

We had last week proposed – (Interjections) - I want to give justification. We had proposed that no statutory instrument should come into force unless it has been brought here on the Floor and maybe after two weeks, the relevant committee would handle. However, the timeframe was not indicated. So you find that as we speak today, ministers have powers to issue statutory instruments and immediately they come into force. 

I would like to recommit that aspect of the statutory instruments so that the rules committee handles it and brings it here and we have a timeframe. This is to ensure that a minister does not just wake up to issue statutory instruments, like what minister of works did on the transport sector and this has had a very serious impact. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are not recommitting it but giving a proposal that the rules committee looks at it; is that so?

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay because some of the Acts do not even require the statutory instrument to come here. So, it is better the committee looks at it. They can report back when they return to report on the other issues. Okay, honourable members, the two matters for recommittal are rule 159 (2) (c) and rule 202.

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

Rule 159 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, it is proposed that we replace paragraph (l) on finance in the following terms: 

“Finance, Planning and Economic Development covering: 
(i) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its agencies; and 
(ii) Office of the Auditor-General.” 

The committee concedes to this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 159 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 159, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 202 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, it is proposed that rule 202 (5) be amended to read thus: “(5) No person may carry into the Gallery a briefcase, firearm or any weapon.” Rule 202 (8) to read thus: “In accordance with the rules made under this rule, a member of the press or media accredited to Parliament or any other press person may be admitted into the press gallery with an electronic device for recording and coverage purposes.” The committee concedes to this amendment. I beg to move that you put the question.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 202 be amended by a creation of a new sub-rule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 202, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.43
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House reconsidered proposed amendments to rule 202 (5) and (8) and rule 159 (2) (l) and passed them. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE FUNDING FOR ARBITRATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND HERITAGE OIL AND GAS LIMITED

5.45
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to present a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the funding for arbitration between Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited. 

Before I present this report, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that two weeks ago, I raised a complaint to you on a matter that had come up in the press regarding the performance of my committee and several others in regard to the report that had come before this House. For purposes of the record, and as you are aware, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament is one of the busiest committees. Also for purposes of the record, I would like to say that we have raised two reports since the session begun.

Even more relevant to the House, which is also for the correction of the record, I would like to say that although we received the Bills late in the committee, I am happy to inform the House that as we talk, the report on the Companies Bill, which has more than 500 clauses, is ready. In the same vein, I would like to inform the House that the report for the Public Order Management Bill is also ready. 

Other Bills whose reports are ready are the Transfer of Convicted Persons Bill and the Anti Torture Bill. I would like to further report that we have also put the Attorney-General to notice to give us his presentation in regard to the Marriage and Divorce Bill because our report is ready. 

So, contrary to what was reported in the press, I want to say that our committee has been very busy. That is why we have ready reports to be presented to this House at the earliest opportunity. That was for purposes of correcting the record in regard to what was reported in the press.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, permit me to present this report. 

Introduction

On 29th of August 2011, Parliament passed the committee’s recommendation to stay the approval of Shs 11,942,283,901 for the arbitration case between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited until the committee receives the necessary documents supporting the budget. The committee was given one month to report back to the House.

Background to the Report 
The committee was informed that Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Tullow Uganda Limited were jointly licensed by the Government of Uganda for petroleum exploration, development and production in exploration areas 1 and 3A in the Albertine Graben, with each having a participating interest of 50 percent in each of the said exploration areas. 

On 26 January 2010, Heritage entered into a sale and purchase agreement by which Heritage agreed to sell to Tullow its 50 percent participating interest in each of the exploration areas, 1 and 3A. In a letter dated February 2nd 2010, Heritage requested for consent for the said transfer of its interest in the said exploration areas from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, in accordance with section 44 of the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap. 150.   

By a letter dated 6 July 2010, the minister gave a conditional consent to Heritage for the proposed transfer of interest subject to the following terms:

1. Upon closure of the transaction, Heritage shall pay all taxes accruing from the transaction as shall be assessed by the Commissioner Uganda Revenue Authority.

2. For the avoidance of doubt, the approval shall not be effective unless Heritage has paid all taxes or demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Government of Uganda, that the said taxes shall be paid immediately upon demand. 

On 6 July 2010, the Uganda Revenue Authority, which is a body corporate and the tax collection body of Government of Uganda, issued a tax assessment to Heritage in the amount of US$ 404,925,000 as taxes payable in relation to the said transfer. On 19 August 2010, URA issued an additional tax assessment to Heritage in the amount of US$ 30,000,000. 

Heritage objected to the above assessments contending that the said transfer did not give rise to any tax liability under the laws of Uganda. The Government of Uganda on the other hand strongly maintained that the said transaction was taxable under the laws of Uganda. 

On 27 July 2011, the Uganda Revenue Authority issued an Agency Notice under Section 108(1) of the Income Tax Act Cap. 340 to Tullow, appointing Tullow as a third party agent for purposes of collection of the aforementioned taxes payable by Heritage in respect of the first assessment. 

On 26 July 2010, Tullow and Heritage purported to complete a sale and purchase agreement transaction without the Government’s approval, whereupon Tullow paid Heritage US$ 1,045,000,000 in respect of the transfer. In addition, Heritage and Tullow deposited 30 percent of the taxes thereof, that is US$ 121,477,500, with URA in accordance with Section 103(2) of the Income Tax Act. They further deposited the balance of 70 percent of the taxes thereof, that is, US$ 283,447,500, in an Escrow Account held between Tullow and Heritage with Standard Chartered Bank of UK, without Government’s consent and approval. 

On the failure by Heritage to pay taxes on the first assessment in full, Government by letter to Heritage, dated 3 August 2010, stated that the conditions set out in the letter of 6 July 2010 had not been met and therefore the conditional consent had not become effective. Consequently, the said transfer between Heritage and Tullow was of no legal effect or consequence under Section 44 of the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap. 150.   

Arising from the above, Tullow could not legally acquire Heritage’s 50 percent participating interest. This prompted Tullow to enter into negotiations with Government. Under the Memorandum of Understanding dated 15 March 2011 between the Government and Uganda Revenue Authority on the one part and Tullow Uganda Ltd, Tullow undertook to pay US$ 313,447,500 being the balance of the assessed taxes payable by Heritage on the said transaction, on the strength of the Agency Notices issued by URA to Tullow on the first and second assessments. 

By letters dated 1 October 2010 and 18 August 2010 to URA, Heritage, in accordance with Section 99(1) of the Income Tax Act, objected to the first and second assessments respectively. The Commissioner General of URA issued the objection decisions to Heritage in respect of the first and second assessments by letters dated 1 November 2010 and 1 December 2010 respectively, in accordance with Section 99(5) of the Income Tax Act.

Consequently, in accordance with 100(1) (b) of the Income Tax Act, Heritage lodged an application for review of the taxation decision before the Tax Appeals Tribunal in Uganda, hearing of which has begun. 

In total disregard of the ongoing dispute proceedings in the Tax Appeals Tribunal, Heritage wrote two letters requesting for re-negotiation of the Production Sharing Agreements and further served two notices of arbitration to the government in respect of the same tax dispute. Heritage went ahead to file arbitration proceedings in London.

Arising from the foregoing, a need arose to engage external legal counsel to give support to the government legal team in execution of the said arbitral proceedings. The Attorney-General instructed Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP to support the government team. 

Since the funds which were required to finance the arbitration proceedings had not been provided for in the budget for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the ministry sought for a supplementary budget from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development amounting to Shs 11,942,283,906. When the committee met with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs during the consideration of the ministerial policy statements for financial year 2011/2012, it was resolved that this budget would not be passed until supportive documents had been provided. The following issues were raised by the Committee:

1. 	Whether the procurement of the external counsel was done according to the PPDA.
2. 	Whether the cost of the arbitration was justified.
3. Why the arbitration had to take place in London.

Methodology 

The committee held meetings with the following departments:
1. 	Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
2. 	Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development 
3. 	Uganda Revenue Authority
4. 	Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority

Procurement of Lawyers 

The committee was informed by the Attorney-General that under Article 119 of the Constitution, he is the principal legal advisor of Government and one of his functions under sub-article (a)(c) is to represent the Government in courts or any other legal proceedings to which Government is a party. He further informed the committee that under rule 4(c) of the Government Proceedings (Civil Procedure) Rules, the Attorney-General can delegate his function to any person/advocate duly instructed by him. 

In selecting the legal team to which to delegate his functions, - this is according to the Attorney-General - the Attorney-General takes into account many factors including the subject matter and forum in which the case is filed. In this particular case, the Attorney-General was of the considered opinion that the arbitration instituted by Heritage Oil Ltd in London, being on the subject of taxation of a transaction in oil and gas, required the assistance of an external legal counsel with distinguished experience in the areas of oil and gas, international taxation and international commercial arbitration.
 
As the legal advisor of Government, the Attorney-General maintained that he is exercising his constitutional mandate to represent Government in a matter to which Government is a party, and he sought the assistance of an external counsel to augment the government defence team. The delegation, according to the Attorney-General, is not subject to the PPDA procedures and that indeed the PPDA previously referred entities seeking outsourcing of legal services through the Attorney-General.  

Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General’s Office, the committee was informed, followed the basic principles of procurement, that is, transparency, competition, fairness, and ensured value for money in the selection of the external legal counsel. This was the same opinion given by the PPDA, that legal services are not covered under the PPDA law. 

The government legal and technical team constituted to handle the arbitration case prepared terms of reference for the external legal counsel and using the databank for external legal experts identified five firms with the requisite experience. The five firms were on 1 June 2011 invited to submit proposals by 6 June 2011. The firms were Crowell and Moring LLP (UK), White and Case LLP (UK), MacLeod Dixon LLP (Venezuela), DLA Piper LLP and Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

The proposals submitted by the above firms were evaluated by team officers from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Uganda Revenue Authority based on the evaluation criteria developed by the Government of Uganda legal team. The proposals were evaluated by a two-stage process in accordance with procurement principles as follows: 

(1) 	Technical evaluation to determine compliance with terms of reference and the evaluation criteria developed by the government legal team for evaluation of the proposals using a merit point methodology of evaluation. Firms that did not score 70 percent and above in the technical evaluation did not proceed to the next stage, the financial evaluation. 

(2) 	Financial evaluation to examine the proposals to determine reasonableness of the legal fees and reasonable terms of payment. All the proposals were subjected to the set evaluation criteria and scored accordingly. 

On the basis of this evaluation methodology and criteria above, the best evaluated firm was Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP.

Cost of Arbitration 

The committee scrutinised the first budget dated 10 June 2011 and raised a number of queries on the consistency of the figures and the justification for inclusion of some of the items such as fuel refund, computers, media consultancy, registration fees and contingency among others. The Attorney-General was advised to harmonise the figures and come up with a more clear and specific budget. 

In the subsequent meeting, the Attorney-General came up with a revised budget, which had a total of Shs 10,587,758,475, as contained in Annex II. That was revised from the figure of Shs 11,655,980,406. This would make a saving of Shs 1, 068,221,931. 

However, members noted that the allowances for support staff, who included a secretary, clerk and driver, worth Shs 24, 300,000, had been erroneously removed from the revised budget and therefore added them back. The following new items were also included in the revised budget: 

•	Arbitration fees of €104,700 at an exchange rate of Shs 3,100, which amounts to Shs 324,570,000.
•	Reimbursements to arbitrators, amounting to Shs 424,224,975. 

All this comes to a total of Shs 748,794,975. In summary, these are the figures that had been omitted from the original submission. 

The committee considered the revised budget and came to the conclusion that some items below should either be reduced or taken out of the budget as the case may be because they were considered not relevant or wastage.  The following items were recommended for removal:

•	Oil refund of Shs 53,550,000
•	A scanner of Shs 700,000 
•	Office computers of Shs 9,090,000 
•	Office consumables of Shs 3,064,000 
•	Media consultancy of Shs 250,000,000 
•	Legal consultancy to be reduced by Shs 3,140, 286,000 
•	The Black Law Dictionary of Shs 300,000 
•	The English Dictionary of Shs 80,000 
•	Subscription to OGEL Journal of Shs 2,768,300
•	Transnational Dispute Management (TDM) of Shs 2,768,300 
•	Registration fees of Shs 5,550,000 
•	The committee also recommended that a contingency of Shs 555,046,686 be removed. 

The total of the above figures comes to a saving of Shs 4,023,203,286. The exchange rates used at the time of writing our report was Shs 2,350 per dollar, Shs 3,700 per pound and Shs 3,100 per euro. There is also the addition of the Shs 748,794,975, which is subtracted from the Shs 4 billion. So the new total savings will be Shs 3,274,408,311. The proposed summary of the budget is attached in Annex 3.

Why did the arbitration take place in London?
The committee was informed that the arbitration proceedings were taking place in London pursuant to Article 26(1) of the Production Sharing Agreement dated July 1st 2004 between the Ugandan Government, Heritage Oil and Gas and Tullow Oil Uganda. It states that: 

“Any dispute arising under the agreement which cannot be settled amicably within 60 days, shall be referred to arbitration in accordance with the United Nations Commission for International Trade Law Arbitration Rules. 

The arbitration shall be conducted by three arbitrators appointed in accordance with the said rules. The said arbitration shall take place in London, England. Judgement on the award rendered may be entered in any court having jurisdiction or application may be made in such court for a judicial acceptance of the award for an order of enforcement, as the case may be. The arbitration award shall be final and binding on all the parties to this agreement.”

Observations

Madam Speaker, the committee observed the following: 

1. The committee was not convinced that the procurement procedure was followed since this is a government department which used public funds and is supposed to follow the PPDA rules. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs did not follow the PPDA Act in the process of procuring external legal counsel. Under Section 1 of the PPDA Act, it is stated thus:
“This Act shall apply to all public procurement and disposal activities and in particular shall apply to– 
(a) all public finances- 
(i) originating from the Consolidated Fund and related special finances expended through the capital or recurrent budgets, whatever form this may take; 

(ii) that may be earmarked for external obligation purposes, except those resources that may be earmarked for payments of membership subscriptions and contributions; and 

(iii) of a procuring and disposing entity; 

(b) resources in the form of counterpart transfers or co-financing or any finances of a similar nature within the context of development co-operation agreements for the implementation of national programmes; and

(c) procurement or disposal of works, services, supplies or any combination however classified by-
(i) entities of Government within and outside Uganda; and
(ii) entities, not of Government, but which benefit from any type of specific public funds specified in paragraph (a) of this sub-section.”

Under Section 3 of the PDDA, a service is defined to mean “any object of procurement or disposal other than works and supplies, and includes professional, non-professional and commercial types of services as well as supplies and works which are incidental to, but not exceeding the value of those services.” 

The committee observed that the PPDA was passed to solve the challenges of procurement which were being faced under the old laws. Therefore the Attorney-General cannot use the Government Proceedings (Civil Procedure) Rules which were passed in the 1960s to side step a law which was passed in 2003. (Applause)

2. The ministry had budgeted for fuel refund to a tune of Shs 53,550,000 yet the officials who will be attending the meetings all use government vehicles with fuel paid for by the government.

3. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs does not have a capital development budget. This has constrained the operations of the ministry since it cannot procure items like computers to enable them discharge their functions. 

4. Agreements providing for arbitration proceedings in foreign countries disadvantage our country due to the high costs involved. In future, arbitration proceedings should be handled in Uganda and no agreements should be executed providing for arbitration outside Uganda.
5. External counsel has been hired at a rate of US$ 747 per hour. The estimated average hours of work are two hours per day for five days for six months spread over a period of one year. Ten legal associates are projected to assist the key personnel at a cost of US$ 562 per hour per associate. These associates will however be used only with the approval of the Attorney-General.

6. The ministry budgeted for a scanner (Shs 700,000) which can be got from the funds available in the ministry. That goes with Black’s Law Dictionary and those items under 6. 

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that: 
1. The government provides the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs funds for capital development. This would have helped and will help to reduce the costs of procurement of things like laptops - (Interruption) - What a rare opportunity to be served by the Leader of Government Business. (Laughter) This would have helped to reduce the costs of procurement of things like laptops and desktop computers.

2. The budget for the scanner, fuel refund, dictionaries, subscription to OGEL, media consultancy transnational dispute management, registration fees and contingency be removed. This will save government Shs 870,763,286.

3. The Attorney-General should always follow the procurement procedure laid out in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act and other laws of Uganda in performance of his functions.

4. Government should as much as possible avoid signing agreements which have foreign countries as places for arbitration since this involves a lot of costs. Uganda has an effective legal regime to handle arbitration under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, and the Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution should be developed to handle some of these arbitrations.  

5. The committee recommends that the House approves Shs 8,719,744,475 for the arbitration since the government had already procured the lawyers and these lawyers had started working against those instructions.

6. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority should ensure that government departments follow the procurement procedure laid out in the procurement laws of this country. 

This committee report I think had a record number of signatures, that is, 18 out of 20 members. May I, on behalf of the committee, thank you for the support that you gave to us and also for sponsoring a trip that enabled us to understand this process. I also want to thank the Attorney-General’s Chambers and the Uganda Revenue Authority for co-operating with us and helping us to reduce the figures to the figures that we submit today. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. I note that the report is actually signed by 17 out of 18 members. So, it is almost 97 percent. We want to thank you for the work. 

I have just two comments. Recently, I was attending a meeting of the EAC and I was informed that under the East African Community, we also have arbitration. If we wanted to look beyond Uganda, we can look within East Africa for arbitration. 

Two, the other day when I was at the Uganda Mission in New York, they were complaining about the problems of compliance with the PPDA when they were trying to buy lifts. They said that the big suppliers were offended at being asked to bid with small people in America. So, I think when the amendments come, we should look at how the PPDA operates for procurements outside the country by our missions abroad. They expressed that it really took them difficulty to explain why they were subjecting Curtis to compete with very small suppliers before decisions could be taken. This is just for your information.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for this good report. This is a very important report that I think would generate some detailed debate. I also note with concern that members have actually been very attentive and concentrating on the debate since we started. 

I just want to inquire, having received this report at about 6.30 p.m., whether it would not be procedurally right for us to go through it and perhaps start debate on it when we all have very fresh and vibrant minds. Now the sugar levels may also reduce on our concentration. I beg to propose, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my chairperson has been vilified in the press for not doing work. He has brought work. When I was communicating this afternoon, I also said we shall only have today, tomorrow and Thursday because we are going to have to adjourn. Is it really hard for us to debate this matter? If you do not want this one, we go to the companies’ law. Let us receive the report on companies.

MR EKANYA: I do not know whether members know the volume of work we have. Just in April, we are going to head to the budget but the volume of work we have is too much that any opportunity to clear work is very important. I do not know where the chairperson of the Budget Committee is. The report on supplementary budget cannot be handled until this report has been concluded and - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Ekanya. Hon. Ekanya was wondering whether we know the volume of work. I wanted to inform him that we are quite aware of the volume of work. It actually includes bathing the children as well in the evening. It also includes cooking - (Interjections) - Yes, these are the triple gender roles that affect our performance in Parliament. That is why often times, we argue that Parliament as an institution is very masculine, a very patriarchal institution; it does not take into cognisance those other gender roles. Whatever we do, we will either escape from here or have to do those other roles very late. I thought that I would give hon. Ekanya that very useful information. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, honourable triple A and I understand this matter, and I do not want us to discuss it here. I really wanted to plead with the House that it is important that this matter be disposed of because the team that is handling these legal issues is having problems in accessing money.

I am one of the members who moved a motion in the Budget Committee and we put a stay on this matter. This money is therefore in the Treasury under Ministry of Justice. If we do not clear this report, these teams will continue borrowing money at a very high interest rate. I really want to plead with members that within 30 minutes, we dispose of this so that we handle the Budget Committee report on supplementary.

THE SPEAKER: The only problem I had with the supplementary is that the minister who is holding the portfolio told me that she would not be able to handle it because she is waiting for hon. Omach to come and handle that tomorrow. We could finish this and then wait for the supplementary tomorrow. We also have the Companies Bill. Honourable members, we have only a few days, so we have to work today. I appreciate all these roles but let us make allowances.

6.27
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the chairperson and the members. I would like to propose to the committee that whereas you have made substantial savings, if you read the international law on trade and arbitration rules, there is international assistance that can be given to Uganda without us drawing on our own budget. We can make substantial savings with this. 

If you read those rules, you will read that in 2010, there was an amendment by the UN Commission as regards the issue of procurement. I would like to urge that your committee goes in depth and sees whether the procurement of the arbitrators was done in compliance with the laws, so that we are not -

THE SPEAKER: Which particular laws? The international law?

MR EKANYA: Yes; it has a clause regarding procurement. I call upon the chairperson to read that law. Some countries were exaggerating costs so it set out rules and standards, payments to lawyers and technical assistance that is available for developing countries, which can be accessed. It also talks about the trust fund that was established by the UN and this trust fund is in Chase Bank in New York. 

The international law also talks about how you can apply the international law on arbitration. So countries that have domesticated arbitration, like Uganda, could have easily appealed objection to arbitration in London and we would have had it here or at the East African Court as you proposed. 

I would like to urge the committee that if the House adopts this report, we need to spend more time and read this international law on arbitration and how it impacts on us, where we can get mileage so that we are just not taken for granted. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

6.30
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sincerely, I am finding problems with a scanner of Shs 700,000, a dictionary - these are things I need to learn as a teacher.

Secondly, don’t we really have lawyers in Uganda who could have been able to handle these matters of arbitration? Why doesn’t charity begin at home? You give money to other people when we have people around here! I have seen hon. Katuntu here battling out the issue of East African Legislative Assembly and he was doing it very well. Why do we give money to outsiders when we have our people here?

Finally, I am not a lawyer but I would think it would have been better for any case dealing with Uganda and which starts from Uganda to be handled here. The oil issue is here - Tullow came here - and then for the matter of arbitration, you take our people outside to UK to handle such matters! That was not fair and not right - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I remember in the Eighth Parliament when we started the oil exploration, Government brought a Bill on how tax revenues could be collected from these companies. When you look at the Income Tax Act, section 10, which we all use - I can read it verbatim:
“Resident Company – like Tullow or Heritage
A company is a resident company for a year of income if it- 
(a)is incorporated or formed under the laws of Uganda; 
(b)has its management and control exercised in Uganda at any time during the year of income...” 

What I am trying to say is that if these companies conform to the law and they are resident companies, they must be arbitrated within here. We have got tribunal courts within the country. That means when they are operating from here, they must conform to the laws of Uganda as resident companies. We do not need to go out. 

MR WERIKHE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have reason to respond to my colleague’s concern as to why this case was not arbitrated here but in London. We are reaping from what we sowed. We had the share agreements we have been talking about. These clauses are enshrined in those production sharing agreements. When we were negotiating with these companies, we gave away some of these things to these companies. That is how we ended up being in London. So, this is a warning to us as we hammer out the new laws. We should make sure that these issues are well prepared so that we have laws which are going to safeguard our interests. That is the information I had. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us allow hon. Ssewungu to conclude.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, I think the promise still boomerangs against the Attorney-General. (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEWUNGU: With these recommendations, it is as if the committee was dodging the Attorney-General. He has a case to answer. 

Finally, there are certain things we have to move away from. In this recommendation No. 1, for example, they talk about the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs buying laptops and desktops. These are very unsafe gadgets to be kept in the ministry. These are things which are supposed to be bought by individuals. Ministry offices should buy things which can be feasible and can be maintained and cannot be stolen. How are you going to safeguard a laptop from being taken by workers? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.34
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first clarification, which is important to me, is that as the committee supports the idea and recommendation No. 5 of legal associates, I would like to know, aren’t there lawyers retained at the office of the Attorney-General who can serve as legal associates? I need to know because we are already paying them money, salaries and whatever. Are they too incompetent or too inferior to even associate with the arbitration company and help us? That is one.  

Two, did the committee consider the possibility that under our production sharing agreement, under the stabilisation clauses and the provisions for cost oil, the legal expenses will be put back on us as cost oil? So, it then becomes a double loss to this country. Maybe you could even advise Government against continuing with arbitration if the legal expenses of Tullow are going to be brought back to us later on as costs at the final stage. 

I would like to emphasise the issue made by the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. The mistake is that the production sharing agreements sold us away. If we want to make a law which safeguards us, I think now is the time; so that we can dictate in law that we need to exhaust all the provisions in our local system, our national system, before we run for arbitration elsewhere. You choose to run for arbitration, you pay highly for this. I think these - (Interjection) - Just a minute, I will give you. These Bills before the House should make it mandatory for us to deal exhaustively with our legal system here.

Finally, I think it is important that in matters of this nature - (Interruption)

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member is that even in the current PSAs, issues of taxes are only arbitrable in Uganda. What happened is that the party, Heritage Oil, ran to London. So, when they ran to London, we could not sit here and say, “This is a tax issue; it is arbitrable in Uganda.” 

MS ALASO: We can make very good laws to help the system. Thank you.

6.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have one point that I want to comment on. Before that, on page 9, contrary to what hon. Baka is talking about, it states that in the agreement which was signed, the said arbitration shall take place in London, England. That was clearly stated in the agreement. Somebody would wonder why a Ugandan who was signing this would accept that the arbitration shall take place in London. 

However, the issue I want to bring out is - This case is arising out of matters of taxation, where one company refuses to pay tax. I am wondering whether the money which has been set aside to pay the lawyers outside is to be subjected to tax. I know that in the laws of Uganda, there are provisions for taxation for non-resident persons. The law firm which was engaged for this purpose is a non-resident company. I am wondering whether we are not headed for another case where they refuse to pay tax on the fees paid to them. Has this been taken care of? That money, which I think is 15 percent withholding tax that a non-resident company is supposed to retain here in Uganda, has it been taken care of? That is what I wanted to get clarification on. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.40
MRS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to really thank the committee for whatever they have done, and I also want to ask why this arbitration is taking place in London. We have realised in the agreement that it will only take place in London if it has not been settled amicably within 60 days. My question is: what became of this? Why didn’t they settle this within 60 days? Did they try? Did they make any effort to really settle this within 60 days and they were defeated and that is the reason they are going to settle it in London? 

We can see the costs which we are incurring in this. We could have settled it within 60 days without us incurring Shs 60 billion. In this statement, when they asked the Attorney-General, he said under Article 199 of the Constitution he is the principal legal advisor of the government. Did they really make an effort to advise the government over this? If you really advised Government, then we would not have incurred such costs. All I am saying, Attorney-General, is that your office has not done a lot. Please, next time try to help us, as Uganda. Thank you.

6.42
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for this report. From the report, we note that there are a lot of omissions on the part of procedure. However, there is a commitment and an obligation for us to pay because the case is on and Uganda is committed. 

Shs 8 billion is not small money. I have a concern on how this transaction was made. We must caution the people who were dealing with the transaction because of the omissions. It is also important for all of us as Members of Parliament to get the details of these agreements as they are being made. 

Madam Speaker, you had made an arrangement for us to be sensitised on the process, but it did not take off. I therefore pray that you take it on again so that we are all brought on board in regard to the processes of these agreements. I support the committee‘s recommendations on the commitments and obligations to pay. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record; I arranged with the Norwegians to give us some seminars for the whole House after the Easter break, so that we can understand them before we go into the debate on the Bills. 

6.44
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is yet again to bleed Shs 8.7 billion for arbitration. Actually, the Attorney-General is again at the centre of the controversy. On page 4, the committee observes that the Attorney-General instructed Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP to support the government team without following the procurement procedure. 

On that particular instruction, the committee was careful not to mention the date when the Attorney-General passed such instructions to that team. However, they were very succinct on page 6 when they mentioned that Government constituted a legal and technical team to handle the arbitration case. Thirty firms were invited on 1st June to submit proposals by 6th - a record five days.  Surely, if we agree that the PPDA procedures were not followed, how can I be convinced to approve an illegality? 

Secondly, I would like to find out whether the committee met the arbitrators. On the list of those organisations met, I do not see the committee having interacted with the arbitrators. However, on page 8, the committee is convincing us to give an additional Shs 748,794,000 to top up for arbitration fees and re-imbursement to arbitrators. I do not know how you came up with this and who brought such information.

Lastly, it is very sickening to me; if you look at the kind of external counsel that we have sought, on page 11, they would be paid at a rate of US$ 747 per hour at an exchange rate of Shs 3,000! If I understood well, it would be Shs 2,241,000 per hour; that is what Ugandans have to pay for. I think we need to put some sanctions on people who cause the country unnecessary financial losses. What sanctions are we going to put on the Attorney-General? To me, this is laxity – (Member timed out_)

6.48
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to contribute something from page 8, which is about items reduced or taken out. I am particularly addressing myself to three items - the media consultancy, the Black Law Dictionary and the English Dictionary. These items have been removed and I do not support that for the following reasons: if somebody goes to war, they need all the different equipment for use. Our lawyers here need the dictionary and that is why they budgeted for them. For them to be well equipped, I propose that we leave the dictionaries there because they will go unprepared and we cannot afford having our lawyers embarrassed in UK.

On the media consultancy, we have been talking about media and cooperating with the media as Parliament. We know that our lawyers there are going to defend us as a country. How are we going to get the information if the media is not catered for in the budget? I propose that instead of removing it completely, we reduce it but make sure that the media is there.

6.50
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable members. My response is based on pages 12 and 13, on the recommendations. 

Recommendation No.3 says, “The Attorney-General should always...” I need clarification if the word “should” is mandatory. If the Attorney-General is the custodian of all the laws and he flouted PPDA laws, I think we should use a stricter term and say, “The Attorney-General must at all times adhere to all the laws.” 

On page 13, we have got a figure of Shs 8.719 billion as the recommended figure. I have a concern on this. When handling yourself, you need to be very cautious so that you are very secure. This is a team from which now Shs 4 billion has been saved, which was going to be carelessly handled. I cannot now trust this group with money in block figures. I would have wanted the committee to give a breakdown of how the Shs 8.7 billion will be spent, so that we are able to monitor detail by detail, and so that when there is a budget review of these actions and activities, we are able to see which area exceeded and which area saved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.52
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): I thank the committee for the very good work done. However, I want to support a colleague who suggested that we should prefer sanctions against the Chamber of the Attorney-General. This country is bleeding because of this very office. You have heard of the billions we have lost through compensations yet this a technical legal committee which is supposed to assist government and Uganda out of difficult legal problems. This is a Chamber, which supports arbitration abroad and has ignored procurement laws. It has included unnecessary items. You can imagine budgeting for a dictionary, which I can pick from my office. In the village, if somebody steals chicken, if that person is given billions he is likely to steal those billions.

I want to thank the committee because you can imagine we are now going to save Shs 3.2 billion, which can help this country elsewhere. We should not forget the pressure that the Government had at that time to make sure that Parliament authorises this and they go and defend the country. You can imagine, Shs 3.2 billion!

My colleague is supporting media. Are you going to spend so much money on media? You want information from the London court for what? I support my colleague that this House prefers sanctions against the Chambers of the Attorney-General because you have let this country down including His Excellency the President, by the way. I thank you.

6.54
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): I thank you. I must thank the committee very much for the job well done. I must say that when you look at the observations and recommendations of the committee, they have done a thorough job and I think they must have left no stone unturned. 

These resolutions can give us a good way forward but my concern, Madam Speaker, is that we have people who have abrogated some rules like the PPDA. We have people who have inflated colossal sums of money to enrich themselves. We have people who have put unnecessary costs to just benefit themselves at the expense of the tax payer. My concern is that for how long will this continue? Are these people going to be left untouched? I think something must be done and they are brought to book. 

Forgetting the PPDA Act, inflating figures and putting in unnecessary costs are great mistakes that should not be tolerated. I feel something must be done; otherwise, I find it perfectly in order that these people should be paid the money so that they wind up this process. I thank you very much.

6.56
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. At the same time, I thank the team that has represented us for some good work done. I can see there is some work done. 

As far as this report is concerned, I highly support the recommendations. I support the recommendations from page 8 that unnecessary costs should be removed from the budget, not even reduced. What do we need media consultants for, for example? We have lost a lot and what is there for the media to do? The committee has observed and realised that it is wastage and I highly support that they should be removed. 

At the same time, the office of the Attorney-General should be strengthened. I highly support the sanctions as has been suggested by fellow comrades because they have betrayed this nation on various occasions. They need to repent, reform and work for the good of this country.

Last but not the least, and most importantly, I support that we should facilitate this team to do good work and save many millions for our country. I thank you.

6.58
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My issues are very few. The first is like a colleague raised; we are wondering why we did not exhaust the avenues here despite the fact that it was in the agreement. Secondly, why didn’t the Attorney-General follow the PPDA law? Three, we are already committed and we are going to pay. Actually, if we do not pay these lawyers, we are going to pay more heavily. 

After we have paid and incurred all this loss, we must punish our own. It is not the right time now to say that we do not pay because when a hen comes home running away from an animal, you do not send it back. After you have chased the animal, you call the hen home and teach it never to go astray again. I think these people must be punished in one way or the other. I thank you.

6.59
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Rt. hon. Speaker. Members recall that the Attorney-General’s failure to provide information to the legal committee is what led to the oil debate in this House; he was hiding information from the committee. Also, when we were debating, hon. Hilary Onek said on this Floor that he resisted the inclusion of that provision of arbitration in London, and then he was reshuffled and other people put there to put this in. This gives us an impression that there seems to be collusion. This seems to have been a project by some individuals to insert this provision in the Production Sharing Agreement so that there is this arbitration, and it is very unfortunate. 

I wanted to seek clarification because the Production Sharing Agreement talks of arbitration in London but we also know that this matter was taken to the Commercial Court. I think arguments were made by URA and Government on the basis of the Income Tax Act and the Commercial Court ruled in favour of Uganda. Now, which provision takes precedence over the other? Is it the Production Sharing Agreement that takes us to London or the domestic Act, which is a local law on income tax where our own court has made a ruling? Is Government going to implement the ruling by the Commercial Court?

Secondly, I think it is also wrong for the office of the Attorney-General to always attempt to interpret the law when it suits them. You avoid following the PPDA law and then you start giving a wrong interpretation. What the office should have done was to write to PPDA maybe for a waiver - to ask for authority and permission to do direct procurement - but not say that you can procure international consultants without following the law. I think that was wrong.

Lastly, a consultancy rate of US$ 747 per hour looks scandalous. We have a number of members here doing international consultancies and there are guidelines on how amounts are computed based on UN rates and bilateral agency rates. I would really want to challenge the Government officials who negotiated this to explain what basis they used to arrive at this figure. Some of us have done international assignments and we know how you arrive at the rates. This looks scandalous! 

I think the Leader of Government Business should be able to streamline the work in Government to avoid these kinds of loopholes. A lot of money is leaking through the system; all the holes should be plugged so that we can stop this corruption and leakage of public resources within the public institutions.

THE SPEAKER: I had wanted the Leader of Government Business to listen to the debate but he says he has some activity. Let me give him three minutes and then we will go back. 

7.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report and I support it. 

First, let me say that the case in London, as hon. Baka said, is a case by Heritage. It is Heritage which took Uganda to the international arbitration tribunal. So, the choice we had was either to go and defend ourselves or not to show up at all. Obviously, no one would support that we should not go at all.

We believe that Uganda has a very good case because this is a tax matter and our law is very clear on it; tax issues have to be settled finally by Ugandan courts and not by arbitration outside. However, we have to make that case before this tribunal, and we have all the confidence that we will win. 

Lawyers generally are not cheap; I know it very well. I can only talk for lawyers because I know them very well- (Interjection) - The teachers are not cheap either. When I was Attorney-General, I did represent Uganda in the International Court of Justice and we hired the services of a QC. This man earned all the salary I earned in the year for every hour we spent with him. Those are the rates, and we had gone around and looked for the best. I happen to know that this firm that was chosen is not actually the most expensive in terms of courts of arbitration. The most important thing is that we think we shall win this case and we hope the other party will meet the costs that we have incurred. 

I am not sure about the proposal by the committee that agreements providing for arbitration proceedings in foreign countries should be avoided or actually should stop. This has a few problems. As you know, Uganda is competing with the rest of the world for investible resources which are from outside. Most of these people may feel more confident to subject any dispute they may have to international arbitration rather than domestic. Do you really want to keep out investors who may prefer international arbitration? I do not think that would be a nice thing to do.

Uganda is also a signatory to quite a few conventions; for instance, there is the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes. This is a convention arising out of a multilateral treaty by the World Bank, which was entered into and came into force on 14 October 1956. The convention seeks to remove major impediments to free international flows of private investment. It is actually now considered to be the leading international arbitration institution devoted to investor-state disputes settlements. One hundred and fifty seven (157) countries of the world are signatory to this.

I think we need to be very careful to study these to see whether we want to take the kind of stand that the committee is proposing. It may be to our detriment. I suggest that we really go and study this and come and reconsider. 

As far as tax disputes are concerned, our law settles them but it is not only taxes over which disputes arise, there may be others. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: I thank the hon. Prime Minister for actually noticing that it is not proper for him not to clarify issues to the nation. I had asked this from the committee, but I think it is the Prime Minister best suited to answer. I asked whether the legal expenses of Heritage, while they are in this arbitration process, constitute part of what in our Production Sharing Agreement is regarded cost oil at the end of the day. Will the Ugandan Government at any one point in future find itself paying for the arbitration as part of cost oil? I really need that clarification.

MR OKUPA: I just want clarification on these issues of taxation because that is where this entire problem arose from. 

There was an understanding before we signed the recent agreements that these companies pay the taxes. However, we were surprised that immediately after signing the agreements, these companies objected after URA asked for taxes and they have gone to the Tax Appeals Tribunal. This is fresh information, which I got from Uganda Revenue Authority yesterday. These very companies, after an understanding that they are going to pay the taxes and after signing the agreements, have again gone to the Tax Appeals Tribunal to object. How can we be able to deal with such companies?

MR EKANYA: I would like the Prime Minister to clarify, as regards this oil issue, whether we have another case between Heritage and Tullow. If it is there, why is it that the Government of Uganda is not participating in that one? I know that there is Heritage and Government of Uganda, but inform the country why Government is not involved in the case between Tullow and Heritage. Don’t you think that if Tullow loses against Heritage, we shall have lost the payment to us because Tullow will have the recourse to recall the payment it has made to Government of Uganda?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I just want to be assured by the chairman of the committee on this question of the interpretation of the laws. I hope they are in agreement with the Attorney-General because if the committee’s interpretation is different from the Attorney-General’s, I do not know how we will handle it in the report as Parliament. 

On whether the legal expenses of Heritage Oil in London will constitute part of the cost, I would like to say that I do not think so because Heritage is even no longer a party in Uganda; they sold out. Hon. Elijah Okupa was saying – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you so much, Rt hon. Prime Minister. I just want to give you information on hon. Alice Alaso’s question. When you read the Production Sharing Agreement for Heritage Oil, there is a provision that any legal costs they incur would be borne by the Government. This is a very bad provision.

THE SPEAKER: Are these the ones you call the recoverable costs?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: I actually was getting a little surprised that the Rt hon. Prime Minister would circumvent the issue on recoverable costs, which are provided for in the Production Sharing Agreement. But given that position, wouldn’t it be advisable not to continue with this matter because whether you lose it or not, you have to pay? What is your view?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, the simple answer that I gave, and to which I want the paralegal to listen to– (Laughter) – If I am wrong, Attorney-General, please feel free to correct me. 

As far as I am concerned, the PSA between Uganda Government and Heritage came to an end. The obligations that Heritage had under that PSA were passed on to Tullow when they sold to Tullow. The expenses therefore that have been incurred post that event cannot be counted in the cost recovery by Heritage. That is clear to me. But in case I am wrong, please do correct me.

Hon. Elijah Okupa said that these companies – and I imagine you meant Tullow because it is only Tullow that has signed an agreement with Uganda – have gone to court to challenge. Well, they are entitled to go to court and court will determine that. I actually do not know why they should go back because we already have a precedent in court. They were in court and lost. So, I do not know how they can go back to court on the same subject and hope to win this time round. They will not, I am sure about that, unless there is something different.

Let me say something about what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya said, that in our courts of law or tax tribunals in Uganda there is a case of Heritage and Tullow but Uganda is not a party yet the outcome of that case will affect it as a country. I think that was the argument he presented. I would like to say that I am not very familiar with this case. If the Attorney-General is, I would request that he responds to that. 

In summary, what I was saying is that we had no choice but to respond to the case in London. The costs we are incurring there are inevitable, and it would have been much more costly if we did not do that. We are almost 100 percent confident that we will win that case in London.

Two, we need to be careful about the proposal by the committee that Government must stop signing agreements which have foreign countries as places of arbitration. This is because we have commitments and international obligations to do; for example, we have treaties to which we are party to, and I just cited one, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, which was sponsored by the World Bank. We actually signed this one on 7 June 1966 and it came into force on 14 October 1966. I can report that 157 countries of the world are party to this convention. Investment is scarce in the world. We are competing with others. So, please let us not lower our competitiveness by taking positions that may scare away investors from here. Thank you.

7.22
MR BIGIRWA JULIUS JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first time I heard about the arbitration costs, I really got worried. However, later on I realised that it was our own mistake or perhaps there was no way out since we had already signed the PSAs, which mandated us to go to that level.

When you look at the costs involved, you pose a question to yourself - it is unfortunate to speak after the Leader of Government Business has raised some issues and left - what is Government doing for capacity development of our local lawyers? I am saying this because I would be glad to see these big sums of money being received by our own sons and daughters from Uganda. At what point are we going to be ready to do capacity building in that line?

The other issue I am raising is slightly similar to what hon. Elijah Okupa has just raised. These companies are under obligation, according to our tax laws, to pay taxes. However, every time they are obliged to do so, they keep running to these tax tribunals. What is Government planning to do with this? Are we going to continue like this? Which kind of companies are these? We need to understand why they keep running to these courts every time the issues of taxes come around. My sense is that Government should be more serious on that by coming up with a remedy.

7.22
MR WILSON WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. From the report, it can be seen that a lot of mistakes were made. Since the issue of oil is still new in the country, a lot more mistakes are yet to be committed. We should be prepared to learn and change the way we handle issues.

I want us to forgive the Attorney-General’s Chambers but also urge them to ensure we win the case. That is the only way they can pay us. The loss is so heavy and if we can win the case, I believe we would have gained quite a lot of money. Indeed, we need to draw lessons from the mistakes we have made so that in future we do not make the same mistakes. 

I want to thank the committee for their work. As for the recommendation for payment, colleagues, please let us approve it. If we pay that money and we win the case, the amount of money we will get from taxes is very big and this would pay for our losses. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.24
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from what the hon. Prime Minister said. He said that the issue of tax should be handled in Uganda, and the team that will go to handle the case will have to talk to the tribunal court about it. However, when you consider the budget that has been stipulated, the money which the committee has decided on - the Shs 8 billion - is too much. It appears that it is a simple case because they just have to be told that issues about tax have to be handled in Uganda. Why then do you put aside such huge amounts of money? 

If you compute costs for one person, say for hon. Peter Nyombi, the Attorney-General, for him to head the commission there within the few days, he is going to earn Shs 50 million. There are also the seven commissioners, who are also going on the same issue, and the total expenditure exclusive of their air tickets – I think the persons who went ahead and did the estimation might not have found out the exact amounts that are required. 

The second thing I want to contribute to is about how the taxation assessment was done. Heritage wrote to negotiate; was there a step that was taken to handle it? Now, how sure are we that we are going to win the case? Supposing we lose this case; that means more money will be charged on us. Something else should have been done other than waiting until such a situation arose. (Member timed out)

7.26 
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I thank the committee for the good work, I would like to thank the Ninth Parliament for trying to save taxpayers’ money. When you look at Shs 3 billion, it was just going like that on things that were not necessary. When you look back at what we have gone through, you will see that these so called advisors to Government in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who are supposed to give us legal advice, are the ones instead creating the losses. If you look back, there are many losses that this Parliament has saved, including this very one. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, what can we do to one of our institutions which is making our Government lose money? I am constrained to support other colleagues who are saying that some sanctions be put on those people because we cannot continue losing money every time. We are waiting for PAC to make its reports and the same kind of thing will be coming out.

When you look at page 13, the recommendations, the committee recommended that we approve this money but it seems they were also constrained because they say, “…since the government had already procured the lawyers and which lawyers had started putting instructions…” It still goes back to our institution, the ministry, which actually brought this up in the Production Sharing Agreements. If they had executed them well, this would not have happened. 

I wish the Shadow Attorney-General was here; a while ago, he said that we should leave them to talk as lawyers, but when you put them to task, look at what we are losing. I think the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General’s Chambers are full of lawyers; maybe he should advise that we bring in people who have not gone to study law to help you. (Member timed out_)

7.29 
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the work they have done in preparing this report and for the amount of saving they have made for the taxpayer in indentifying areas where there was wastage.

However, looking through the document, I still think more savings could have been made. You have a very big team of technical people, for example, who are supposed to go to London. I think some of them are going there just to see how things are done. I do not think they really have much input in what is going on. The government has already hired people to handle the arbitration. If you look at the team of 15 people going to London from Uganda; what are all these 15 people going to do there? 

In addition to that, I saw in the recommendations where it says that Government should provide the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs funds for capital development to reduce the cost of procurement of things like laptops and desktop computers. I am surprised. I thought that the office of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs are well equipped with things like laptops, computers and so on.

I worked in the civil service before and you find that civil servants want to have the latest laptops. You find somebody got a laptop last year but should he get any chance, he would want to get even the very latest model this year. This is not because he does not have one but just because wants to have the latest.(Member timed out) 

7.31
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the job well done. However, I would like to seek clarification from the committee on two issues.

Firstly, on page 6, in their submission, the chairman did indicate that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs did not follow the PPDA procedures. However, in their observations, it was actually confirmed by PPDA itself that procurement of legal services is not covered under their law, but the committee is faulting the Ministry of Justice for not having followed the PPDA procedures. So, I am wondering, which is which?

Secondly, I would like to know how this committee, which was set up in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, was mandated to procure the services of external lawyers. How transparent was the process? Could this committee have been set up but again remained following the instructions of the appointing authority? It was rumoured that this company that was finally procured had earlier been identified. So, was this committee put in place to simply rubberstamp the firm that had already been earmarked? I will need those clarifications. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.33
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good job. 

On page 9, we see that this arbitration arose out of the Production Sharing Agreement, which partly says, “Any dispute arising under the agreement which cannot be settled amicably within sixty days shall be referred to arbitration in accordance...” Now, we have not been told what effort was made by our Ministry of Justice to settle this issue within the 60 days. This would have saved us this London arbitration process, which is expensive. 

Secondly, you get the impression that the Ministry of Justice is somehow not that serious or they are not taking their job seriously. It looks like we are signing agreements which to some extent give away our rights and then they came back and haunt us. This House already knows about the Umeme agreement, and there is an ad hoc committee for this. If you read that agreement and decide today as Parliament that Umeme should go away, we would have to pay a lot of money. If Umeme went on its own, we would still pay a lot of money. So, you wonder what kind of agreements our technical people agree to. 

I imagine the Ministry of Justice really has lawyers, and if you do not have the expertise within, you are free to go and procure and outsource. So, what is it? As someone who has been a manager for some time, it hits me hard that the Ministry of Justice - The Prime Minister is here; really, something must be done. You should look into the operations of the Ministry of Justice and see how serious our people there take these matters of state. We seem to be losing a lot because of people taking things casually. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.36
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of the House to the budget. I am still not content with the Shs 8 billion. Look at item No.1 in the draft budget - fuel refund for 17 people. I thought these are public servants; each one of them is entitled to daily fuel to and from their offices. So, if you look at this item, it is a lot of money.

Look at item No. 2; if we have hired lawyers, what are these commissioners going to do? We really need to be educated on this. Look at the technical team - (Mr Baka rose_) - Mr Baka, let me finish my submission and then you will come in later. Look at the technical team of 12 people and the four commissioners; how much money do we need here? It is about Shs 300 million vis-à-vis what we are going to put into the lawyers. 

Further on the budget, there are laptops, internet and modems for everyone. Even if these people were to go to UK, are they going to sleep in very remote hotels where there is no internet? Are they going to do work in the court rooms to be wiring information to the country for us? I do not see this as serious.

Furthermore, external legal counsel; here is where we need to be guided as a country. I know this is where we have always got ourselves wrong.  Mr Attorney-General, with due respect, and the young people out there who are learning law, I think that office should not be an office for robbing this country of money. It is becoming a shame to all of us, as Ugandans.  
 
7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. However, from the word go, as a student of mathematics I would like to say that this is not a saving. It is just a reduction in the budget. This is a provision; it may either cost us more or less. A saving is when you budget for an item and instead of buying it at a price x which you had estimated, you buy it at a less price. So, this may not be a saving because it may become more. It is a – (Interjection) - I will give you a chance. You will come in later on. 

Secondly, the committee quoted the United Nations Commission for International Trade Law Arbitration Rules, and since we are a signatory of the United Nations, we cannot run away from international arbitration taking place outside this country.  We have similar cases in the Ministry of Works and Transport where we do international tendering. When you do international tendering and you run into trouble, you go for arbitration. If they see that your laws are not favouring them, what they do is to run and look at international laws. So, whenever we are making our laws, we should harmonise them with these international laws. When I look at the recommendation that the government should never sign an agreement with a clause where the arbitration is going to take place outside Uganda, then we are isolating ourselves from the rest of the world. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of PPDA, I agree within our laws you can write to PPDA to seek for a waiver and then you do what we call selective procurement. In this case, however, maybe our Attorney-General will tell us which supersedes the other - whether it is the laws which were made in the 60s or the new laws of this time, because here there is a conflict of the two laws. Maybe we need to amend that law to bring it in line with the PPDA law because we may use either of them. However, I do not think there is a law which can stop me from quoting one Act against the other as long as they do not contradict the Constitution. Madam Speaker, I beg to rest my case.

7.41
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukooto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the work of the committee.  While we are here, we should know why Uganda is moving very fast towards international trade. Uganda is moving very fast simply because of the liberalisation of trade.  Uganda today is dealing with international investors and what they simply need is protection from their mother countries and laws. If we are going to deal with these companies, we must know that they rely on their mother laws for any dispute. 

There are different courts for arbitration and litigation. I am talking from experience because in 2006, I was involved in litigation in Washington Federal Court against the Central Bank of Sudan and the Government of Sudan, and the costs were US$ 2,000 per hour. When you talk about teams of lawyers, I flew lawyers from Uganda and the UK and we had a bigger team in Washington to battle the cases. So, when you talk about 15 members going to UK to battle over the US$ 438 million, it must be a serious group. On the costs, when you talk of US$ 700 per hour, I do not see the logic when we were paying US$ 2,000 per hour in litigation in Washington DC. Therefore, I think the costs are genuine. 

At the same time, when you look at page 8 and you see that the legal consultancy was removed, I do not agree with that. This is litigation where we need consultants. There is no way you can do without lawyers. We lost the first round when we could not present ourselves for amicable settlement in 60 days; now we have another chance to bail our money out and this is the only time. 

When the Attorney-General was sued, he had no choice. You are talking about PPDA but the procurement cycle here has 18 steps. If you are to follow all those steps, up to now there would be nothing and we would have lost the case instantly. If you take the example of other countries, like Rwanda, the procurement cycle there has three stages – (Interjection) - I am talking from experience and I am – 

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR MBABAALI: He can wait.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is an order.

MR MBABAALI: Okay, I agree.

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Mbabaali to come here and tell us that the PPDA Act should be flouted because we were rushing to win the case? 

THE SPEAKER: I think I will have to ask the Attorney-General to explain to us how we ended up in court. What happened in the 60 days before we ended up in that problem? The ruling will abide the information from the Attorney-General.

MR MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say that there is no substance? (Laughter) You are talking to both a local and an international investor; there is no way you can challenge me. I have vast experience in litigation; there is no way you can challenge me. 

I think that this report should be reconsidered because it was made with a vindictive mind. It must be reviewed as some items should not go out, especially the legal consultancy. It must remain because it is the core issue in this matter. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I am sure that the committee chairperson will be able to explain those things. I now invite hon. Ruhindi, the Deputy Attorney-General. Mr Attorney-General, you know we have invested in educating the engineers; tell us what you have done on your side on the oil sector.

7.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I first thank the committee chairperson and his team for the commendable job. Indeed, today I was reminded of the tale of a pig and a hen. They were very good friends and they ran financially constrained. The hen proposed to the pig that they set up a restaurant in which they would sell sausages and omelettes. Obviously, omelettes are generated from the hen’s eggs while sausages are from the pig. The pig said, “My dear friend, you must be damn clever; while yours will be a mere contribution, mine will be total commitment.” (Laughter) Similarly, mine today was total commitment. (Laughter) 

I want to say one thing, which is very important; to me, Parliament is like a mirror. It is like a mirror through which we look at ourselves, particularly the Executive. Where the Office of the Attorney-General falls, we learn and take stock of the challenges that you raise and we do our best to address them. 

I can assure you that in the Office of the Attorney-General, many challenges abide but we have also scored remarkable successes. I am happy that the presenter of this report is the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We shall be with you, apprising you of our challenges, what we have addressed and the ways and means of solving many of our issues. 

Madam Speaker, you talked about training. As I speak now, I think we have seven people, and four are abroad, for a Masters degree in oil and gas law. Of course you will say, “Why don’t you use those ones on this mission?” Yes, some are there but to be able to compete in this kind of field, high level experience is necessary.

You also asked about what happened in the 60 days as required in the agreement. I do not have concrete details. What I can tell you is that – I am sure even the committee chairperson knows because that presentation was made before his committee – a lot of haggling and negotiations, including with the head of state, went on behind the scenes but without much success. That is how we ended up in court. 

We are mindful because we have scored goal number one in this matter in London. The arbitration tribunal agreed to hear our case on technicalities, and this case may even be over in about August this year. They agreed to hear our application to strike the case out for lack of relevant jurisdiction because the matter should have been sorted out here. That is where we have scored – at least to be heard on our merit on that particular issue. So we have a lot of hope that we have a good case in London.

Much has been said by the Prime Minister and I do not need to repeat it – (Interjection) - Yes, and that is what I am doing. When you talk about the excessive amount of money, US$ 747 per hour on the face of it looks excessive, but in terms of international competitiveness and as far as such high level consultancies are concerned, this is reasonable. I am sure even the chairperson will talk about it. 

On the issue of procurement laws, honourable colleagues, we have a challenge. I do not want to lie to you that it is not a challenge. I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that this is a matter we shall do our best in our Chamber to harmonise with the PPDA to see the best way forward. It is like when you get sick; would you prefer to go through competitive bidding to get a doctor? In matters of this nature, you are not even looking at the financial element in serious terms. What you are looking at is quality - will I be able, with this lawyer or doctor, to save a life or massive resources of a nation like this one? 

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I agree that there could have been that lacuna and they had to rush like that, we cannot run this country the Amin style whereby he said, “I want a school here” and it was there. By the time we go for procurement, it means there is a need. In every ministry when they are procuring a car, there is an immediate need for that car but they have got to wait and follow the procedure. 

I am not comfortable with the Attorney-General, the chairman and the minister telling us that they did not follow the right procedures for procuring the funds and we go on to sit on it and it goes untouched when we are talking of billions of money. Tomorrow we shall be challenged; I am member of PAC, and tomorrow we shall bring here an issue that has got procurement problems. When we call the witnesses to come and defend themselves, they will say, “but you remember even in the other case in Parliament you defended arbitration to go without procurement procedures because there was urgency.” They will also defend themselves like that. I think we need to scrutinise that more than what we are doing. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, I think what the minister is saying is that he had not planned to go to court in London and therefore he could not prepare to procure. He was taken to London and when he was served, he said, “I must go for battle on the other side, so I must take action quickly.” That is what he is saying. 

MR RUHINDI: Let me finish, honourable colleagues. We have already been alerted about gender issues and the need to attend to- Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. 

I want to say one most important thing; laws are not cast in stone. Where need be, we shall amend. The PPDA is our law; we made it and we respect it. We shall do our best, as I have said, to harmonise our working relationship with PPDA so that in future, for such cases we come when we are all in harmony with each other.

Finally, on sanctions, expressed by hon. Yaguma, I will end with the words of Mark Antony: “The evil that men do lives after them; the good is oft interred with their bones.” Hon. Yaguma, you have been in such positions before and you know the challenges of holding such offices. We are ready for the guillotine but please do give it some more thought. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he might say, like Julius Caesar, that you are free to cut me but do not spill any drop of my blood. (Laughter)

7.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I also thank honourable colleagues for the contributions you have made to the report. Before I make a few comments, once again I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the support you gave us including the training and the interactions that hon. Namayanja, hon. Karuhanga, hon. Baka and I had when you sent us to London. It gave us a deep insight into the subject matter on which we are submitting this evening. 

Some of the matters raised by honourable colleagues have been responded to by the learned Attorney-General. Hon. Ssewungu was talking about dictionaries and a number of other wasteful items, and I think the committee was clear that some of those items should not have come up and we recommended their deletion from the budget.  

As to why the arbitration is in London has also been alluded to. To the extent of international commitment and obligations, I would like to note and also concede to the response advanced by the Attorney-General and I think hon. Byabagambi in respect of international agreements to which Uganda is a party. However, I think our recommendation still stands in respect to local commitments. As much as possible, let us see how we can address this matter. Also to the Attorney-General, we have talked about strengthening the Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution, which would address some of these matters. 

Hon. Werikhe, you gave us information. There is the issue of legal associates raised by hon. Alaso - why do we need legal associates when we have lawyers here? The information we got when we went to London was that, first of all, we have senior lawyers from here who go to London to participate and work with the engaged lawyers from London. At the same time, and I think the Attorney-General did not mention this, some of our lawyers are also benefiting from the training which we as Members of Parliament also benefitted from.

Hon. Lubogo raised the issue of the cost and I think that matter was responded to. Really, the concern of the committee on the US$ 747 per hour is that much as it may be reasonable in some circumstances, it is not so much about the quantum but also the procurement. So, to the extent that the Attorney-General concedes that they are going to address matters of harmonising procurement for legal services in his Chamber, I think that addresses our concern that the procurement of lawyers as a service is a matter to be addressed by Government.

Hon. Mutyabule talked about media funds. I think that one has been explained, that we do not need to pay newspapers to report on the case. I think they would recognise it as newsworthy and they would definitely report on it without us having to pay Shs 250 million from the Ugandan taxpayer. 

Hon. Yaguma, I think the Attorney-General has pleaded that as you actually pass a sentence, he also has mitigating matters in his favour. 

Madam Speaker, an honourable member talked about the capacity of our lawyers. As a committee when we went to London, we were happy that steps had been taken to build the capacity of some of our lawyers. So, in future we should reach a time when some of our people in our departments here should be able to do the bulk of the job to save us the enormous costs.

Hon. Kabasharira talked about the Shs 3 billion saved by this Parliament through this report. I have already paid my tribute to you, Madam Speaker, for the support you gave us in arriving at these recommendations. 

Hon. Ogwang, talked about the cost of fuel. I think that was also our concern. We are saying we should not pay for dictionaries and for all those types of expenses when actually that is recurrent expenditure which is supposed to be met by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs- (Interjections) - May I finish, Madam Speaker? 

Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Honourable member, we shall be meeting the other committee where we are members. I want to take exception to the matter raised by hon. – (Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Just a moment ago I listened very carefully to the hon. Minister of Justice and his speech touched my heart. I now begin realising there could be some capacity challenges as well as material, finance or otherwise within his ministry, which may need urgent attention by this Parliament.

Many members have raised a number of issues – and the chairperson is about to finish - especially on the area regarding the removal of some items. Whereas some of our colleagues, especially my neighbour here, hon. Yaguma, and I have been thinking this issue to do with Blacks Law Dictionary and the English dictionary is simple, I just want to get clarification from the chairperson-

THE SPEAKER: But what is the point of procedure?

MR BIGIRWA: I just want, Madam Speaker, to understand whether procedurally, this was correct. This is because we may find a situation where we might lose this case as a result of the removal of this Blacks Law Dictionary. What circumstances led to the removing of this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I found that one most ridiculous. If we are hiring international lawyers, they should have this dictionary; and the Attorney-General, really, must have this in his Chamber already. I found this ridiculous.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is exactly what I thought, and that is why I do not understand the clarification which my colleague seeks from me.

As I end, I would like to take exception to what the honourable minister, hon. Byabagambi, said, that this is not even a saving but it is actually a reduction and that it is just a budget, which may go higher or lower. I think the honourable minister, to say the least, was not very serious. If we are talking of removing Shs 250 million for media and you are saying that one is just temporary, it will come back; if we are saying that civil servants are using Government vehicles, they should not be paid twice and you are saying that is temporary, it may come back; I do not know how I should respond to this point of the honourable.

The view of the committee is that we received figures for particular purposes - Shs 11.9 billion to conduct arbitration – but we are saying out of that money, Shs 3 billion should be saved. As of now, no reason has been advanced to indicate that they need more money. So, really, for the minister to come here and say that this is just a reduction, at best he is speculating and should really be ignored. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity and once again, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, I just have one small problem. This matter is related to the supplementary schedule. The request therein is only Shs 6.79 billion, so your recommendation is far and above the supplementary schedule. The schedule requested for Shs 6.79 billion but now you want us to give you Shs 8.7 billion. How do we cure that problem?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, we are looking at a figure from the time it was submitted to us and the activities that were listed under that item. I am not sure as to what activities the Shs 6.79 billion is supposed to fund but for us we are looking at the total project. I think the Minister of Justice or rather the Minister of Finance or both should be in a better position to clarify this.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. As commissioners, we attended the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs when that matter was being discussed. We just sat and I recall the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Justice were disagreeing. One minister was saying about Shs 2 billion had already been spent, the other minister was saying that no expenditure had been incurred. 

So, I want to seek clarification from the chair whether you actually found out if by the time this matter came to your committee some expenditure had been incurred. There was a disagreement between the two ministers, the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Justice. I do not know what the committee found. That could be the difference. The Shs 2 billion could be the difference between the Shs 8 billion and Shs 6 billion.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I raised matters of a legal paradigm about the UN Commission on International Arbitration. It has rules and standards to which Uganda is a signatory - rules and standards on payment of fees to lawyers, rules and standards on procurement of services, rules and standards on the period of arbitration and the qualification of the people to be hired. It even set up a trust fund at the UN for helping developing countries. This matter has not been responded to either by the Attorney-General or the chairperson. How are we going to handle this very critical issue if at the end of it, it establishes that the procurement and the fees being paid to lawyers does not comply with the UN standards of arbitration?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know what you are saying is important but it would have been good if you brought the regulations here so that even our committee can look at them and establish. Now they are in your head.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. The Attorney-General is aware of these rules and the chairperson is aware of these rules. If I am granted opportunity, Madam Speaker, within 30 minutes I can make a print out of all these regulations and rules so that we conform. As you are aware, if international obligations-(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: What you should clarify, honourable, is whether those regulations are model regulations being proposed for countries which wish to look at them, or whether they are binding. Clarify.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, since the UN Commission proposed this at the UN General Assembly in 1964, there have been improvements and modifications. Some of these regulations and modifications took place in 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011.

The point that I wanted to address, which the chairman put in the report, and the Attorney-General even responded to dodgingly, is that for all international treaties which countries have domesticated, the first requirement is that litigation must take place in the local environment. You cannot, for example, move to Geneva to the ICC when we have a local court here. Those are part of the requirements, and in this country we have done domestication.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance whether we should ask the chairperson of committee to go back and do more work on this matter; this case is still going on anyway.

THE SPEAKER: I think the chair has done enough work. Why don’t you bring those documents so that the chair and the Attorney-General can look at them and then we can complete, because it is only voting which is remaining.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I take your guidance. Tomorrow I will lay the documents here.

THE SPEAKER: No, give them to the committee chair in the morning, the Attorney-General and to me so that when we come in the afternoon, all of us are well informed – (Interjection) - The Shadow Attorney-General also. We can stand over the vote.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for that very wise guidance. 

In respect of what my colleague, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, raised about the difference in figures between those ones by the Ministry of Justice and those ones with the Ministry of Finance, we addressed our minds to this matter. We confirmed that Shs 279 million had been spent and this Parliament approved that expenditure. So, it has nothing to do with the difference between Shs 8.9 billion and the Shs 6.9 billion which is being requested for in the supplementary. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we defer the vote on this matter. We will complete it tomorrow after we have received the information the honourable member is talking about. Also, the Minister of Finance will be here to address the discrepancies. Let us stand it over until tomorrow. 

I want to give notice that tomorrow we shall handle the Companies Bill. Today I was with the Justice, Law and Order Sector and one of their demands was that we should deal with the laws which touch their sector. I understand that this week, we shall handle some of them. So, come with your Companies Bill. I know the report is here. We shall handle them tomorrow.

Also, tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. we shall be in the conference hall to brief you about IPU. So, let us meet at 9.30a.m. for the other function and House is adjourned to 2 O’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 8.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 March 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
