Thursday, 23 March 2006

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pleasure to welcome you and to mention that again we have scored another victory; one of our boxers I think has been awarded a bronze medal. This is an encouragement now that we have two medals in two days. (Applause) We congratulate our team for this performance. Let us hope we shall get more medals.  

Honourable members, I want to repeat what I said when we started that you have the full mandate to conduct business as the Seventh Parliament up to 12 May 2006. And, therefore, we should be diligent in handling the work before us so that people do not say, “Because of elections, people have given up.” If we give up, we do not expect to have any vacuum in as far as Parliament is concerned. Parliament has to continue until another one takes over.

I was happy on the first day with the attendance and yesterday, but there it is. Now as you see, we are supposed to handle a very important business on refugees, but I do not think I will be fair although there is nothing to prohibit me to proceed with you because House was adjourned to today at this time. But the number is quite miserable and I think it will be unfair for me to proceed with the business now. 

Maybe I give it a benefit of doubt. Members could have had some problem on the way, and the best course to take is to suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m. hoping that Members will have arrived. 

I know we are going to have a lot of problems in travelling to Kampala, especially as today I heard on radio that they are closing the Clock Tower access to the city. They have closed part of Jinja road and this in future may really hamper our work not only here in Parliament but elsewhere. I think those concerned should look into this and minimise the inconvenience that the public may face by a complete closure of the Clock Tower. Because that will mean people from Entebbe will have to use Namirembe road, which is at the moment congested with taxis. But anyway, I am just telling you what I have heard maybe it is not true. So proceedings are suspended up to 2.30 p.m. this afternoon.

(The proceedings were suspended at 10.36 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.25 p.m. _)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Minister Alex Okot Ogong, can you make your statement?

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, yesterday I promised Parliament that today I would make a statement in respect of the election of Youth Members of Parliament. The National Youth Council Statute 1993 was enacted by the then National Resistance Council to provide for the establishment of the National Youth Council, its composition, objectives, functions, administration and finances among others.

In 2003, the statute was amended and the National Youth Council’s (Amendment) Act 2003. The term of office for the youth council was extended from three years to four years. 

Under the new provisions, the tenure of office of the lower youth councils in existence was due to expire on 15 December 2005. Due to time constraints and congestion of various electoral processes, which were ongoing by that period, it was deemed not feasible to hold elections of the new councils in December. A proposal was made, therefore, to Cabinet to amend the Act by providing for a transitional clause, which would allow the youth councils to continue functioning until May 2005, after which it would automatically elapse and dissolve. This will pave way to give the Electoral Commission time to conduct elections for Youth Members of Parliament before 12 May 2006 to enable them join Parliament with other Members. 

Mr Speaker, Cabinet, therefore, has approved a proposed amendment and the minister has given drafting instructions to the First Parliamentary Counsel to urgently prepare the amendment bill. It is expected that the amendment bill should be in Parliament next week and once Parliament approves it, then the current youth councils shall be preserved until May 2006. I am in touch with the Electoral Commission on this matter and as soon as the bill is passed, the Electoral Commission will be instructed to carry on the elections of the Youth Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the statement. Any comment?

2.31
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want clarification from the minister. Since the term of the youth council, which was elected four years ago, ended in December, do we still have the youth councils in place? What are we going to extend? In my understanding, their term expired which means automatically the councils expired. 

Number two, where was the minister when actually we were making all these amendments, which were affecting even the lower councils and what have you - where was the minister by then? Why did he not bring this amendment?

2.32
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want also to agree with hon. Byabagambi that indeed this is something that would have come to the floor of the House at a time when we were looking at all the laws that were to be the basis for elections of Members of Parliament. But I also want to inform hon. Byabagambi that the youth council elections that took place in 2001 were done in such a way that the lower councils, the youth council one and two, were conducted in November-December of 2001 and then the youth councils from three to five were conducted in April 2002. 

Now, Mr Speaker, the composition of the electoral college of the youth members of Parliament hinges particularly on the sub-county youth councils, district youth councils and national youth council.  So, I believe members of the electoral college, their term of office is expiring in April this year and where I would support the minister’s position of extending these particular councils is that it is not easy to organise. 

First of all, I do not agree with the position where we have youth members of Parliament coming in late after others have been sworn in. We experienced a problem in the local council elections when councillors in the district council came in very late at a time when committees were already in place, at a time when the executives of those districts were in place, at a time when even the budget was already passed and, therefore, the youth voice at that level was not heard. 

In this effect, Mr Speaker, given the experience we have had of youth council elections, it may not be very easy for the Electoral Commission to organise election of new structures within this period to enable Youth Members of Parliament to be here as the other Members of Parliament are coming in because the risk we are going to face is that when other Members of Parliament are sworn in, immediately after swearing in we institute committees and everything. 

I would also agree with the minister that we extend because youth councils three and five that constitute the electoral college are still operational until end of April. So, those ones can be used as the electoral college and then thereafter we have election of new youth council structures right from youth council one up to national level. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, is your position that some councils are still within their mandate and others have expired? Is that what you are saying, because it seems you are saying that some will expire sometime next month? So, if they are expiring next month, it seems they still have the mandate, but that there are some whose mandate has expired. Is that the case?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, this may require a legal interpretation because the youth councils at levels one and two were elected in November or December while youth councils from three to five were elected in April and then the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, it is clear. You are saying some of the structures still have the mandate, others have ceased to have the mandate and, therefore, you are finding a solution and that is to extend. Is that the case?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, the councils that still have the mandate are three and five; they are the ones that constitute the electoral college of the youth members of Parliament.

2.36
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The statement by the minister should have been attached by several attachments and these attachments cannot only be legal attachments, the pieces of legislation. Why am I saying so? 

According to the Constitution, a youth is somebody between the age of 18 and 30 who qualifies to participate in election but it also says if you are 30 years, you are elected a Member of Parliament and you become 31 you continue being a Member of Parliament until your time expires. But if you are in the youth council, you are really supposed to resign and a by-election is supposed to be conducted. I see a situation where most of the current youth, who are in the youth council now being above the age of 30 and, therefore, we can sit here like the minister is proposing to cause on this amendment but –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for giving way but also to inform him that the provision he is quoting was the provision of the old law that was amended. In the old law, it was a requirement that once one clocks 30, he ceases to be a member of the youth council but the amendment which I want to read, Section 7 (9) of the National Youth Council Statute as amended is that for the avoidance of doubt, “Any person holding an office in a youth council shall not vacate office on the sole reason that he or she has attained 30 years of age at any time during his or her term of office.” That is a provision as we amended it here.
  
MR EKANYA: Thank you for that information. Unless I am guided by the Constitution, that amendment might be contravening the Constitution. Mr Speaker, therefore, we in the Forum for Democratic Change have demanded government to display the voters, the current youth in the youth councils so that really the youth on the ground can really say so and so still qualifies according to age, he is still available within the community because parliamentary election law provides for display of the voters roll. Also, some of these youth are elected to the leadership position of the youth council - some of them migrating –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you not think that one can only come after we have dealt with this one. We have extended and in the process of election, there will be a display and then a body will be able to say no, this one does not qualify. That will come after the elections are being arranged but when you look at the statement he is saying that they have a technical problem because according to him, the term has expired and therefore you need to extend for them to exist so that the Electoral Commission can arrange the elections. When it does, it will display the register and then the Forum for Democratic Change or any other party will be able to show this and the other.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is why I really request the honourable minister to have several attachments before we engage in amendments or accept this proposal because as I was really saying, I do agree with you that the display comes after, the leadership in youth structure is really voluntary. You find that some of the youth take this position while they are in villages, districts and then they get admitted to other institutions of learning and then at the end of the day they migrate. You will find that in a given district most of the youth are no longer part of that community; they have migrated, taken other roles and responsibility. So, we request the minister to conduct assessment to find where these youth are, whether they are still there.

But also, Mr Speaker, the danger we are facing is that, in the last election of the current Youth MPs, it was also done through extension. Why can’t the government honour the institution of the youth and once the time expires, a youth vacates a position, election is conducted because this virus might migrate and then we continue amending the Constitution and extending term limits. 

You might even hear Members of Parliament saying, “Let us also extend our term for 10 years because of that virus migrating from the youth”. Therefore, I would really urge government to conduct elections. There is money and the youth are ready to have new leadership, which is fresh. Thank you very much.

2.42
MR KASSIANO WADRI EZATI (Terego County, Arua): I would like first of all to thank the honourable minister for making this very important statement.  But I will hasten to say that it has come rather late. The Minister of Gender, Labour and social Development is fond of fire fighting instead of being proactive. They knew very well that the youth as an important sector of this country’s population will at one time have elections conducted but they decided purposely to wait until the neck of time to come here saying they are making a proposal to reconcile differences in the various laws that have been enacted. This will have a very great effect on elections come May 2006. That is when the youth will go under multiparty dispensation. 

We have known for the fact that even in the past elections conducted by youth, there have been a lot of regularities and these regularities even went to the extent of not having the electoral college in one institution or one place of aboard where they can equally have equal access to all the candidates who will contest for the post. This all arises because everything is done in a hurry and of course when something is done in a hurry, you cannot expect equity, you cannot expect level on the ground. 

I would request that the ministry not only considers this mistake that it has made I think for the fourth or fifth time, but that in future it considers programmes that follow its mandate and be foresighted enough rather than always fire fighting and bringing things, which have gone wrong because time is running out. The youth out there are complaining. 

Even right now, there are those who are not sure when the elections are going to be conducted. They feel that they are going to be ambushed and since they are not given ample time to consult and be able to sell out their candidature, then we will say, they have been denied a chance of democratically canvassing for support in the countryside. 

Let Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development liaise very closely with the Electoral Commission so that mistakes of the past are not repeated because if that is not done, we will actually be replicating some of the problems that we have just gone through in these just concluded elections and pass it to the young generation, a thing which is not good for this country. 

Let the ministry make close follow up of the proposal that it has made. Let it liaise with the First Parliamentary Counsel so that as expeditiously as possible. This will help the youth to know the various positions that will be contested for and then they appropriately vie for them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement was made to explain why elections of youth representatives have not taken place. They are suggesting that it was so because there was need to adjust the law to allow the necessary structures for those elections to be in existence so that the youth members can join their colleagues in May. 

That was the essence of the statement, but there are a number of policy matters, which I have detected from your contribution, which policy matters can be addressed when the proposed amendment is tabled before us. With this we can end the debate on this subject, urging the minister to bring the law as soon as possible so that elections of the youth members can take place. I think that is clearly understood. Thank you very much.

2.45
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, yesterday one of our colleagues raised an issue of buses being parked in the road and you requested the Minister for Local Government to make a statement. I am sure we are not likely to have a Parliament sitting tomorrow and if any colleague of ours goes to that particular side of town, the park has been dug up, there is no parking space for buses and the travelers are stranded all over the city.  

It is a colleague, the hon. Minister Okot Ogong and I who stopped bus owners from going on strike and blocking the roads so that the Ministries of Local Government, Lands and Transport could amicably solve this matter. But there is a lot of reluctance on the part of some of these senior brothers to take action because the most important thing is that that place is reserved as a bus terminal and I do not see how the Minister of Local Government does not appear here with a statement. 

I am happy that the Prime Minister is here since this is a crucial matter - really this country cannot be run like a market because one would feel that we are not in charge of this government. You cannot look at these people who have been having their livelihood at the bus park being pounced on, their property being taken, and people digging up and developing the park overnight. This is a matter of great importance to this nation and the city, which should be addressed by honourable colleagues and this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately the Minister of Local Government is not here. I do not know which minister is in position to make such a statement, but as we said this morning, there may be other serious problems caused by the complete closure of the Clock Tower access to town. When people cannot access through that gate, that is another matter, which will require – but the Prime Minister can tell us about this bus park.

2.49
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With regard to the second matter, you drew to my attention and I did request the Minister of Local Government to handle it along with others. I must say that I am disappointed that my colleague is not here. I do not want to blast him because the contingent element is ubiquitous so I can only promise that I shall handle the matter and cause him to explain. In fact I have no hesitation in asking the Minister of State for Information to go and ring and find out what is happening. I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFUGEE BILL, 2003

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, we finished the general debate on the second reading of this Bill, but there is somebody who said that there were comments, which the minister should have made before the closure of the debate. I do not know what they were, I did not detect anything that was directed to the minister to answer, it was a general complaint but if the minister has anything to say about matters raised yesterday he can do so before we go to the Committee Stage.

2.51
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for their constructive contribution yesterday. But I have realised that we must explain the difference between refugees and other illegal immigrants moving from one place to another. Even those from neighbouring countries who come into the country and do not ask for asylum are not refugees. A refugee must be scared of his country and then asks for asylum and once they are considered they are taken to a camp or settlement area.

There was a lot of misfiring on this Bill because many people raised issues, which actually were not connected, but I have summarised most of the contribution and I want to answer back as follows:

“Who is a refugee?” A refugee is a person who owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or a particular opinion is outside the country of his nationality; and owing to such fear is unwilling to avail himself for the protection of that country. Or who not having a nationality and being outside the county of his former habitual residence as a result of such events is unable, or owing to such fear is unwilling to return to his or her country.

But if you are in country moving from one place to another then you are not a refugee. If the absentee landlords sell their land in Nakasongola it is not a refugee matter because it is covered by a different law altogether. So, there is the Immigration Department, which is handling those people who move illegally into the country, and there is also a law, which handles refugees that we are trying to amend.  

Rejection of status: a question was raised where an application is abusive or manifestly unfounded. Clause 20, sub-clause (6) of this Bill provides for deportation of an applicant according to applicable law. Where the application is rejected because of no grounds for asylum and the person has exhausted the process of appeal, the person is allowed 90 days of stay while seeking an alternative solution elsewhere. This is provided for in clause 23, sub-clauses (2) and (3) of the Bill.  

Once accepted, refugees are registered and known under our registration system software called “Profile Registration System”. If one is not registered and is in the country loitering, he is not a refugee. In case of urban refugees, we have professionals who are refugees; they are businessmen and women and students living in different urban centers in the country. We also have vulnerable cases that are living in Kampala for different reasons under the care of Inter Aid, an NGO, which is our implementing partner for urban cases. There are about 500 people living in Kampala, who are registered and known.

The policy of Uganda is local settlement, based on their profile, which is largely peasantry in nature. However, there is a realisation of the changing profile. UNHCR and the Government are to carry out a study and survey of urban refugees in Uganda.  

Voluntary repatriation:

We have a Voluntary Repatriation Agreement with Rwanda and the process is on, but slow. Both governments and the UNHCR facilitate the process. The Sudan Repatriation Agreement is to be signed on 27 March 2006 in Kampala. We had hoped to return 5,000 Sudanese refugees who have registered and are willing to go this year, but there seems to be insecurity coming up in certain areas of return like Yeyi, Yambyo and other places in Southern Sudan. So it may affect the programme for the repatriation.  

People also complained that we over-feed refugees. Most refugees have attained food self-sufficiency due to our policy because they till the land we give them and also receive food from the World Food Programme. So in a few years - two or three - they will be self-sufficient in food. There are now about 40 camps of refugees in the country that are self-sufficient and do not receive food rations from the World Food Programme.

On environment, the UNHCR has been supportive to the Government in this sector and more funding for environmental activities is being negotiated.  

Restrictions and controls:

The Bill has restrictive measures that match internationally acceptable standards in regard to controls for national security and interests.  

On sharing of services as a policy matter of government to minimize conflict, there is a new programme known as, Developing Assistance for Refugees Hosting Areas, to address this matter. Unlike in IDPs, the international community has UN agencies to look after refugees, the UNHCR. There is need to distinguish between illegal alliance and duly recognized refugees. The UNHCR and UN General Assembly have recently mandated the UNHCR to look after IDPs with specific interest in camp management and provisions of emergency shelter. Uganda is one of the three countries on the pilot project, the others being Sudan and the DRC. This will compliment government efforts.

On employment, Article 19 of the 1951 Geneva Convention states:

1.	“Each contracting state shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their territory who hold diplomas recognised by the competent authorities of that state, and who are desirous of practicing a liberal profession, treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances.

2.	The contracting states shall use their best endeavours consistently with their laws and constitutions to secure the settlement of such refugees in the territories, other than the metropolitan territory, for whose international relations they are responsible.” 

Uganda is a signatory to the 1951 Geneva Convention, therefore, what we are doing is in line with international obligations.

On land, refugees are settled in gazetted refugee settlements where they have a right to use but not to own land. In areas where government has no land, communities avail land for use, like the case in some parts of West Nile. Before you take these people you have to negotiate with local people, who give you the land.

On burden sharing, Uganda is signatory to international conventions and therefore is obliged to contribute to protection of refugees. Similarly the international community is represented here in this role by UNHCR. Mr Speaker, I hope this has summarised the points raised yesterday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, before we go to the Committee Stage, in the strangers’ gallery is Mr Mustafa Presley, Senior Protection Officer in the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. He has come to follow up what is going on. You are welcome.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFUGEE BILL, 2003

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Mr Chairman, we have an amendment to clause 5, which reads: “Expression of crime against peace as used in sub-clause 5(a) should be understood as defined by any international new instruments to which Uganda is a party to justification.”  The term, “if not close reference” is subject to various interpretations that could be exploited to victimize certain refugees.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what is the amendment?

MR LOOTE: We have said that this one should be referred to the international laws.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can I take it as an observation? So, I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, on clause 6, paragraph (b) of sub-clause (i), we have a proposed deletion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honorable members, the proposal by the committee is to delete paragraph (b) of sub-clause (i) of that particular clause.  

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The proposed amendment to clause 6, which the committee recommended to be deleted, falls under the cessation provision of the Bill and is the same as in the 1951 Geneva Convention Articles 1 to 6. This Article again falls under those provisions in the Bill on which reservation cannot be entered.  

The clause spells out the conditions under which one ceases to be a refugee. This is based on the fact that international protection should not continue to be granted in a situation where it is no longer required. Under the convention there are six clauses dealing with these aspects. They are in two categories: the first four reflect a change in the situation of the refugees, and the second category of the clauses are based on the consideration that international protection is no longer justified on account of the changes in the country where persecution was feared because the conditions have ceased to exist.  

This clause does not apply to refugees who have compelling reasons for not returning based on previous persecutions.  Within the Uganda refugee situation, this clause is important because these situations are being experienced now and were experienced in the past.  I do therefore recommend that clause 6(i) be maintained.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal by the committee to delete that particular provision. The minister in charge of the Bill opposes the deletion because of the reasons he has given. Any comment, chairperson?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee recommended the deletion but then he did not give the reasons why we should delete.

THE CHAIRMAN: The reasons are very clear in the report - the justifications.

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, we have given the justification under that particular clause we are proposing for deletion. The Geneva International Refugee Convention and established principles of protection do not envisage surrendering as a ground for cessation of refugee status. In its present form, the sub-clause predisposes the refugee to a situation of lack of international protection at a time when the refugee has lost national protection. I think that was the justification the committee provided for.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, it is quite interesting that the committee is asking for the deletion and the minister is asking for retention. Issues of refugees are very sensitive in international law and relations and, therefore, it is just not a question of the committee recommending for deletion and the minister asking for retention, but the House must take a principled position, knowing very well that this is a matter, which is subject to a lot of international conventions. So, what is the international position on this matter, the international law and convenance on refugees? That is what the House should be guided on, not just saying what the committee and the minister want. What is the principle position as far as international law on refugees is concerned, and we have technical people to –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, clause 6(i) reads as follows – where they want (i) to be deleted – it provides that, “A person shall cease to be a refugee if that person voluntarily avails himself or herself of the protection of the country of his or her nationality, or voluntarily establishes himself or herself in the country of origin.
(b) That person surrenders his or her refugee status.”

Now the committee is saying you delete while the minister saying it is okay. This is the dilemma we have to get out of.  

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, this is part of the convention. We just borrowed it in order to be in line with the international convention and that is why I would like to retain it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question to the proposal by the committee to delete.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR LOOTE: Mr Speaker, we have a small amendment in form of an addition to sub-clause (2) of clause 16.  Insert the expression “human rights” between the words “administration and” appearing at the end of the fourth line.  

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, the proposal is welcome and the draftsmen should redraft it accordingly.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment to insert “human rights.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, we are proposing an amendment to clause 19(1) and the proposal we are making is to delete the words, “within 30 days after the date of his or her entry into Uganda”, appearing at the end of the sub-clause.  

The justification is that the provision of a time limit within which a person wishing to be a refugee in Uganda should apply for refugee status at the time of entry into the country creates the potential to contravene the principles of non-revilement.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us get this clear; are you suggesting that there should not be a time frame within which –(Interruption)

MR LOOTE: Yes, that is what the committee thought that there should be no time frame.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard, according to the committee there should not be any time frame.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The spirit in the clause is in line with EXCOM exclusions; this is an old meeting which takes place in Geneva. It is for all ministers for refugees, they go to Geneva every year and they have decided on ten days as the period to apply for refugee status from the authority that gives asylum. We are saying however that we should give refugees 30 days.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, in clause 24 there is a simple amendment by the committee, that sub-clause 2 should be amended to read as follows: “The applicant is entitled to a hearing during the consideration of his or her application and where necessary the state shall provide the services of a competent interpreter to the applicant.” 

The justification is that the person seeking asylum is often destitute and without capacity to secure the most basic necessities of life. It, therefore, follows that such a person will be unable to pay for the services of an interpreter. The clause, therefore, undermines the principles of effective access to justice. That is the justification for that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any objection?  

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Sir, this is a valid observation and we propose that the amendment be drafted accordingly.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposed that we have the words “public entrance” and “the natural,” defined, but as we made consultations we resolved that the interpretation should be left as it appears.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we insert a new sub-cause after (c) to read as follows: “Subject to this Act, a recognized refugee shall not engage in any political activities within Uganda, whether at local or national level.” 

The justification is that the clause, if left as it is, leaves room for refugees to involve themselves in national politics, which is not proper and would contravene the electoral laws of Uganda. Those are the justifications as provided.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, we have a simple amendment to clause 41 sub-clause (1), to insert the words “and the Chief Justice”, after the expression “the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs,” ending in the middle of the second line of the closing paragraph of the sub-clause. The justification is to avoid arbitrary extradition of refugees.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman this clause 41(b)(2) requires clarification by the minister because in the recent times we have had several leaders worldwide facing criminal offences like rape and corruption yet they are really politically motivated, from Russia, to South Africa, to Uganda, and to West Africa. So, we really need to define the statement “non-political offences,” so that a refugee is not just deported and that his rights are not abused yet the offence is really political and only covered up as a criminal offence. Thank you.

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: Mr Chairman, we agree with this proposal but we wanted to draft it so that it is handled by the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General, in consultation with the extradition laws of Uganda. This will take care of both the committee and us. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, this is now as far as the committee’s proposal is concerned, but there was an inquiry from hon. Ekanya; can we deal with it?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman I was seeking clarification from the minister regarding 41(b)(ii). Let me read it: “An international tribunal makes a request to Uganda for extradition of a recognized refugee on the ground that such a refugee (ii) has been convicted by a competent court jurisdiction on a serious criminal offence, which is a non-political offence.” 

My clarification is that it has come to our knowledge in the recent times that most politicians are faced with political offences brought in a criminal nature. For example, in South Africa, Uganda, West Africa and Russia, where potential political leaders are either charged of corruption related criminal offences or rape. This sometimes may cause abuse of the refugees’ rights because the court has convicted him of a criminal offence yet that criminal offence was politically motivated. How does this provision protect the -(Interjection)- yes, but even this international tribunal has not helped the Russian man whose corruption case was politically motivated, the South African Vice-President, and here in Uganda, we have the example of Besigye.

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: Mr Chairman, I think our proposal is that the amendment be drafted the way we proposed, it is going to take care of all these fears.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now I think the chairman has agreed that instead of referring to the Chief Justice, we adopt the proposal by the minister.

MR LOOTE: Yes, I think it takes care of the committee’s proposals because he has included the same.
(Question on amendment put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR LOOTE: Mr Chairman, the committee has some amendments in form of an addition and re-numbering. We should renumber sub-clause (3) and subsequent sub-clauses as (4), (5) and (6) and insert the following new sub-clause (3): “An authorized officer shall in the implementation of any provision of this Act consult the refugee eligibility committee and the office of the refugees.” 

The justification is to safeguard the rights of the refugees. 

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: It is acceptable, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.30
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.31
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Refugee Bill, 2003” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.31
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE REFUGEE BILL, 2003

3.32
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Refugee Bill, 2003” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Refugee Bill, 2003” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE REFUGEE ACT, 2006

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. It is indeed very good that in the first week we have been able to pass this law, which has stood for a long time. Congratulations.  

We were expecting a statement from the Minister of Local Government, fortunately he is here. Can we receive the statement?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, before I make this statement I would like to apologise for having come in late. Yesterday my senior colleague promised that he would be here on time to make this statement, but it was not possible because we could not get information from KCC early enough for us to be here on time. However, we are now ready and I proceed to make the statement.

In the year 2002, Kampala City Council sub-leased the land on which Baganda Bus Park sits, to Uganda Bus Operators Association Investment Limited (UBOA). The sub-lease to UBOA is for five years and one of the key terms in the sub-lease is that UBOA had to develop a modern bus terminal on the plot. 

This has not been done to date, though the sub-lease became effective in the year 2002. UBOA submitted building plans to KCC for approval and this was granted. However, the developer has never submitted the structural plan. In the meantime, KCC learnt that UBOA had sub-leased part of the land to Kobil Uganda in contravention of one of the terms of the sub-lease. 

Consequently, KCC sued UBOA and Kobil Uganda Limited. The parties requested to settle the matter out of court and whereupon the parties agreed and court gave a consent of judgment. KCC felt that the matter had been resolved. However to KCC’s surprise, on the 17th of February this year the High Court issued a decree to Bazira T.G Bailiffs to evict KCC and UBOA and hand over possession of the said plot to the following persons: Mr John Sebalamu, Mr John Bosco Muwonge, Ms Christine Nabukeera, Mr Francis Dreg Lubega and Mr Tom Smith Ssemuwemba. 

KCC has disagreed with the above decree and has instructed its lawyers to appeal. As a result of the High Court’s decree, the orders thereof went ahead and evicted the occupants of the plot. That was early this week. The people evicted include the bus operators, and other tenants. Machines were used to excavate as if construction had started. The eviction has thrown the bus park and its neighbourhood into total confusion and disorder.

Action taken: 

As the line ministry, we have prevailed on KCC to be mindful of its duty to ensure that there is order in the city. We now have assurance from KCC that:

1.	The current construction of the bus park has been halted with immediate effect.
2.	Those who caused the disruption of the normal operations in the park and the neighbourhood must immediately restore the status quo. This entails filling the excavated areas and replacing the concrete slabs. 
3.	The buses should go back to the park for normal loading.
4.	KCC and the developers should sit and hold talks on the way forward.

These talks will aim at the following: 

(a)	Settling wrangles within UBOA.
(b)	Causing the developer to conform to the procedural requirements before the actual construction commences.
(c)	Systematic and orderly re-location of the buses when the development of the park starts.
(d)	Detailed work plan indicating the schedule of activities with clear time frame right from the start to the completion of the development of the park.

Above that, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government will ensure that all players in this matter conform to the law and that the public is not subjected to unnecessary inconveniences. I thank you, Sir.

3.40
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I have about two or three comments to make. I am surprised that in the action taken by the ministry there is no matter or effect referring to the court decree. In other words, the court decree seems to exist but the minister has gone ahead to take administrative action. In other words, the court decree, which the minister referred to on page 1 says: “… However, to KCC’s surprise the High Court on the 17th of February 2006 issued a decree to Bazira T.G. Bailiffs to evict KCC.”  

The court decree existing means that somebody went to court, won a case and the court is now issuing its final decision regardless of whether the ministry and KCC do take administrative action on the matter. The legal position is that the decree still exists and can supersede whatever administrative action is being taken.  
 
What I am asking the minister is that apart from the action taken here, which is administrative, what action was taken to ensure that the court decree is in the legal terms, nullified, reversed and so on? Because as long as these so-called people, who are holding a court decree still hold it, whatever administrative action you take, these people will emerge one day, and they can sit on this decree. You may pretend to have taken administrative action but as long as they have got the court decree, they still have the superior hand over your administrative action. 

So, I would like the minister to tell me; in addition to the administrative action taken, what has KCC done, and what do they mean, knowing that a court decree was given, and they do not seem to be following that court decree, how did they get the court decree? That is a very serious matter and let me also add two other things.

This matter should not just be looked at as a two page thing. To me there is something wrong with the bus operators in this country and the way the bus parks in Kampala and all over Uganda are being operated. You have heard people fighting in Masaka, Mbarara, and Lira; some of them are very important people in this House. So, I do not know! Something must be done about bus parks and taxi parks in this country. Honourable minister, you are dealing with this issue of bus parks and taxi parks in piece meals terms; the issue seems to be deeper. It is deeper.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the member for giving way. The information I want to pass to you is that in the year 2003 a Select Committee of this Parliament, where I was privileged to be the chairperson, investigated the wrangles of the bus parks in Uganda and gave its recommendations. The minister did not take those recommendations seriously and as a result, this is what we are getting now. Actually for the case to go to court, it was a result of that report and KCC used the same report to go to court. As a ministry, they did not consider this report as a useful document.  

MR ATUBO: Thank you very for very much for that excellent and useful information. In that report I remember you chaired and a report was presented to the House. The minister now can really use that report to see how the wrangle must end and, Mr Speaker, if you know how many people suffered because of what went on at the bus park - everything in Uganda is centralized in Kampala as of now. 

People are coming for letters of administration; they are coming to the Administrator-General, widowers and orphans, to be interviewed so that they can be given letters of no objection to administer estates of the deceased. Imagine somebody comes from Koboko to get a passport in Kampala. So it is incredible how you disrupt people who are possibly coming for only one day because of the problem in the bus park, it is terrible.  

So, I do hope that what has happened is an eye opener to the minister and you should deal with this matter in-depth, including taking into consideration the report of the committee of the House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.47
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, when I look at the report of the minister, in addition to what hon. Omara Atubo has said, on page 1, the minister says that UBOA submitted to KCC building plans for approval, and this was granted. However, the developer has never submitted the structural plans and on the administrative action that they have taken, the minister says that he has prevailed on KCC that the current construction of the bus park be halted.  

Is the act of halting the construction in a way to defeat the High Court decree, or is it enforcement of the responsibility that for any development to take place in this city the structural plan and the architectural drawings must receive approval of Kampala City Council; which is which? Is it fairer to have the structural plans approved, which has made you to move and halt the construction or is your prevailing on KCC to undermine the decision of the High Court?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you considered this statement and the issue of the High Court decree, I think it is necessary to consider these paragraphs. There is a paragraph to the effect that the parties were requested by court to settle the matter out of court and they indeed went to discuss it and consequently they agreed. Though I do not know which parties agreed, because they say that court gave consent to judgment -(Interjection)- I do not know. Then KCC felt that the matter was settled, however, to its surprise - it appears that KCC was not party to the consent judgment that is why they were surprised.  

So, there is a lot to investigate; was this a consent judgment among the parties? Because they were three parties; was it a consent judgment between two parties and if it was a consent judgment of all parties, what are the consequences? I think there is need to study these particular paragraphs and find out what happened because it may not be clear what the legal position is from this statement.

3.49
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you very much and I agree with you entirely. I was going to suggest that the minister takes back this statement and comes back with a clearer statement, because there are lots of loopholes in this matter. Besides what you have stated, where do these other fellows come from: John Sebalamu, John Bosco Muwanga et cetera? Who are they? They all dropped from thin air and then the minister seems to be saying that since KCC had appealed, therefore, it was surprised to see this other new decree.  

The minister should be mindful of the fact that an appeal does not operate as a state in any matter before court. I think the minister should go back with his technical team and some legal officers, and come back with a more detailed statement than this taka taka.

THE SPEAKER: I think the main concern why this statement had to be made was the issue raised by hon. Otto about the confusion, which was caused in town with respect to these vehicles. Have these vehicles now gone back to the park, or are they still outside?

3.51
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the House already seems to understand, the matter is more complicated than could be handled between yesterday and today, especially since we met here until late and some of us were also involved in the visit of His Excellency, the President of Tanzania. Therefore, we had only this morning to undertake this task.   It is true that we need more time and we are committed to making a statement. 

In addition to that, Mr Speaker, it is very clear that Uganda Bus Operators Association (UBOA) went outside the mandate of the agreement by sub leasing to these people.  What we have is a confusion brought about by acting contrary to the agreement. UBOA gave the lease out to Kobil. The question is, “Is Kobil going to do the same thing as had been originally agreed?” These legal wrangles became intense, leading to this kind of confusion.  

What we have done so far is to attempt to understand the cause of the confusion. The statement states, “Kampala City Council (KCC) which owns the land cannot be evicted.” If you sub lease land, at least you still have the legal ownership and in any case, when you have not followed the agreement, surely you cannot evict the original owner.  Therefore, KCC does not accept the UBOA’s behaviour and has taken the matter to court.

Further more, we have taken action as you have seen in the document that stops the process of any sort of construction. There have been excavations, which are not associated with the structural plans. This is not something that we in the ministry are supposed to oversee.  KCC is a government, which has its own planners and architects. We are supposed to be supervisors at a distance.  

In this statement, we have asked them to halt so that the confusion stops. We have also asked them to level the ground so that the buses go back. This is what I want the House to appreciate and then we will do the comprehension of the problem –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot solve this matter with the kind of submissions, which we are making in view of what has been revealed by the minister’s statement.  We do not know what the legal position is in the sense of the decree and who the parties involved are. How do you stop the enforcement of the decree?  We may not be able to handle this here until we know all the facts. There is a lot to investigate before we can understand the position and suggest the way forward. The statement itself has raised a number of issues.  It points out a number of parties as hon. Ben Wacha already said. We have Kobil, UBOA, KCC and many others. We really do not know who are the people involved in the decree of the code.

3.56
NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I am puzzled. I am in possession of a letter from one of the ministers in Ministry of Lands writing to the Minister of Internal Affairs, restraining the police who are interfering with the developers. The letter talks of final payments.  Therefore, it is really a serious matter – if you can allow me read this letter.

This letter is dated, 17 March 2006, and it is addressed to the Minister of Internal Affairs. “REFERENCE: COMPLAINT AGAINST INTERVENTION OF POLICE IN DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT 43/47, NAKIVUBO ROAD.  I have received communication from the lawyers of Mr Dreke Lubega, Mrs Semuyaba, Yiga and Company Advocates to the effect that police is blocking construction on their client’s plot without any genuine reason.  This property was acquired through a high court judgment, a memorandum of understanding and a sale agreement, which was executed on 9 February 2006.  

On the said consent judgment, Mr Lubega was entitled to possession immediately on execution of the agreement and payment of the final instalment, which was paid.  The purpose of this letter is to request that you cause the police to withdraw its officers to enable Mr Lubega to continue with construction on his plot without interference.”  Signed by Maj. Gen. Otafiire, minister.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as somebody who contacted the Mayor yesterday with hon. Okot Ogongo and requested him to go physically to the park and see the mess, we were shocked when he looked as if he had never heard of anybody constructing. This was queer to us.  It seems the City Council is telling you lies, and as hon. Ben Wacha said, this matter is very important because Parliament had said this person should not take the tender of developing the park. He simply did not have the capacity.  However, somehow nobody took heed for the decision of Parliament is not a law.

Therefore, the case has come back here. I appeal to Minister of Local Government and Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Transport and the city Mayor to sit down and look at the situation at the park. That place as we talk now in the Ministry of Lands it is gazetted as a bus terminal but the people who are coming in are going to develop a shopping mall –(Interruption)

MR  OTTO: I was around the park at 1.00p.m and the situation is still the same. People are still lining up at the roadside so I do not know if your contributions could head towards suggesting a place where the buses should line up, like near State House in Nakasero. Those legal arguments will not solve the problem when the buses are still lining on the roadside. Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am extremely shocked.  Some years ago, we had an area gazetted for the bus Park. This was UTC Company Bus Park, which was owned by Government.  In the privatisation process, there were no legal framework to restrain the developer from doing any other business and we lost the park.  The only remaining option was this Baganda Bus Park.  To my surprise, according to the minister’s statement, we now have John Sebalu, John Bosco Muwonge; what exactly are they doing? Are they constructing the bus park or doing something different?  I think the minister needs to come out clearly and tell us about these people who are developing and yet causing chaos. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see where we are moving with this kind of general debate. First, we do not have the facts. We need to sit down with City Council and other parties involved to know the facts before we can meaningfully debate this issue. Let us ask the minister to go and sit with City Council, get the facts and report to us next week.  Otherwise, we are wasting a lot of time. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your ruling. The statement has clearly talked about the action taken.  As the line ministry, we have appealed to KCC to be mindful of its duty, to ensure there is order in the city.   These talks will aim at –(Interruption) - please.  Hon. Byanyima in good faith has read a letter, which is not even copied to me. Surely, if he had it, why didn’t he make it available to me yesterday, instead of waiting to present it here? Is it a trap or something else?  

Mr Speaker, this matter, as we have indicated needs more time.  We admit that this statement cannot answer all the queries. (Mr Otto rose_) Hon. Otto, we have instructed City Council to make sure the excavation stops so that the levelling is done. Therefore, you should give us time to get satisfactory answers because the ministry is capable of doing this. I should also inform the House that this is one of the reasons Government decided that Kampala should have a different status. For a long time now we have been getting problems with this same KCC.  Therefore, please bear with us. We will give you details soon.  

THE SPEAKER: Time frame?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The report has given the House a picture, which I cannot withdraw. We can only improve on it.

THE SPEAKER: When are you coming back, to address this issue?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think we will try to operate within one week.

THE SPEAKER: We give you Thursday.  

MR ATUBO: Could the minister assure us that he will be in the House on Thursday, without being telephoned to come?

THE SPEAKER: The minister will be in the House.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I have already indicated that we had very limited time and we were even shocked in the morning to learn that the House would sit at 10.00 a.m.  We came here rushing and fortunately, we were told the sitting had been rescheduled for the afternoon. This gave us some time to prepare the statement. I am surprised that instead of appreciating the job we have done in such a limited time, we are being skinned.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Thursday we will get a comprehensive statement on this issue.  

4.06
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Yesterday, when you adjourned the House, you asked us to come in the morning, and your greatest fear apparently was the load shedding.  I am now wondering whether this Parliament has the capacity to save itself from the load shedding.  I am conscious that we as Parliament pass the monies that run this country; we also set the standards and supervise the ministers.  We should do something to help business proceed normally, other than depending on the whims and wishes of when there will be power.  Isn’t there something that could be done, Mr Speaker?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable sister that that is the more reason we should be load-shed so that we pressurise those who are supposed to do it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even before we reconvened, we had made inquiries about this load shedding as far as Parliament was concerned.  We got in touch with the authorities concerned and they informed us that technically it is not possible to spare Parliament.  The computer does load shedding and there is nothing much that can be done. Therefore, what they told us was to alternate the load shedding so that if we have electricity today, tomorrow we do not have. When we do not have it, we use our generator, even though it is very expensive. We can only afford a few hours. Therefore, what we have decided is to always work full day when we have electricity and half day when we do not have. That is what we are going to do. 

Just a few minutes ago, I have been advised about what is going to happen next week. Please note the load shedding for Monday and Tuesday next week.  On Monday - although normally this is not a sitting day - we have power during the day and we do not have on Tuesday.  In view of these problems, we may have to come back on Monday instead of Tuesday to transact business for that is when we shall have power. On Tuesday, we start in the afternoon.  Hopefully, soon the problem will be solved. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am glad that you are able to highlight the situation as it is.  Before I completed, hon. Rwamirama interjected to the effect that this is of course a general problem.  Consequently, I think the whole country would like to appreciate what is happening.  We are privy to that information because we are in Parliament. Would it not be good if the minister came here and told us what plan she has, to alleviate this suffering for the whole country? It is getting gloomier, businesses are affected, the women by the roadside who make passion juice have been edged out of business, things get rotten and many other bad things.  Therefore, we would be glad if the minister came here –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Hon. Alaso is talking of things rotting on the street.  As I was coming to Parliament, I listened to one of the radio stations talking of the situation in Soroti hospital. I do not know whether members have heard about it. There is no electricity, patients who are supposed to go to the theatre are dying, and related medical attention cannot be given. However, this is not only unique to Soroti hospital; it is a national crisis. 

The point, which hon. Alice Alaso is raising, is of extreme importance.  This country must be told in very clear terms, about the existing power crisis in the country, what our station in Jinja is producing and the shortfall. I think there is something about thermal, which we are paying a lot of money for. What is the Government doing about this? All of a sudden, we have heard that an agreement has now been signed for Bujagali and we are going to have power in the next two or three years.  We have not heard anything about Karuma. 

During the recess, we heard about some big contract being signed for Kanungu or Rukungiri. I understand that money was supposed to go to Karuma but it was taken somewhere else.  Therefore, this is something, which we want to hear.  We heard that a big team was coming and they have now signed a big contract to give power to some – hon. Amama Mbabazi was there – so this is very serious.  We want to know if there is a plan. After all, when you are a powerful minister you could bring Egyptians or Chinese to take a big contract to your home area. Next time I become a big man, I will also take a power station to Otuke.  

THE SPEAKER: I think this is the point, which has been made by hon. Alaso.

MR ATUBO: Therefore, honourable minister, I think through hon. Alice Alaso we should ask the Government to come here on Monday to give us a definitive statement on the power crisis and the plan to develop Bujagali, Karuma and all the stations. We need to know where these small stations are being built in Uganda and whether certain areas are being neglected. Which areas is the Government planning to put macro power stations? Thank you, hon. Alaso.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Leader of Government Business has taken the request Parliament is making. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: The statement my honourable colleague is requesting for - though I am in support - might be a statement, which will talk about the long-term solution for energy in this country.  However, hon. Alaso raised an important issue of how we can solve this problem quickly; especially for this Parliament and other important Government institutions like Mulago hospital. 

As Parliament, we are the people making the budget, and the generator we are using is a very powerful machine.  I do not think that this Parliament can use less than Ugshs 3,000,000 per day, if it is to run the generator of that capacity. When you consider State House, for instance, it has a straight line from the main feeder pillar, which is nearby. It is possible for us as Parliament to tap from that line so that we are not loadshed. That way, the amount of money that we are going to use on a generator for a month, which is about 100 million, would be enough to pull a three-phase line from the line that goes to State House.  

Mr Speaker, we should also consider that alternative. Let us look at how we solve the problem in this short time so that the proceedings of this august House are not interrupted.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall discuss this with the appropriate authority concerned to see whether it is possible.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, this is supplementary to what my colleague was saying.  There were press reports recently with Uganda Manufacturers Association receiving some concessions from Government about the use of diesel generators of a certain capacity.  I would like to find out whether that arrangement was actually concluded, and what the capacity of our generator is, and whether we cannot benefit from the same concession from Government as a Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: That will be examined.  Honourable members, in view of what I have told you about the advice I have got on load shedding next week, I am inclined to adjourn the House to Monday, 10.00 a.m.. Monday is not normally our sitting day, but because of the circumstances under which we are operating, we have to sit.  

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I just want to appeal to my colleagues, the Members of Parliament and the nation at large that a mistake was made causing this power crisis.   It now requires us to be patient because solution to this problem cannot be overnight. It will take at least three years or four.  Now, as it takes three or four years we have to optimise the resources we have.  In fact, my able engineer friend has brought one of the solutions for Parliament. If that is solved then I do not know what plans the ministry has because if the ministry could bring us their plans here then we would exhaustively see what to do.  Otherwise, putting up a hydro power station takes a minimum of three years.  Bujagali alone is not enough because it will produce about 200 mega watts depending how Owen Falls on the other side is performing. If they continue messing up the release of water there, it will even produce less power.  Therefore, I want to develop my argument honourable members (Ms Alaso rose_) I will give you a chance. Now, the demand of power two years ago was 340 mega watts and –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. This House has just directed the Leader of Government Business to cause a statement to be made to this House on Monday.  The issues that are being raised now would best be raised during the discussion of that statement.  Therefore, is it procedurally correct to pre-empty and speculate on issues that this House has already demanded?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us contribute on this issue when the minister has finished making the statement.  Whoever has ideas on how to improve the situation will –(Interruption)?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  When you made your directive, I had gone out to handle an urgent matter. I want to inform the House that we are still handling that matter and His Excellency is in the chair.  By Monday we will not have concluded, so I would request for at least a week because there is no point in making a statement, which you are going to question. However, if you insist, I will direct the Ministry of Energy to make it. This is a major issue affecting the entire country.  Therefore, we need to have done it properly and as you know His Excellency, the President is extremely busy but he has prompted us to handle it under his leadership.  I request that you give us at least a week –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: A week from today is Thursday.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Alright, I direct the Minister of Energy to make a statement on Thursday.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I request the Minister of Local Government who is supposed to be here next week to give us a statement on these issues of the Bus Park to also include the problems regarding market dues in almost the whole of my constituency.
  
THE SPEAKER: I think the point is made and the minister will tell us.  We come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to Monday 27 March 2006 at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.23 p.m. and adjourned until Monday 27 March 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)

