Monday, 27 March 2006

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from the weekend and thank you for making it to the House on a Monday. Honourable members, the mandate of this Parliament continues up to 12 May 2006, and there is a lot of work, which we are supposed to dispose of between now and May. Therefore, I appeal to you to turn up in big numbers. I expect every Member to come so that we clear what is on our Table, including the budget process, which will begin sometime next week. Please, do not say, “Well, the 8th Parliament is in place.” The 8th Parliament will not transact business of the 7th Parliament. 

I am happy that over the weekend our team was victorious in Melbourne where we got gold. (Applause) We now have two gold medals and a bronze. This is very significant because I even heard the British Prime Minister praising Uganda on the news, for this achievement. We were the 16th in these games and we should, therefore, prepare to welcome our team when it comes back.

Honourable members, according to the Order Paper we should start with the labour laws, but as you remember, we set up a committee to look into industrial relations last year. This came because some employees were facing problems with their employers, for instance, the AGOA girls. We set up a select committee chaired by Hon. Dora Byamukama. For this reason, we intend to change the Order Paper to begin with the report of this select committee, which will help us know something about industrial relations. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ADEQUACY OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN UGANDA

10.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON ADEQUACY OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN UGANDA (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am reliably informed that the copies of the report are being brought from down stairs and it will be with us in a few minutes. Please bear with me.

This is the report of the Select Committee on Adequacy of Industrial Relations in Uganda. Following the parliamentary debate on industrial unrest at Apparel Tri-Star (Uganda) Ltd (hereinafter referred to as Tri-Star), which occurred in October and November 2003, Parliament on 6 November 2003 adopted a resolution to set up a select committee. On 9 December 2003, the Select Committee on Adequacy of Industrial Relations was set up with the following mandate:

•	To investigate the authenticity of allegations raised by the workers of Apparel Tri-Star Limited;

•	To examine the existing labour policies and laws with the aim of ascertaining as to whether they conform to the Constitution of Uganda;

•	To examine whether existing labour policies and laws comply with international treaties and conventions (such as AGOA) that Uganda is signatory to;

•	To examine whether Uganda’s labour laws are in harmony with those of Kenya and Tanzania in the spirit of harmonising the legal framework of the East African Community; and,

•	Any other matter, incidental or arising from the above-mentioned terms of reference, and the way forward. 

The composition of the select committee was as follows:

1. 	Hon. Dora Byamukama - Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. Wagonda Muguli – Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Rex Aachilla 
4. 	Hon. John Byabagambi
5. 	Hon. Martin Orech
6. 	Hon. Umar Lule Mawiya
7. 	Hon. Ruth Kavuma
8. 	Hon. Teopista Ssentongo - co-opted member 
9. 	Hon. Martin Wandera - co-opted member

Methodology:

The committee adopted the following work methods:

•	Literature review: Under this, the committee reviewed several reports, legislation and other relevant documents.
•	Public hearings: The committee invited various stakeholders in the area of industrial relations as witnesses. Some stakeholders who did not respond to the initial invitations eventually attended the committee meetings and gave evidence. A list of all the witnesses is attached as Annex 1. 
•	Field visits: The committee co-opted the Assistant Commissioner/Inspection, Mr Steven Bakaswirewa, to accompany it during the field visits. The following factories were visited: Thembo Steel Rolling Mills, Southern Range Nyanza, Kakira Sugar Works, Tororo Cement Industries, Butenaniro Coffee Factory, Rwenzori Commodities Ltd, Kigumba Tea Estate, Apparel Tri-Star (Uganda) Ltd, Nice House of Plastics, Mukwano Industries Company Ltd and Rosebud Ltd. Details on what was established are attached to this report as Annex 3.

Acknowledgements:

The committee acknowledges the support of Parliament and in particular the Speaker’s wise choice in nominating the committee Members. The committee also extends appreciation to the various witnesses who responded positively to the invitations or sermons. In addition, Ms Barbara Munube, a lawyer and research officer in the Parliamentary Commission, was very helpful.

Industrial relations:  

Industrial relations may be defined as a set of phenomena, operating both within and outside the work place, concerned with determining and regulating the employment relationship. The following areas when not handled properly often lead to poor industrial relations:

(a)	Wages:
	•	Minimum wage
	•	Protection of wages
	•	Labour clauses, unfair contracts

(b)	General conditions: 
	•	Hours of work
	•	Night duty
	•	Weekly rest
	•	Paid leave.

(c)	Occupational safety and health:
	•	Prevention of accidents
	•	Specific hazards and risks
	•	Air pollution, noise, vibration, heat, radiation
	•	Welfare facilities.

(d)	Social security:
	•	Income security,
	•	Medical care and sickness benefits
	•	Old age, invalidity, survivor’s benefits
	•	Employment injury benefit.

(e)	Labour relations: 
	•	Collective agreements
	•	Voluntary reconciliation, mediation and arbitration mechanisms
	•	Consultations with the undertaking
	•	Freedom of association (the right to organise).

(f)	Basic human rights: 
	•	Forced labour
	•	Equal opportunity.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me present the background to this case study.  Tri-star is a private company, which was set up in 2001 to participate in the AGOA arrangement. The Government of Uganda offered to train about 1,000 Uganda females, popularly referred to as AGOA girls.  These girls were expected to form part of the staff of Tri-star. The expenses of training the AGOA girls were borne by government. In addition, the government provided premises where the factory is located. Tri-star specialises in the manufacture of a variety of apparels.  

On Tuesday 21 October 2003, over 1,500 factory workers at Tri-Star Apparels staged a demonstration allegedly because of bad treatment that they were subjected to by the management of the factory.  Representatives from the government, Parliament and the private sector made an effort to intervene in a bid to peacefully resolve the demonstration.  Following the intervention, the strike ended on Thursday 23 October 2003. 

However, management of Tri-star dismissed 330 female factory workers. The workers left the premises and marched to the Parliamentary Buildings.  While there, they were provided with shelter in the Members’ Lounge and were offered meals.  

However, the manner in which the matter was handled left a lot to be desired, thus Parliament in its wisdom instituted this select committee to generally investigate the adequacy of industrial relations in Uganda.

Findings:

It is worth noting that although the event that sparked off the setting up of the select committee has been overtaken by events in that the strike was quelled and several of the issues, which led to the strike were addressed, the other terms of reference still remain valid. It is, therefore, the committee’s prayer that its recommendations are taken into consideration as Parliament debates the merits and principles of the labour bills.

The first term of reference was based on the allegations and these were:

•	Lack of association. The employees alleged that they were denied the right to freely subscribe to a trade union, which would negotiate for their rights with the employers.
•	Restricted freedom of movement and restriction on visits by relatives and friends.
•	Lack of provision for sick leave. Workers were denied compassionate leave after losing their dear ones.
•	Harassment by the employer. It was alleged that some workers were beaten by the employer and the workers were under constant threats of being replaced any time.
•	Employment for more than eight hours of workers per day. No schedule of work and no organised shift work.
•	Unfair dismissals. There was no right for a hearing, no provisions for disciplinary procedure and workers were unfairly terminated without being paid their terminal benefits.
•	Underpayment of salary. The workers had been promised that they would be paid Shs 80,000 at the time of recruitment but they were paid only Shs 72,000 per month, which became peanut after deducting NSSF.
•	Fear of sexual harassment. Management had recruited about 50 men to share dometories and toilets with women, thus women were threatened with rape.

The allegations raised by workers of Tri-star were addressed and the situation has since returned to normal. What remained outstanding is signing of a collective bargaining agreement between the workers, trade union and Tri-star. A chronology account of the events that occurred immediately before, during, and after the unrest is attached to this report as annex.

The committee addressed all the aforementioned terms of reference and the following findings and observations were made:

(a)	The need for a labour policy. The labour policy would be a government plan to provide guidance on rights of employers and employees. In essence, labour laws should ideally give legal force to the labour policy.
(b)	The committee noted the need to review the existing labour laws with a view to domesticating international conventions Uganda is signatory to. A list of these is attached as Annex 5. Review of laws should also operationalise the 1995 Constitution, which specifically provides for rights of workers to:
•	work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions; equal payment for equal work without discrimination; rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay; form or join trade unions; collective bargaining and representation and the right to withdraw labour according to law. 

The labour laws that needed to be revised are:

•	The Employment Act Cap 219
•	The Factories Act Cap 220
•	Trade Unions Act Cap 223; and
•	Trades Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act Cap 224.
 
(c)	The committee noted that Article 40(4) of the Constitution specifically provides that the employer of every worker shall accord her protection during pregnancy and after birth, in accordance with the law. Article 33(3) of the Constitution mandates the state to protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in the society. 

(d)	The committee also noted that in line with Section 6(1) of the Children’s Act, it is the duty of both parents to care for their children and, therefore, working fathers should be given an opportunity to be with their families at the time of the arrival of a new born baby or adopted children.  Likewise, Section 34 of, “The Employment and Labour Relations Act” of Tanzania, grants male employees three days paternity leave per each leave cycle. This is the best practice that Uganda could adopt. 

(e)	 The committee observed that apart from operationalising the Constitution provisions on economic rights, there is dire need for a specific legal provision for sexual harassment.

(f)	The issue of a statutory minimum wage was raised. It was noted that all the East African countries have a minimum wage law.  However, it was noted that currently the minimum wage in Uganda is set at Shs 6,000.  This has been the case since 1984, more than 20 years ago. The proposal to raise the minimum wage to the range of Shs 53,000 to Shs 73,000 has not been adopted and yet in some sectors, such as the agricultural estates, wages and conditions are so bad that workers are trapped in poverty and are at the mercy of employers. 

(g)	The need to address occupational safety and health issues was noted. The committee noted that the need to provide for occupational safety and health is paramount. After visiting metal smelting plants, flower firms, apparel factories, coffee factories and the cement factories, it was noted that workers in most of these industries need protective gear in order to work under satisfactory safe and health conditions. The case of the Ebola victims is a cruel reminder of the occupational hazard.

(h)	The need for more vigilant labour inspection, which service has been decentralised to the districts, was noted.  The committee was informed that labour administration was understaffed and, therefore, unable to carry out regular inspection of work places.  

(i)	The committee was informed that although the industrial court is in existence, inadequate space was located for it and, therefore, it is not operational. This situation needs immediate rectification.

(j)	The committee noted that the biggest challenge that faces government is inadequate funding for labour operations and enforcement of laws. The enactment of labour laws will no doubt enhance the ability of workers to secure their rights. This should be followed by awareness campaigns. 

(k)	The committee established that Article 104 of the treaty for the establishment of East African Community provides for harmonisation of labour laws. This particular Article provides for cooperation on the free movement of persons, labour, services and the right of establishment and residence.  The partner states of the East African Community are required to:

•	maintain common employment policies;
•	harmonise their labour policies, programmes and legislation including those on occupational health and safety;
•	establish a regional centre for productivity and employment and exchange of information on the availability of employment;
•	make their training facilities available to persons from partner states; and
•	enhance the activities of employers and workers organisations with a view of strengthening them.

Recommendations:

In light of the findings, the committee recommends as follows: -
 
(a) Government should urgently formulate a labour policy. Enactment of the laws without a labour policy causes a major challenge when it comes to the implementation and enforcement of the laws.

(b) The reviewed labour laws should have explicit provisions on constitutional economic rights of workers to; work under satisfactory, safe and health conditions; equal payment for equal work without discrimination; rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay; the right for workers to form or join trade unions; collective bargaining and representation and the right to withdraw labour according to the law.

(c) 	Maternity leave of not less than 60 working days for every woman worker should be provided.  The Constitution specifically provides that every woman worker shall be accorded protection during pregnancy and after birth. The Employment Act currently provides for four weeks after confinement. It also provides for no dismissal during maternity leave. The four weeks period should be reviewed to 60 working days. 

	Review of the maternity period would be in line with the International Convention on Maternity Protection of 1919 No.3 and Maternity Protection Convention (revised) of 1952 No.103. These international conventions require the ratifying state to provide 12 weeks maternity leave from work during which time women shall be entitled to financial benefits and medical care and such women should not be dismissed. In addition, the woman is entitled to nursing breaks during her working day. Uganda, like Ghana and Zambia, need to sign and rectify this particular convention.

(d) Paternity leave of five working days per leave cycle is recommended.

(e) Labour laws need to address the issue of sexual harassment in employment.

(f)	A statutory minimum wage that takes into account the socio-economic situation should be announced immediately.

(g)	More vigilant labour inspections should be done. The shortage in staff can be addressed by more recruitment of labour officers at district level in order for them to effectively and adequately inspect industries at least four times in a year.

(h)	The committee calls upon government to fully operationalise the industrial court. Space and staffing for the court should be given priority. Measures to assist the court to enforce its judgment should also be put in place.

(i)	The Equal Opportunities Commission that promotes equal opportunities and non-discrimination should be established to carry out its mandate.

(j)	In order to ensure that labour laws are not dead labour laws, government should create awareness of labour laws because workers can effectively utilise laws that they are aware of.

(k)	The trend of under funding labour operations should be reversed. Government should provide adequate funding.

(l)	Domestication of international obligations as well as harmonisation of labour laws of the East African countries should be expedited. Harmonisation of East African legislation is key in light of the signing of the customs union and in conformity with Article 104 of the treaty for the establishment of the East African community.

The committee will move substantive amendments in line with our recommendations at the appropriate time.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I pray that the annex to this report be part of our parliamentary record. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for this report. The report has come when a number of recommendations have already been implemented, for a number of labour bills will be presented to Parliament today.  Therefore, I suggest that when Members are handling these other bills, they should take into account what has been recommended in the report. Thank you very much.

We need not debate now. We shall combine the debate with that of the labour bills. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

11.14
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to present before the House, “The Employment Bill, 2005” which is one of the four bills proposed for review and culmination of a long process of our labour laws reformed. 

Honourable members, you are aware that there are provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which directly relate to labour matters. The first one is Article 25(1), to the effect that no person shall be held in slavery or servitude. The second one is Article 25 (2), to the effect that no one shall be required to perform forced labour.  The third one is Article 34(4) to the effect that that children are entitled to protection from social and economic exploitation and from employment or work that is likely to be hazardous or interfere with their education or harmful to their health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.

The fourth one is Article 40(1), which says: “Parliament shall enact laws- 
(b) to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination; and
(c) to ensure that every worker is accorded rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for public holidays.”

The fifth is Article 40(4): “The employer of every woman worker shall accord her protection during pregnancy and after birth, in accordance with this law.”

Mr Speaker, the existing labour law is meant to operationalise and give effect to the above cited Articles of the Constitution, which were enacted before the coming into force of the Constitution in 1995 and these laws are outdated and are a source of frustration for all concerned stakeholders.  They do not give proper and adequate effect to the Constitution - in fact, in many cases the current provisions contradict the Constitution. Therefore, the Employment Bill, 2005, which I wish to lay before you seeks to give correct and adequate effect to the Constitution as well as to meet international labour standards, which are critical in international trade in this globalised world.  

The purpose of the Employment Bill, 2005 is to set basic terms of conditions of work. The Employment Bill covers the following basic aspects of employment: the contract of service, termination of contract, termination notices, protection of wages, hours of work, rest, holidays and leave, employment of women, employment of young persons, employment of foreigners and care and welfare of the employees.

Mr Speaker, I wish to place the Employment Bill before you and I urge that it will be considered and approved by the House. I move the Bill for a second reading.

11.18
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr Avitus Tibarimbasa): Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services, on the Employment Bill, 2005.

Introduction:

The Employment Bill, 2005 was presented for a first reading in this august House on 27 October 2005 by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Bill was referred to the Committee on Social Services for scrutiny.

Object of the Bill:

The Employment Bill, 2005 sets basic standards (terms and conditions) of work.  

Background:

The labour registration review has been a long process, involving extensive consultations with the various stakeholders. The Bill is one of the four labour bills that are a culmination of a long process of a dialogue between government and institutions like Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions, and Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions among others.  

The existing legislations do not conform to the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, which recognise and uphold workers and employers’ rights and obligations. The specific Articles that relate to work and workplace or working environment include Articles 25, 29, 34, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44.  

The existing law is archaic and restrictive, and does not address the challenges and needs of the new work environment and modern labour market. Therefore, there was need for a legislative framework that responds to these challenges and needs.

Uganda is a signatory to a number of international conventions that relate to labour, labour market, and work environment among others. Harmonisation of our domestic labour laws with the international labour conventions is long overdue. 

The security of Uganda’s current and future external market is dependent on the reforms on our labour environment. The reforms are a necessary ingredient for Uganda’s survival in the global market.

There has been a global development of new concepts in the labour environment, which has created a need to restructure our labour laws to be in line with the new labour development and labour concepts.

Methodology:

The committee met with various stakeholders who included the following:

•	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
•	The Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry
•	The Members of Parliament representing workers
•	The Federation of Uganda Employers
•	The National Organisation of Trade Unions
•	The central Organisation of Free Trade Unions
•	The committee also scrutinised and took into account submissions by the various NGOs like Platform for Labour Action, and other interested individuals.

Observations and recommendations: 

Employment Policy: The committee observed that in addition to the enactment of these labour laws, there is need to develop an employment policy and systematic programmes by government, to address the unemployment problem in this country. This will make it possible to address labour related issues in a more wholistic approach.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that government should expeditiously develop an employment policy.

The committee recommends that a clear interpretation to the words “dismissal” and “termination” in the Employment Bill, be made for purposes of proper application and job security.

Maternity leave: 

The committee observed that there is need for women to be given enough time to recover from pregnancy and labour. When women are subjected to heavy work, they get maternal complication and many have died as a result. The employers’ arguments were heavily based on less period for maternity leave, in order to cater for their productivity in their organisations.

The committee recommends that the Employment Bill be amended to give women a maternity leave period of 60(sixty) working days, as opposed to six fixed weeks, which would include public holidays and weekends, as provided in Clause 57. 

The employers expressed fears about female employees being frequently absent for long maternity leave periods. 

To partly address these fears, the committee recommends that government makes arrangements to provide reproductive health programmes at the work place to educate employees on proper planning of families.

Paternity leave: 

The committee observed that there was need to provide paternity leave to enable men support the women after child birth. There was a fear expressed by employers that this would result in loss of man-hours, especially men who are polygamous. 

As a compromise composition, the committee recommends that paternity leave be fixed at a minimum of four working days per annum.

Sexual harassment:  

There was concern that employers use their positions and power to sexually harass their employees, despite the provisions of the penal code on sex related offences.

There was further concern by employers that the labour laws do not protect employers who are sexually harassed by their employees. The committee was not convinced by this submission because where it occurs, the employers have the powers to take administration action on the employees who sexually harass them.
	
Migrant workers: 

The committee was concerned that employers, especially the foreign investors hire skilled and unskilled migrants even when such skills are locally available. 

The committee recommends that immigration board should include, among others, a tripartite partnership of the federation of labour unions and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in the process of issuing work permits.  

Violation of rights of workers by employers: 

The committee noted that some employers continue to violate the rights of workers to form or join trade unions and to collective bargaining and representation.

The committee recommends that government firmly enforces this right in all work places, and that employers who fall culprits should be brought to book.   

Conclusion: 

The committee is in full support of the motion for a second reading of, “The Employment Bill, 2005.”  

A number of amendments have been proposed to address the concerns raised in this report. At an appropriate time, the relevant clauses will be amended.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and members of the committee for the report. The debate is now open.

11.30
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion, and to thank government for having brought these Bills to Parliament. For us as workers, this one is a milestone achievement in the struggle for workers’ rights. For over 10 years now, we have been struggling to have these laws amended and government was seemingly moving at a snail speed. 

There is only one bill out of the four Bills, which is still lacking and that is the machinery for negotiation of Public Servants. The reason here is because the other Bill is still with the Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, we just request the Leader of Government Business to quickly bring this Bill. It lost out because it was in another ministry and, therefore, I was told that it is being taken to Cabinet. We hope it will not be captured there for many years.

Mr Speaker, in this country, we have been witnessing the worst form of violation of workers’ rights in the region. The employers have been blatantly violating the rights of workers, taking advantage of the gaps in the law and the lack of sensitisation by the workers on their rights.  

Initially one of the reasons there was that slow movement was because of several misconceptions in the international circles, especially the World Bank and IMF, where there was an argument that recognition of labour rights leads to increased costs of production and, therefore, countries had to make sure that labour rights were violated.  Therefore, somehow the Ministry of Labour suffered from that. That is why even when there was that slow movement, we could not blame the Ministry of Gender and Labour because there was a lot of interference or pressure from other international circles. 

The argument was because this government had embraced investment and therefore creating favourable conditions - so that misconception took several years when there was debate between various groups.  Unfortunately, that misconception was a disadvantage to the country because when you have a cheap labour force or you have the labour movement, the employment sector does not favour the workers, you end up with very low quality goods and low productivity and in the process, the effect is that you suffer in the international market because your goods will not attract any market. The impact is increasing labour costs in the long run.  

The other very unfavourable impact on the economy is that, when we have low productivity and poor quality products, we have low domestic market and international market because of poor quality products and yet the reverse happens to rich countries. Low materials produced by poorly managed labour in poor countries, transformed into finished high quality products by highly paid workers in the developed countries, are leading and being sold expensively. Therefore, you find that in the end, you have what is called, ‘approximation of surplus’. You work, but all the money goes into the pockets of developed countries.

Mr Speaker, as I said, we thank the government because the concepts within the new labour laws, the Employment Bill in this case, captures the core labour standards, and the labour standards are about eight ILO conventions, which were defined as core labour standards. It has been researched that implementation of this core labour standards leads to improvement in development. Therefore, many of the issues possibly that have been captured in the new Employment Bill, which we are debating looks at the core labour standards, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the ILO Resolution of 1998, imploring governments to improve labour standards.

Our country has signed all the core labour standards and when we implement these bills, our laws will be the best in the region. Therefore, that will be a very big achievement in this nation. 
I do not want to go to the details.

However, one of the things that was lacking were the issues that have been captured and raised by the report on industrial relations. All the issues that have been raised in that report have been catered for, including other additional issues that are even far beyond the issues that were raised by the committee on industrial relations.  Issues like sexual harassment, job security, and the minimum wage.

This law caters for the right of workers to be paid, to have contract of employment and others. The labour bills cater for the right of workers to organisation, and then the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 caters for the right of workers to negotiate.  

The issue of minimum wage is something different.  There is already a committee, which is handling it and what is only lacking is announcement of the minimum wage to set the rates. I think that concept is outside these labour bills. The principle is in place, but we should go ahead to establish how much because the minimum wage is the amount. What we have captured here is just the concept of that process.  

Mr Speaker, there was a very important point in the law which has also been cured - the right of workers to be reinstated. All countries in the region and the world over have a provision, which caters for the right to reinstatement. If, for instance, the termination was unfair and if the conditions are that a continued employment relation is fine - but it also caters for other conditions where maybe it is not possible and if the worker does not want to be employed and others.  However, that right has been put in this new labour law, which we are debating. Therefore, I would like to say that the workers in this country support this new Bill. What the workers will need after this is implementation.

We have seen situations where some of the employers, even when the law provides for certain things, continue to violate the law. What we need now is strong enforcement, just as the committee suggested, by the government to make sure that the employers that violate the provisions are brought to book without exception. 

In the last over one year, the government has come out strongly to pursue employers.  We have had the ministry issuing what are called, statutory directives. The President also issued some directives to employers. Therefore, the government has really done well so far. What we want to respect is continued support and enforcement so that workers in this nation do not suffer the violations that have been taking place.  

Mr Speaker, I do not want to take much time because as I have said, the concepts that are within the bills adequately cater for the issues of the workers. I, therefore, do not want to lament here because I know that now the issues that we have been crying about have been catered for. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.43
DR DAVID MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the very depressing moments at a graduation ceremony, is to see these graduates jubilation, throwing their hoods up and down, but aware that the following day they are going to the streets.  Some of the things that we have to tackle, as a Parliament, as a country, is to see how we create employment or teach subjects that are going to give the graduates some skills for self-employment. Unemployment is a very important issue in this country.

Mr Speaker, my second point concerns maternity leave. The committee has recommended 60 working days for maternity leave, but I would like to suggest that we modify this. Hon. Dora Byamukama mentioned something about maternity leave, for instance, in Tanzania, where they give 60 days.  But then the committee should also have added that this is given every two years to avoid repeated annual pregnancies.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, hon. Byatike, for giving way. The maternity leave period, which is specified in our report, makes reference to some international conventions, which provide for the 12 weeks, which was mentioned. Unfortunately, Uganda is not yet party to these. But apart from that, this Parliament some time last year passed maternity leave of 60 working days under the UPDF Act and, therefore, it would be more consistent if we also did likewise for this particular bill.

On the issue of whether maternity leave should be granted per year, I am glad hon. Byatike is a doctor because he knows very well that there are some cases where family planning or contraception methods may not work very well. Even the best tested are not 100 per cent accurate in that you may accidentally get pregnant. 

We may also be going into issues of privacy rights because I may decide to give birth every year for three years, in order for me to be free thereafter. Therefore, when we give birth, this is a duty to our nation, for we are procreating. You should even be grateful to us because we are providing more labour. I thank you. 

DR BYATIKE: Thank you very much, for the clarification. I think we should be fair to the employers when we talk about labour laws. Therefore, to enhance the family planning business, I think we need to consider every two years for this kind of leave.  

In my view, I do not think there is any point in giving men these four working days as paternity leave. I do not think it is necessary. My fourth point, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What would be the guarantee that these four days are utilised for the purpose for which they are granted? 

DR BYATIKE: I am not so sure. 

MR ONEK: Thank you, for giving way. When I was Managing Director, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, each time a wife gave birth, I always gave one-week paternity leave, and it became a standard. This is the time the man can help in sorting out some things. Therefore, I think it is in order. I would highly support giving paternity leave because as a father, at one time or the other I had those responsibilities, which require that you are at home, particularly at that difficult time when your wife is not able to move.  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Further information is that many companies are already benefiting from this paternity leave, especially in the hotel industry and other sectors. We know that there could be some few men who might misuse it, but the majority of the responsible men definitely will take advantage, so that they are around to assist their wives. I know there has been some information to the effect that it might not be very useful, but most of the information we have is that this paternity leave will be very helpful to the women. 

In one of the committees, someone came up and said that some of the men will instead take this time to come and disturb the women. Some men end up having sexual intercourse even the first day and women go to the hospital with private parts torn and bleeding. However, these are irresponsible men. Therefore, we think that for responsible men, these four days will be very useful. We also know that in our country, those are the days the man gets the opportunity of looking for money and other things to cater for the woman at home. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BYATIKE: Thank you very much, for the information. I have a funny feeling that it is the other way around; few men use the paternity leave while the majority abuse it. 

My last point, Mr Speaker, is sexual harassment. I am sorry I do not have my copy of the Bill here but I am just wondering whether they went into details of this kind of harassment. There are so many other forms of harassment, which are equally bad. For instance, there is psychological harassment. I do not think it was addressed in the Bill. There is black mail, which is some kind of intimidation. These are the sorts of harassment that need to be looked into. 

Lastly, the inequality in remuneration. I understand this is a worldwide kind of problem, where women are given less pay than their male counterparts, although they are doing the same kind of job. I heard this on the BBC the other day. If you are going to have a proper and appropriately managed employment relation, these things have to be considered. Thank you very much.

11.51
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I have some areas of intervention especially in the following areas:

Employment policy. The committee correctly observes that the labour laws exist but without an employment policy. Hon. Byamukama’s report said the Employment Act Cap 219 was made sometime back. Maybe we need clarification from the Minister of Labour as to when this Act was made? Does this mean there was no employment policy? If it was in place, where is it now? 

Maternity leave. You say that these 60 days will give time to women to recover from pregnancy and labour. We should be aware that we are making this law for all Ugandans. What are we going to do about the Luo who after just a week or two, are already in the gardens digging? This law appears to be concentrating on only office people. How are we going to assist a woman who has just delivered in the village?
 
Paternity leave. You recommend four days per annum and yet the customary law here allows men to have many women. How are we going to discriminate whom to give eight days or 12 days? 

About streamlining the laws for the East Africans, I am surprised you have not started on them and yet we are in the second phase of implementing Article 104 of the Treaty of East African Cooperation. I thought we would already be getting a report, which is in advanced stages of how far you have gone in making the laws for the free movement of labour within the East African region. 

I have not even heard of how strikes in companies will be handled. There are companies that ensure that strikes are punished with dismissals and nothing is done. Is it the enforcement, is it the law, which is missing? What is it, honourable minister?

Work permits. I have seen the provisions about the drafting of work permits. It must be based on the law and the committee here has recommended some members should be included on the board for the issuing of work permits. There is a big board right now comprising of several members who are –Sometimes I see people who come here as expatriates and work for over 20 years. Yet, in the contract provision, they say during the first contract you would train the nations in which you are an expatriate. They do not even train anybody and we keep on renewing their work permits. What is missing? Is it the law or something else? The committee should have reported the inadequacies of the board, which is in place, before recommending creation of another board.  

In conclusion, I fully support paternity leave. However, I suggest that it is made more than just four days per annum.  If I have my four wives, each time a wife gets a baby, I should qualify for the four days. Otherwise, if you just say four days per annum, you are creating discrimination within a family and it will lead to divorces in contravention of the customary marriage law. 

11.58
MRS SARAH NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the observations, and government for the effort of reviewing these labour laws. I would, however, like to give a situation where we have some investors, mainly Indians, who have a tendency of putting employees on probation, usually of six months - maybe the minister is not aware - and the worker is just given transport and lunch allowance of a mere Shs 2,000 per day. And after probation, they tell these employees that they did not measure up to their standards and so have to leave and they recruit afresh. This is psychologically affecting our people and the ministry should look into it. So, will this be addressed with the review of these labour laws? 

Secondly, on maternity leave, I would like to agree with some of my colleagues especially hon. Matovu Byatike. The committee recommended and we as midwives, we advise mothers to produce after two years. The committee report is recommending that government should provide reproductive health programmes at places of work in order to educate employees on proper planning of families. It is our duty as leaders to educate and we are telling government to educate these employees. So, I agree with the maternity leave and I would be pleased if it was increased to 90 days, but 60 days are good enough.
 
Lastly on paternity leave, I was amused by my colleague hon. Wakikona. Some men father more than five children in one year. Someone is telling me one every day. It could be, somebody said from there. But then, how are we to enforce this paternity leave of four working days per annum, because there are few responsible men in this country. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.02
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their report. Yesterday, as I was watching television, there was somebody representing the union who spoke so well. She said that the laws are there, but when you go to the field, nothing is being enforced as far as workers rights are concerned. We are told that some enterprises stop their workers from either forming or joining unions. 

We are told that, for example, in Mukwano Enterprises, most of the workers are casual labourers, and are not unionised. You go to Tororo Cement Factory, the same thing. Most of the workers are casual labourers. So, the laws are there, but it is the enforcement, which is lacking. So, can the Minister of Labour assure us that these laws we are enacting are going to be enforced so that workers rights can be reinstated and people work in peace. According to what we see now, everybody is a casual labourer. 

And then on the issue of work permits, I get very disappointed to find that we are giving permits to people who are not even supposed to come to this country. I am told some people are hidden in some workshops because they neither understand our language nor the English language. They speak their mother language, which is not spoken here. They are doing jobs, which ordinary Ugandans would be doing. How do they get work permits when they are semi-literate? 

So, I would like to appeal to Government to ensure that whoever comes to this country, comes with a skill, which is lacking. In some hotels and retail shops, you find that the majority of workers are Indians not Ugandans. The whole problem is lack of enforcement of laws by government. 

Mr Speaker, the workers should have a right to associate and their grievances should be addressed. For example, the other time the AGOA girls suffered and yet they were fighting for their rights. But they were dismissed and yet they were trying to associate so that their problems could be addressed. I would like to end by appealing to government that after making these laws, we want to see them enforced so that Ugandans can enjoy their working environment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.07
MR TOM BAGALANA (Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will begin where my honourable colleague stopped, concerning migrant workers. Some months back, His Excellency promised fresh graduates that there would be a policy, which would be enforced by government to allow them get their labour bought in other countries. So, if there is such a policy or a move by government to try and export our labour, why should we import labour at the same time? And the honourable Minister for Labour, Gender and Community Development is also aware of this. Why should we encourage migrant workers in this country? 

Those days we were for migrant workers because the experts in our universities were not adequate, but now you find a 26-year-old boy holding a PhD. The Rt hon. Prime Minister will bear me witness since he is the Chancellor of Makerere University. We have enough labour to allow us restrict migrant workers in this country. It is time we reviewed our labour laws and the liberalisation policy alongside the restructuring programme.  

You cannot talk about labour without talking about training. There is a lot of over flooding of Master and Doctorate degrees on the labour market. There is need for Parliament to look at this thing critically. Why is it that we are encouraging so much training without job creation? We need to look at job creation alongside training, because we may depend on exporting labour without creating our own, which will make our institutions fail to have adequate personnel.

I will also support the section concerning sexual harassment of employers. Employers also need to be protected from some shrewd employees who harass them sexually. Many times, you find these girls especially those who serve tea in offices complaining, “My boss did this about this” – I am trained in family law and domestic relations from Makerere University. It is difficult for a man to advance on a woman without indicators from the woman. (Laughter) Yes, in Africa generally. So, the bosses also need to be protected. Some employees need favours and they make advancements on their employers.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, hon. Bagalana. I do appreciate your point, but issues of employment relate to power relations. You may have this office girl or tea girl serving the boss and in the course of service she must be pleasant, and in being pleasant she must smile and dress appropriately.  So, if these kinds of mannerisms are misinterpreted, this girl may fall prey to some unwarranted and unwanted advances. So, I would like us to take this very seriously, because it is an issue of a person earning a living and there are power relations in the whole context as well as the need for her to be pleasant.
  
Whereas it sounds very easy, we are talking about issue of life and death in certain circumstances because this is her livelihood. I would like us to take sexual harassment very seriously and I want to thank the honourable Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development for having elaborated on this point as you have seen in the newspapers.  

From interviews and the work environment- for me just innuendos, you see a woman and you want to say a word which you think she loves, you pat her in the wrong place, pat her in unwarranted places!  So, hon. Tom Bagalana and other colleagues, I would like us to take this very seriously because it makes it impossible for women to enjoy employment.  I thank you.
 
MRS KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, I do not want to contradict, but rather to expand on what has been said. We have talked about the girls in the office with their employers, but it is being simplistic when the committee says that the employer does not also suffer. For example, many women employers are harassed by their drivers!  You know, they just come and say, “She was dressed in such and such a way.” So, we need to put employers, especially women employers who have suffered sexually from their employees, into consideration. This is not a simple matter.

DR LYOMOKI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we are talking about sexual harassment, we are talking about a power relationship where if one does not give in, they would suffer certain consequences.  Now, in this case, it is clearly the employer who has certain power whereby if the person being sexually harassed does not give in, would suffer certain consequences related to employment. In the case of a driver trying to look at the employer in such a way, that is not sexual harassment, it is misbehaviour, which is catered for differently. There is nowhere any employee can offer certain adverse consequences to an employer. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we want to protect the employers, putting on uniform for the employees could also be a very good gesture in order to protect our employers, because if a tea girl is smarter than my wife, what are the indicators? (Laughter)

Finally, I would like to appeal to this House to look at labour as a general term because many a time, we look at it from the educated employees angle yet the majority of our workers never went to school –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague.  I just want a bit of clarification. You did say that the tea girl in the office should not be smarter than your wife at home. Who is supposed to ensure that your wife is smart to your satisfaction? And who would tell the tea girl in office that she is smarter than your wife so that you do not break the rules in the office?

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, some of these things are subjective. Just as a matter of common sense, that is why I appealed for uniform to be worn in most of these offices. If you put on a uniform, which is decent - many of our women MPs have not faced this.  It is very difficult for men; they easily fall prey to women except for the born again like hon. Lyomoki. For some of us, women can be very dangerous.  

Finally, teachers should also be protected. The relationship between a teacher and a student is also a dangerous situation. I think let me stop there.

12.20
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of my colleagues who have outlined issues concerning employees in Uganda. If you read the observation on the industries that were visited like Tri-Star, Tororo Cement, Southern Range Nyanza, Kakira Sugar Works and the others, you observe that there is gross mistreatment of workers in this country. Workers are mistreated, some by even people who do not have work permits. This law that we are making today should protect the workers who are desperate and are working under harsh conditions.

Work permits should be emphasised so that every foreigner who works in Uganda must have one. There should be a system that regularly scrutinises and checks on these kinds of people. It is so disgusting to find a holder of a Bachelor of Commerce degree or even Masters in Financial Management being supervised by a migrant worker who is a senior four leaver. 

You find that there is a discrepancy in the payments where the senior four migrant worker earns about Ugshs 3.0 million and a graduate Ugshs 500,000. I want this law to address this problem and the minister responsible with his technical team to be vigilant in these matters.  

Hon. Kulany talked about us not making these laws to go on shelves to be filled with dust because the line ministers are not taking charge.  Recently, the minister went to Tri-star and the managing director bounced him back. I would hate to see this situation occurring again.  

The harassment of workers in this country goes far beyond termination of contracts and dismissal of employees at will. Employers prolong probation periods and giving one a confirmation letter is a favour. So, we should make a law putting the probation period at six months or one year, after which, one should get automatic confirmation.  

Some employers disguise their workers under casual employment because they know that casual employees do not get appointment letters. It was outlined and observed in this report that many industries do not give appointment letters. You find that somebody has been working as a casual labourer for four to six years. We need to make it a law that nobody should work as a casual labour beyond say, six months. If it is there in the law, then we should enforce it.  

The report on page 4, observes violation of rights of workers by employers by not allowing them to form or join trade unions. But, the violation of workers rights in this country goes beyond this. Recently, it was reported in the press that a lady was made to sweep the floor using her tongue and nothing was done. We are having modern slave trade in this country; what used to happen to our great grandfathers is happening here.  

I was in one of the hotels here in Kampala where a poor girl was being locked in the men’s toilets.  When I found her there, I asked her what she was doing and she said, “I am instructed to stay here, and when a man leaves the toilet, I go in and clean.” I just ordered her to get out and called the man in charge. The girl had to literally kneel before me and say, “Do not say this to my boss, I will be fired.” Incidentally, I forwarded the matter to one of the commissioners in the Ministry of Labour and I am told that it was somehow addressed. 

We should have systems and institutions to protect Ugandans. Otherwise, if you make this kind of laws and they are not going to be enforced and people are going to be abused, people are going to be harassed and we know how the Tri-Star girls were harassed and abused and nobody could take charge and this is our country!  I do not think this thing can happen in other places say UK, the person who harasses in that kind of manner would be deported the next day. We should put it in the law that if such a person harasses the employees should be deported.

Hon. Tom Bagalana talked about trainings. Some employers, mainly in artisan workshops, disguise that they are trainings their employees and only give them lunch and transport. They claim to be doing their employees a favour. After a year they get others. We should instead rejuvenate artisan-training institutions like Nakawa to impart skills to these young boys and girls other than being exploited in the guise of training.  

This was the same situation that happened in Tri-Star. People were working and being paid peanuts under the disguise of training. They would say, we are training. If they are training, do they have the certificates, can I be informed –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I have heard you lament on a number of areas ranging from abuse of rights of workers, mistreatment, not giving them appointment letters as a way of not accessing them their rights to defend themselves when it comes to non-payment and now touching the issue of training. 

The problem is, as long as we as government have not changed our attitude towards white skins, coloureds who are in this country and we continue to handle them with kid gloves, telling the community that these are investors - do we need more investment than the rights of our own citizens? - we will stay in this Parliament and enact laws, which laws will only collect dust in bookshelves.  

I think the most important thing is for government to change its attitude. Because when you take the example of Tri-Star, the person who was there ignored and neither wanted to see the commissioner for labour nor talk to the Minister of Labour, but wanted the top most, President Museveni.  So, if we are going to run the country at the whims of one person, the only one with the password to all things to come without due consideration for the welfare of our societies, we will continue to lament until Jesus comes the second time under the same situation. So, my appeal to government is to enforce all the laws enacted by Parliament. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable, for that information which I agree with. Actually there are worse things that happen outside there that we may not know. Recently, in our committee we heard of a worse situation, which the minister should investigate. I read about a lady working with Southern Range, Nyanza who delivered at night and in the morning had to go and work!

She even had to conceal the pregnancy because she could not be given maternity leave. Some people conceal pregnancy because when their employers get to know of it, just fire them. These are very bad things happening in this country that need to be addressed. The minister in charge of the workers should do something about it.

Finally, in the report, I see workers pay NSSF funds but never access their money. There should be a system on how people who have contributed to NSSF should retrieve their money. It should not be mandatory, but a law be made that when one contributes to NSSF and wants to access their money, there is a clear procedure on how to get it.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.32
MS ALICE ASIANUT ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two comments to make: First, this review of our labour laws is very welcome because as my colleagues have already said, there seems to be a lot that is happening and it is ultimately going wrong because we have not been able to review them.

I want to address myself to two issues: One is the question of sexual harassment in the workplace, which I am aware that it is a power relation issue.  I would like to see at the end of this review a scenario where we come out very explicitly to provide that sexual harassment is totally prohibited by whatever form it manifests itself.  

I have been listening to the submissions here, but I want to point out that while a lot of sexual harassment is a gender issue, it is about time that we face the reality and admit that men are also harassed. Because it is a power relation issue, if you have a boss who is a woman, and she makes up her mind to harass you, she will harass you. We have reports in this country where lady bosses harass their male employees. They harass them by putting on shorter than short mini-skirts and sit in a very dangerous way, and then call you in their offices and say, “Come here, I am dictating this assignment to you.” That is sexual harassment at the workplace.  

We need to protect those people. So, the women who are in charge should be very keen to ensure that they do not harass the men who work under them by way of dressing or otherwise. You call a staff from his home to your office at night saying, “Come I have an assignment for you tomorrow morning.”  What do you really want this man to come and do in the office? And because he fears to lose his job, the fellow has to come. That is sexual harassment. 

So whatever form it takes, whoever commits it, it is time that we come out clearly and ensure that it is totally prohibited. I cannot wait for the day this House will handle the Bill on sexual offences because it is my assumption that it will cover a number of things that seem to go unnoticed and yet they impact heavily not only on the workplace but even on our institutions.  

We have professional codes of conduct that we are supposed to adhere to but I have often read about situations in higher institutions of learning where lecturers demand for sex from girls and make it so hard that the girls have to succumb for fear of being failed. If we have a Sexual Offences Bill in place, I believe it will reinvigorate the workplace and make the learning environment conducive.

The second issue is about the labour policy in this country. My colleagues have talked about the abuses that go on in the workplace like people being asked to leave their original transcripts with the employer. There is nowhere you are supposed to do that, but that is the type of harassment! I am even aware of people who were asked to leave their voter’s cards with securiko organisations, which are perhaps the greatest offenders as far as this is concerned in this country. Salary in securiko organisations is Shs 60,000 per month. And for the first month people are paid a quarter of the salary, which is Shs 15,000. By sheer hard luck, if you are found dosing, even the Shs 15,000 will not be paid at the end of the month. That type of situation is very dangerous. 

Like hon. Wadri said: “Do we find ourselves trapped in this because we are so desperate for what we call investors in this country?”  Is it because we do not want to set a standard and say, “Well, you might have the money to bring into Uganda, but at least this is the basic standard you have to adhere to.” How come some institutions in this country have the guts to say: “You are not supposed to belong to a labour movement.” How comes? Because if I belong to a labour movement, it is not only that I will be able to explore what happens in the workplace very well, but I am also entitled to a broader understanding of employment from an overall perspective. 

If you say that I am not supposed to belong to any employment organisation it is very dangerous. As Government we need to review that. But the challenge I want to put to the ministry is inspection, because with the bad framework of the laws that we need to review, inspection is lacking. How come some of these abuses are happening day in day out, right and center when the Ministry of Gender is just here in the city center? And then across, is Industrial Area, Mukwano Industries and AGOA, everything is so wrong, who is supposed to inspect?  

If you look at the labour officers at the district, they do not even have motorcycles, and yet we have a whole ministry supposed to ensure that standards are adhered to. Sometimes I wonder, apart from just the name “Ministry of Labour,” is there anything that we can see out there beyond having a minister and probably a commissioner? If I am an employee suffering in one of these organisations, is there anything that really makes me feel that somebody out there is concerned about my welfare? I think inspection is totally lacking and we need to change our attitude. Investors should not be handled with such kid gloves so as to compromise our well being. We cannot be slaves in our own country, Mr Speaker.   

12.40
MS BETTY UDONGO (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government for this Bill, and the committee for their report. I would appeal to government to lead by example, especially in the area of maternity leave. If we look at our Rules of Procedure, this Parliament does not grant maternity leave to its female Members. 

I am among those people who suffered due to lack of that law. I produced the previous week and reported to the Defence Committee the following week. But I thank God that I was able to fight for the ladies in the Army to have the 60 days that were passed in this Parliament. So it is my appeal that while we are talking about other institutions we should start by granting maternity leave to women Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I want also to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but this issue of maternity leave -(Interjections)- you seek leave of absence if you have that problem, and the Speaker will definitely grant you leave. 

MS UDONGO: Yes, Mr Speaker, it is true that I hid under the leave of Parliament and mentioned that I had a baby, but I would love to see it as maternity leave not just leave of absence. 

You know in those days we would have children from the villages that would come to look after our babies, but with UPE there is no one to provide you with a maid to look after these children. So I would appeal that we do not stop at providing the 60 days, but also institutions like Parliament and universities should make provisions for either day care facilities or nursing rooms -(Applause)- so that while these honourable ladies are deliberating here, they could sneak out to breast feed. So I appeal to the minister who is a lady too, and knows what I am talking about that she should go further than just giving the 60 days.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of paternity leave, I am a bit skeptical. Some men are going to take advantage of this and produce as many children as they can in one year, which will make them permanent absentees from their places of work. Not only that, there are some men who have more than four wives! How are we going to operationalise this provision if they are going to have four days per annum? 

Those who have five wives and are very faithful in restocking this country such that all those women produce in the same year, don’t you think that it is going to cause us a problem? I don’t think this provision is really practical, but I do agree that we need the support of the men, but which should be realistic.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. But when you look at our Constitution and the Children’s Act, it is very clear that the duty to look after children - the duty for responsibility of children is entrusted to both men and women. When a woman gets a baby, one of the things that I at least notice is that the father of the baby is equally responsible and therefore not stable in the working environment as they would be otherwise. 

For example, they are running around, looking for certain things, especially if the birth was not normal. They also have sleepless nights because the baby is crying all night and also take turns at looking after the baby so that the mother can sleep. (Applause) So we should not penalise or generalise the issue of some men who may be irresponsible and take it that all men are irresponsible.

In light of what is done in Tanzania, where they have a paternity leave of three or four days, it would do us well to adopt the principle and urge our husbands to take responsibility for the babies that we bear together. I thank you.

MS UDONGO: Thank you. My problem is how does this law help the irresponsible husband be responsible? There is no way this law is going to make the men responsible if they are not responsible at all. That is why I am wondering how it is going to help if the man is already irresponsible! I know of men who send their wives out of the bedroom because they do not want noise from the babies and yet they are the ones that made the babies. So I am saying, how does the law in the way it is going to be put, help the irresponsible men to become responsible?  Do we need to put a penalty that if a man is granted paternity leave and does not perform as expected, he is penalised? Otherwise, it will be part of this law and nothing is going to happen.  

I also want to mention something about sexual harassment. We should, as one member proposed, list and describe the offenses. Because somebody was telling me of a skirt shorter than a mini-skirt, and then another one said that long skirts harass him because he keeps wondering what is hidden there. Unless we define sexual harassment, it is going to be very difficult to tell whether some of us are not harassing others or not. These are matters, which we have to sit down and debate seriously because in some traditions, nakedness is not harassment; it is normal. So if we come up with a law that penalises anybody who exposes their body, we may penalise other people unjustly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Honourable Speaker, I will limit my contribution to only one thing. The lamentations we are hearing about the rights of workers or employees, would not arise if we addressed the issue of the labour officer, the inspectorate arm of the ministry.  To me this is where the problem is. I say this because I have worked in the inspectorate arm of my former employers’ organisation, and we worked effectively. How were we able to work effectively? It was because there was adequate funding, adequate facilitation. 

When you look at the Bill, they have given the labour officer a lot of powers, but powers without facilitation will come to naught. The inspectorate arm, the labour officers, need to be facilitated. This is where the problem has been. You do not expect this labour officer to perform if they have to beg for transport from the employers. You cannot expect them to perform if they cannot move outside Kampala, because the Bill provides that among other things to lock premises, get books and analyse them. 

It provides for the settlement of grievances, which are not only limited to Kampala. It further empowers the labour officer to investigate and dispose of complaints and gives them powers to prosecute. But without facilitation, we should not expect much from this department. So the onus is on this House, honourable minister, the Budget process is starting and we would want to see funding provided for. I ask my colleagues to support the ministry so that we are able to provide facilitation to enable them execute the business that we expect of them. That is the only way we shall be able to address some of these issues.

Of course the issue the work permits goes to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Uganda Investment Authority. I am reliably informed that the Fang Fang Restaurant applied for 35 work permits for people just to serve in the restaurant, as if they cannot be got from here. I am happy that they were not able to get them for people to serve tea and food in restaurants as if Ugandans cannot do it. That arm of the Government must leave –(Interruptions)

MR RUHINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I at one time worked with the Uganda Investment Authority and we quite had a problem on the issue being raised by our honourable colleague. It is a genuine problem. A person comes to invest in providing Chinese food here and actually people want to appreciate that food as Chinese food; they want to be served the Chinese food. Imagine if a person goes to a restaurant where all the people are Black and you say you are serving Chinese food! The problem is that psychological feeling that you get in the place where you are being served Chinese food. You get the problem? So this is why sometimes you would recommend that people coming from that particular region provide such facilities.  

I know of course Ugandans could be trained to cook and serve Chinese food, but I do not think that particular restaurant would get clients; and this is why places like Fang Fang are still booming in town because of the labour force that provides these facilities. It is a genuine problem and we need to look at it from that point of view, Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Honourable member, I think you have looked at it from the wrong point because if we are talking about the way it has – we are not talking about the people who are preparing food, and we know very well that there are two Fang Fang restaurants in this city or in this country. It would not be a pain to them to have five or less Chinese to prepare this food and show their presence – if part of your delicacy is looking at a Chinese serving Chinese food, I feel the two or five would be enough to give you the appetite for food in that restaurant; you do not need 35. So we must put that into perspective, we must make that difference. If they were just complaining that they want chefs certified, that possibly would be the case; but to serve as maids, that cannot work.  

That is why I said it was good to understand why our department in internal affairs responsible for issuing work permits did reject. They are the ones issuing these work permits to people who provide labour, which could easily be got from this country. So we also need those colleagues of ours from that department to help us enforce this law.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: We should end the general debate and go to the Committee Stage.

12.58
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the report from industrial relations plus that of the minister and the Bill.  

I want to add my voice to those that have talked about maternity leave. Maternity leave is very important if we want to develop right citizens of this country; and paternity leave is also very important but I feel that the fathers of this nation have to make time to bring up the children. Making a law giving only four days is not enough; a week per annum would be okay. 

I recommend that we have household constitutions where the husband has to play a role in bringing up children. When we are going for graduations of our children, it is mainly the fathers who appear in the front seats, the mothers are nowhere. During labour, it is the mother and her mother in hospital; the father only comes to see the baby after it has been washed and cleaned. So we should critically look at division of labour as far as maternity and paternity are concerned.  

The other thing is sexual harassment. What is sexual harassment in the workplaces? What do you define as a workplace? If a maid in a rural area goes to the well and somebody sexually harasses her from there, what do you call that? So, sexual harassment is not a welcome evil everywhere, and it should seriously be taken care of. We realise and acknowledge the presence of sexual harassment everywhere, even in homes by the parents, workers and leaders. So, sexual harassment should be addressed, defined and condemned in every aspect of human life. Laws to enforce it should be put in place and the Penal Code amended to include sexual harassment.

Honourable members, we know our institutions are both male and female, but I have noted that when ladies graduate, they do not get their testimonials immediately. They have to go back and make carpet negotiations in order to be able to get their diplomas, certificates and degrees. I might be generalising, but this is an evil within us. I will touch on the graduates and the Ministry of Labour. I am sure if we went to either Makerere, Uganda Christian University or any of our universities and asked them whether they have ever gone to the Ministry of Labour to find out what is in place for them, I doubt whether anybody would knows about it. Most of our unemployed graduates are not aware that there is guidance for them in the ministry. So this Bill should also cater for that.  

We are talking about fathers and mothers having maternity and paternity leave, but the maid, who looks after that baby, whether the mother is there or not, is not catered for. She works from six O’clock in the morning up to midnight. Whether the mother is expecting or has a baby, the maid is not thought of as an important partner in bringing up the child.  

Our immigration laws should be taken into consideration while dealing with the Employment and the Industrial Relations Bills. There is a very big hotel I went to and the gatekeeper was an outsider, surely couldn’t our people open that gate? How he got the work permit and employment when there are so many Ugandans who can be gatekeepers and security personnel is another case to be thought about.  

There is a lot to be said about the labour market, where we go to search for jobs, if it is not from brothers, sisters, grandparents and uncles. We do not have a labour market strategy. I get several phone calls from graduates who are looking for jobs. We need to create a labour market so that our people have where to refer. We should include work shifts in the employment law although we are now suffering from power cuts and electricity shortage. There should be work shifts where you of eight hours each, which will enable more people to get employed. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a number of Bills related to labour as you can see on the Order Paper. I will ask the minister if she has any comment to make on the issues raised.

1.05
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, first of all allow me to thank honourable colleagues for the support they have given to me in debating this Bill.  

Hon. Lyomoki raised issues, which were more of comments in relation to the sensitization of workers. The labour law reform costs and understanding that government was not supporting the labour law reform because of pressures from outside, yes, there were debates, which went on like that, and now government is ready to debate those laws and that is why we are here, working together.  

It is also true that the issues raised by hon. Dora Byamukama’s committee fall under labour laws and most of them as we debated, have been catered for.  We were also able to include the right to reinstate workers during the discussions with the committee.  

Hon. Matovu Byatike talked about creation of employment and specifically dwelt a lot on the issue of maternity leave, which very many colleagues have talked about. The 60 days for maternity leave are working days so they actually translate into almost 90 days. So, I want to allay the fears of the honourable members that the committee and the Government took this seriously and recommended 60 working days for the women.  

Then on the issue of whether this should be every two years, the right to have babies should be left to the women and the families. People should be given reproductive health information to enable them make choices as to when to have those babies.

On paternity leave, which many people have raised whether men will misuse it or not, we discussed this matter for a long time and we already have companies, which are giving up to seven days of paternity leave. Because some are giving two days, and others seven days, we came up with a recommendation, a minimum of at least four days and that is within the contracts of the workplace. The employers and their workers within their contracts will negotiate it. It is already happening and we have not heard of some men misusing their paternity leave. 

Women need physical, psychological and moral support at the time they give birth. So it was in that context that we thought it was important for the men to have paternity leave. So, I urge colleagues that the only thing we can all do, if we pass it, is to make the men more accountable. It is not enough to take these four days and just go roaming and not be able to give support to your wife because that child belongs to both of you. So, the men should also be made responsible by giving them those four days.

The issue of sexual harassment has been widely debated. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, issues of harassment are issues of power relations. They are issues of power, the weaker and the stronger, so it is a relationship between the employer and the employee. The employees are being manipulated so that they can give sexual offers in order to be paid. We have got stories from the younger people about the famous carpet interviews and certificates. So, these are the things, which are going to be addressed. Today we are looking at it as an employee and employer but tomorrow it could be your child subjected to this carpet certificate or interview. 

We want to stop these erroneous acts raised and these issues also have international – which we abide by. We have signed this law so we cannot allow our own children to be manipulated by people who believe they are employers and have power. I want to urge that these issues be debated by the House and be passed because we must legislate against sexual harassment where our children are being intimidated not only physically but also psychologically as indicated in our document.

Hon. Wakikona was talking about the Employment Policy. Yes, the ministry has an Employment Policy, which is now in draft form. We took it to Cabinet and we were requested to cost it, which we have done and are taking it back to Cabinet. So, this is going on side by side. As we pass the law, the policy is also going to be passed by Cabinet.

Hon. Wakikona also asked about harmonisation within the East African Community. Our ministry has been part of that process; in fact the other sister countries have learnt a lot from our laws, which are still in draft. And as you hear –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable minister. You have just said that Cabinet is working on a policy and as we are working on the law. I was just wondering, what is informing what? The policy would probably inform the law otherwise we are likely to run into a mismatch. You may come up with a policy, which is contradicting the law, what are we going to pass? I mean, isn’t there such a possibility?

MRS BAKORU: I want to allay the fear of hon. Alaso, you already know that the labour law reform has taken more than ten years and this process has been going on. We took our Employment Policy to Cabinet and we were requested to cost it. My ministry has costed it and submitted it to Cabinet. It has also taken into account many of the things, which have been debated in the process of these several years of looking at the labour law reform. 

I was talking about the East African Community and the harmonisation of these laws and saying that actually the two sister countries have learnt a lot from our process. Our labour law reform process started earlier than theirs although they have passed theirs. They have gained a lot especially from our Employment Policy and the Employment Act, which we are about to pass here. And so we have been going in these meetings and harmonising together. 

Why we are having no strikes? The Ministry of Labour has worked a lot to promote what we call bi-partisan and tri-partisan charters in the last five years. That is why you do not see strikes. The workers have been sensitized, they can now be able to negotiate with the employers and so making these laws actually strengthens the whole process. We also have a bi-party charter and tri-party charter, which the three stakeholders and the two stakeholders have been working on.

The immigration board: several people have raised the issue of people getting work permits. What have we done about it? And what are we going to do about it in this law? It is true as other colleagues mentioned here, the Ministry of Internal Affairs gives work permits and we are harmonising on that. And we also know –(Interruption) 

MRS KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, at this point in time the honourable minister could tell us about foreign workers who are locked up in certain workshops and factories and whose documents have been taken away from them. Can you please throw some light on this particular issue so that our fears – because this issue has been raised a number of times. When we were discussing the immigration report? It was again brought up. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MRS WONEKA: I want to thank the honourable colleague but I will still say that those are the mandate of Internal Affairs. So, it will be very difficult for me to speak here on behalf of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you my honourable minister for giving way. The issue, which hon. Olive Woneka has raised, is very pertinent. If it is happening, it contravenes our Constitution and can be interpreted as human trafficking. This is modern day slavery and I hope that the minister, in conjunction with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, will in the shortest time possible be able to give us a statement on it because it is very important that we do not contravene our Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, the proper question should be whether the ministry intends to investigate and find out what has happened, instead of taking it as a fact? It could be a fact; you heard hon. Alaso talking about lack of inspection, is it not because there is a problem of inspection that this has not been detected? So now that you have drawn the attention of the minister to this particular issue, it is for the relevant agencies of government to investigate and come out with the truth. 

MR RUHINDI: You may recall, Mr Speaker, that there was a Select Committee on the Immigration Department chaired by hon. Kasirivu. The report was presented here and very serious and pertinent recommendations were made including areas on that particular subject. So, rather than recommending another investigation, we should be saying that the relevant ministry should follow up and implement the recommendations, which were made by the Kasirivu Select Committee -(Interjection)- yes, they did, because I was a member of that committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, that was immigration. But the claim is that some people are locked up and their documents taken. Is that not a matter that requires to be investigated? 

MRS BAKORU: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, issues of work permits are the mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but as I said earlier, we are going to harmonise under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister. 

On these other issues of what is happening at the work place, hon. Speaker, where we have got reports, we have acted and there have been results.

I also want to say that we have taken note of some of the statements, which have been made by honourable colleagues. As members also noted, we have a structure in the labour ministry. During the last five years, there has been a lot of improvement, that is true, but we do still need more support from the hon. Members of Parliament who have also made it possible for that ministry to function. We need a little more support in the area of the budget. It is true that supervision has been done and may not have been done 100 percent because of the lack of facilitation for the labour –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: No, let us close this matter. Please, wind up.

MRS BAKORU: Really, we do appreciate that we are going to work on that. We have taken note of the issues, which have been raised by Parliament. 

There was also the issue of sexual harassment, especially for the employers. Mr Speaker, we did discuss that at length and as I said earlier, issues of sexual harassment are issues of power relations. If a female employer is harassing a driver or a shamba boy, it is still a matter between an employee and an employer and it is still a matter of power relations. So we take it as sexual harassment and so there is no way we are going to say that an employee can be able to harass an employer. It is actually the shamba boy being harassed by that female employer or the driver has been harassed by the female employer. 

On the question of disguising professions and appointments, we have in this document section 25 and 26 of the Bill, which is handling contracts. So if a worker is terminated after six months without a fault from that worker, it is treated as unfair termination and this is covered in section 75 all the way to 78 where there is compensatory order and reinstatement order. This was also moved by hon. Lyomoki during the time we discussed this. 

These laws, which are going to be debated; the four laws including the one which we are handling now, are going to help us a lot. They are going to help us to cure and treat most of these fears and issues, which have been raised by hon. Members of Parliament and I just want to again thank all of them. Most of the issues, which were raised about maternity leave, sexual harassment, the issue of contract and the issue of unionising will be handled when we are talking about the Labour Union Bill. But it is also going to be cured. 

The problem was that the current law provided an ambiguous situation where the employer could either want to form an association or a labour union. Therefore, the employer could refuse to have the union. But this is now cured in this current law, which we are going to legislate. There is no way any employer in this country is going to say that, “I do not want my workers to unionise” because you are legislating for that. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Employment Bill, 2005, be read the second time. I now put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We are moving to the Committee Stage. Let us dispose of this Bill and then we shall come to the other one. But I think we cannot – we have to suspend the proceedings, for lunch, and then when we come back to have the Committee Stage, we clear this one and then we can go to another one.

(The proceedings were suspended at 
1.26 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.00 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

(Question 1, agreed to.)

 Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to clause 9(1) to the effect that the administration of this Act shall be the responsibility of the commissioner acting under the direction of the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, according to the procedure, if any of you had an amendment, you ought to have tabled it with the committee. If the amendment is refused by the committee, then you bring it here and I should have been given notice of this amendment so that it is – other than this prompt amendment of the Bill. But honourable minister you have heard.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, we have actually consulted on this and we have no problem. We are sorry about what happened, but we consulted.

THE CHAIRMAN: The procedure is that you have to table it. But since it is acceptable by the owner of the Bill, I now put the question that clause 9 be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, on clause 10, we delete the word appearing on the last line and the justification is to correct the typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 22 is rephrased to read as follows: “The representative of employers and employees shall be nominated to the appointment of the Labour Advisory Board by the Federations of Employers and Federations of Labour Unions respectively.” 

The justification is to ensure equity and for all representatives and stakeholders to be brought on board.

MRS BAKORU: That is acceptable to us, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 22 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 38, item 3, delete the word “of” appearing on line 1. The justification is to correct the typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 39

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, in clause 39, insert immediately after sub-clause (4) the following provisions:
(i) 	Sub-clause (5) should be: “Recruitment agencies shall submit returns of their operations to the commissioner.” The justification is to act as a system of check and balance.

(ii) Sub-clause (6), “The minister shall make regulations governing the operations.”

Justification: to cater for future eventualities.

MR KIGYAGI: Recently, there were some firms that were licensed to recruit and export labour to other countries. I do not remember this issue passing through this House. Is it true that some firms have been licensed to recruit people to go and work outside this country? I would like this clarification.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, there is a migration of employment policy which has been developed by the ministry and which was passed by the Cabinet. The process of agencies recruiting people has not been finalised and so I am not aware of agencies that have already been established or gazetted to recruit people and take them abroad. That has not been done. But the policy on migration of labour has already been developed by the ministry and it was passed by the Cabinet.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek some clarification from the minister as to whether once she finishes making these regulations, will they have to at one point come back to us to see what kind of regulations she has drawn so that we are all kept abreast? Or it is going to be in form of a statutory statement? I wish to know.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I think my honourable colleague knows that these are statutory powers so the regulations do not pass through Parliament. He will get a copy of it. So, I want to allay his fears.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, I think we should have a law on this one because what has been happening in the recent past - it is good that the minister has accepted that there is something in the pipeline. But you know the way Ugandans work, people have moved very fast, they have been going to firms of lawyers to sign certain agreements of collecting people and exporting labour. I think if this thing does not pass through Parliament, we can have another slave trade occurring in this country. So, we would rather, instead of handling it as a statutory instrument, bring it here and we ratify it under the law. Otherwise it might cause some problem. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment to clause 39.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 40, agreed to.)

(Clause 41, agreed to.)

Clause 42

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 42 sub-section (5), delete the word “is” appearing on the second line. The justification is to correct a typing error.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 43, agreed to.)

Clause 44

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 44, sub-clause (5), the whole of it is transferred to the interpretation section. 

Justification: for proper arrangement of clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

 Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 50, sub-section (3)(a), delete the word, “is” appearing on the third line and on (b) insert the word “shall” between the words “is” and “liable”. 

Justification: to make the penalty mandatory.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 50 be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR TIBARIMBASA: Clause 57, Mr Chairman, sub-section (1) is amended by substituting the words “six weeks” appearing in sub-clauses (1) and (2) respectively, with “sixty working days”. 

The justification is to enable mothers to fully recover from post antenatal conditions and to tender to the newborn baby.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the amendment and this follows the debate you had in the morning. I put the question to the amendment –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 57 as follows: 

a) “(i) Paternity leave should appear as the head note; 
(ii) 	A male employees shall immediately after the delivery or miscarriage of his wife have the right to a period of four working days leave from work yearly herein referred to as paternity leave.
b) 	Such an employee provided for in (a) above shall be entitled to the payment of his full wages during the said paternity leave. 
c) 	A male employee after the paternity leave shall have the right to return within four working days from the date of his wife’s delivery or miscarriage to the job which he held immediately before his paternity leave, or to a reasonable suitable alternative job on terms and conditions not less favourable than those which would have applied had he not been absent on paternity leave. 
d) Notice shall be given at least seven days before the expected date of child birth.” 

The justification is for fathers to help mothers to fully recover during the post-natal period.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I rise to seek clarification on sub-clauses (c) and (d). When I look at (c), which reads, “A male employee after the paternity leave shall have the right to return within four working days,” I thought he was entitled to four working days paternity leave. When you now say within four working days, it is less than four days. So, this contradicts what is in (a). I would therefore, propose that it should read: “A male employee after the paternity leave shall have the right to return after four working days from the date of his wife’s delivery.”

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Mr Chairman, no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, instead of the committee’s proposed amendment, we take the formulation -(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Instead of “within”, it should be “after”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so we take his formulation?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Yes.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I do not think that is even necessary because we have stated in (a) that the person is entitled to a paternity leave which is four working days. Once you stated that, you do not need to refer to the number of days again within the same clause. All you need to state is returning from a paternity leave and the law already recognises the fact that the paternity leave is for four days. Therefore, I am going to do the following: 

Mr Chairman, in (a), I am making an amendment to state: “A male employee” not “male employees”. The rest should run as it is. And then in (c) it will state: “A male employee after the paternity leave shall have the right to return to the job which he held immediately before his paternity leave.” 

And then in (c), I am going to beg the House that the whole of (c) should be deleted. You cannot play God; you cannot give notice of a birth because you do not know. Anything can happen. So, we delete (d) and the rest remains as I have stated. I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: I want my mind to be put to rest. Is this four days’ leave given each time a man receives a child? That means that if I have 10 women and four deliver in one year, those are four leave cycles?

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you cause the problem for nothing?

MR KIGYAGI: No, I want to find out.

THE CHAIRMAN: If they are your children, you are entitled to leave.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, the proposal by the committee is talking about wife. Now, I think the definition of wife is what I am asking clarification for because a concubine by this drafting does not mean wife. Therefore, somebody could be denied leave on grounds of not having proof that that is his wife.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is paternal? What is the meaning of paternal?

MR WAMBUZI: Paternal is different from husband and wife.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the operating term here is paternal. And you see the issue here is that you are a father. So, it is a question of being a father. 

MR WAMBUZI: The dangerous thing is that the employer can say, “Do you have proof that is your wife and, therefore, your child?”  

THE CHAIRMAN: That is different because it could be your wife and somebody may dispute it. So, the question of evidence - for us we are dealing with the law. Once you become a father then you are entitled to four days.

MRS NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, I think it is clear in (a) that leave of four working days is annual. So, if you [Hon. Members: “No.”] Yes, it is clearly written and so we should not even waste time on this.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think let us clear this matter. The intention is that the father should be by the bedside of a mother of a child. The question of once a year I think should not bother us as long as you are a father. Suppose you have two wives or three!

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We can go around that by just stating that a male employee shall immediately after delivery or miscarriage of a wife, not of “the wife” which means even if you have ten, once you –(Interjections)- no, no, we are talking law.  That means even if you have ten, if any one of them gives birth or has a miscarriage, you are entitled to this paternity leave. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the argument I am following is this. The Christian should have one wife, the Moslem has got four. So now they are trying to say that when you use the term “wife”, what do you mean? Hon. Wacha, that is the argument here. They may want to restrict it to strict interpretation of “wife”. Who is a wife?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I think the issue of who is a wife is clear in our laws and I would like to support you because we have the Customary Marriages Act, which says that as long as you conform to the rights of a particular community, you may marry more than one wife. And as you say, the Islamic law –(Interruptions)

MR WAMBUZI: It is known in Uganda that very many girls, moreover some of them before they finish school, are being impregnated and being abandoned by these so-called fathers. So, it is very important for these girls to get attention by the so-called fathers. Therefore, for somebody to just argue in this House that a legal definition of “wife” is what matters in this law, I think it is very unfair and I do not think she is in order. Is she in order, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, why do we not leave this for interpretation by courts? Since in the principle you agreed to this paternity leave, let us leave it then for the court’s interpretation.  

MR WANDERA: Is the question on hon. Wacha’s motion that we delete (d)?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see as soon as he made this, then people started raising issues. Are we in position to dispose of the meaning of “wife” in this particular Bill?

MR WANDERA: I have a different view. I think what we should do is to amend (d) in the following terms to state that: “For the purposes of enjoying paternity leave under (a), an employee shall give notice immediately after the delivery or miscarriage of his wife or a wife”, to put in place a mechanism for the employer to know. Otherwise, every employer may decide to implement a law in his own way.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see you just do not give yourself leave when you are employed. You inform the authority that, “This has happened and, therefore, I am taking my leave.” You must inform, otherwise you just do not walk away and say, “I did not come here for four days because my wife delivered”, unless it is something like that. But I think now to be orderly, let us deal with each part of this amendment of the clause.  

As I remember, it has been proposed by hon. Ben Wacha that in (ii) we say “employee” not “employees”, instead of saying male “employees”, you say, “employee”. Is that okay? So, I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: A miscarriage of a wife - instead of “his”, you say “her”. Is that okay? That was accepted. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to move a friendly amendment to (a). I have no problem except that I would like us to increase the period to five working days so that a person has a solid week and they are comfortable. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. Let us deal with this. It is four working days and one is now suggesting five. It says four working days. There is nothing to amend.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I think the number “four” was discussed and agreed between the workers and employers. So when we bring “five” we shall be bringing another conflict.

THE CHAIRMAN: Four working days?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now (b), “An employee provided for in (a) above shall be entitled to the payment of his full wages during the said paternity leave.

(c) An employee after the paternity leave shall have the right to return to the job”, but we cut out this “within four working days”, which is unnecessary. That was the formulation. 

I think (d) has been found unreasonable.  

MR TIBARIMBASA: Notice, Mr Chairman, the committee found out that it is important in order to bring proper management of the organisation so that if say many people find themselves in this category, then the managers of the organisation can see how to distribute the work so that the production is not affected.

THE CHAIRMAN: But have you got the figures? How many expectant mothers deliver in hospitals or maternity and how many in villages? Will those delivering in villages with these attendants be able to give notice that, “On such a day I am going to deliver?”

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is no way you can give notice of seven days medically because there are some women who even go and stay in the hospital for a week or even a month before they deliver. So, if there is need for any notice, then I think hon. Wandera’s motion takes priority. But the best thing would be to delete so that it is taken that when such a situation comes, someone goes and asks for leave. Otherwise, there is no way you can give notice for even a miscarriage. A miscarriage just happens in the night or in the day and they call the father that the wife has had a miscarriage. You cannot give notice.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a motion that we delete it. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 57 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, when you look at – I beg your pardon; I am aiming at clause 65

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 65(1)(e) it states that: “Termination shall be deemed to take place in the following instances: where the employee being a woman who has exercised her right to take maternity leave is refused her right to return to work by her employer, and such termination shall be deemed to take place on the date when such refusal takes place.” This negates the principle of protecting the woman during her maternity leave. I, therefore, would like to propose that we delete it. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you deleting?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I am referring to clause 65(1)(e).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable minister?

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, we have no objection.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to the amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)  

(Clause 65, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 66

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, on clause 66, we delete the word “the” appearing on the fifth line. 

Justification: to correct a typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 67
  
THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 67 stand part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 71 is amended by adding the following new sub-clause (5):
(i)	“If court finds that a dismissal is unfair, the court may:
(a)	Order the employer to reinstate the employee;
(b)	Order the employer to re-employ the employee either in the work in which the employee was employed before the dismissal or in other reasonably suitable work on any terms;
(c)	Order the employer to pay compensation to the employee.
(ii)	The court shall require the employer to reinstate or re-employ the employee unless:
(a)	The employee does not wish to be re-instated or re-employed;
(b)	The circumstances surrounding the dismissal are such that a continued employment relationship would be intolerable;
(c)	It is not reasonably practicable for the employer to reinstate or re-employ the employee; or
(d)	The dismissal is unfair only because the employer did not follow a proper procedure.”

The justification is to ensure justice and equity, to harmonise with the labour laws in the region and to cure a lacuna in the current law.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  If you look at part (b), before an employee is employed, of course he is given a job title and each job title has got different payments. If you say, “order the employer to re-employ the employee on any terms,” assuming that employee has been, say a technician earning a certain amount, now you are ordering the employer who is likely to punish him to make him a sweeper in a different grade. Will that be justice as per your justification? I am seeking clarification. I propose that part (b) be deleted; it is just creating room for an employer to play around with the rights of an employee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us dispose of this first.

MR SSENGO: Before we dispose of it, Mr Chairman, I am also worried about this phrase that “can employ him on any terMs” That disadvantage is for the employee because if he gives him any terms, it means you are giving him the leeway to punish the employee even more.  

THE CHAIRMAN: That is why hon. Bakkabulindi is saying we delete it.

MR SSENGO: So, I want to agree with the honourable minister that we actually delete the whole provision.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have a contrary view. Much as the provision is having a negative part on the worker, I would like to retain it but amend it and say that: “Order the employer to re-employ the employee either in the work in which the employee was employed before the dismissal or in other reasonably suitable work on the same terMs” We retain it because it is a good one. The only loophole in on the phrase “any terms”, so let us say, “on the same terms”.  

MR WANDERA: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, Ssentongo, that the evil (b) attempts to cure is properly cured by (a) because reinstatement is re-employment. So, I now beg to move, Mr Chairman, that (b) be deleted.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, we have no objection. Delete (b).

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to delete (b).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I am very uncomfortable with this new clause. My understanding of employment contract also gives the employer the right to reject or to accept to employ. That is the principle of employment that I read sometime back. Maybe, now it is fused up, but here we are ordering the employer to employ. I do not know whether you can assist me, Sir, as a senior lawyer. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I quite appreciate what you are saying. Actually, you cannot enforce the employer to employ but should he be wrong then there must be compensation. That is what is provided for in (c), which orders the employer to pay compensation to the employee in case he is not reinstated when it is not hers or his fault, then you have to give compensation. That caters for your worry about us enforcing an employer to employ because an employer can terminate so long as he gives notice and compensation as the case may be. So, we are deleting (b) and retaining (c). I put the question to delete (b) and retain (c).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, clause 72(1); substitute the word “shall” appearing on the second line with the word “may”. 

Justification: to liberalise the provision. 

MR WACHA: I know this was a provision of the Constitution but do you need it here really? Because there is a basic provision in the Constitution I think 126 to that effect. Do you have to pick it and bring it here to sound liberal?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, you have heard the policy behind is to liberalise the provision. Do you want to or you do not want to amend?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, on clause 73, we correct the word “communicating” appearing on the second line to read as “communication”. 

Justification: to correct a typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 73 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93

TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, on clause 93, sub-clause 2(b), insert the word “of” between breach and “the” and the justification is to correct a typing error. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 93 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, on clause 97, insert, “The process of recruitment, by recruitment agencies” immediately before “any other matter under the Act” appearing at the end of the provision. The justification is to give the provision a wider perception.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you explain, please?

MR TIBARIMBASA: We want the clause to have a wider meaning.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard the reason.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, that reasoning is not good because we have to avoid ambiguity in law. If the chairperson of the committee is saying it is to give it a wider meaning, it will be difficult to zero on what exactly one means. So, ambiguity has to be avoided in this matter.


THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Well now, I put the question. The committee has proposed that amendment for that reason. It is up to you now to decide whether to accept it or to leave the original text as it is –(Interruption)  

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I think the provision was to insert an additional sub-clause because that situation had not been catered for if you look at the list under that clause. So, I think the provision should be to insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: “The process of recruitment by recruitment agencies”. I think that is how it is supposed to read.

MRS BAKOKO: Mr Chairman, earlier on, one of the members was asking a question about these recruitment agencies in relation to immigration and labour. So, the purpose of that insertion is to give an opportunity to the ministry to be able to control the private recruitment agencies as was pointed out by one of the colleagues earlier. This was debated in the committee and people said, “Yes, you now have Immigration and Labour Policy, how are you going to control the recruitment agencies?” That is why the committee proposed that we should have this in the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 97 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 97, as amended agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 97 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 98 agreed to.

Clause 99 agreed to.

Clause 100

MR TIBARIMBASA: On clause 100, Mr Chairman, insert the word “by” immediately after “repealed” appearing on the last line. The justification is to correct a typing error. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question for correction of clause 100. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 100 as amended agreed to

Schedule 1

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, Schedule 1, clause 1, Roman ii (d), substitute the word “other” appearing on the second line with “or her”. The justification is to correct a typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that schedule 1 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that schedule 1 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2
  
THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that schedule 2 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.05
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.05
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Employment Bill, 2005” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF A REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.06
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, I am moving that the Bill be recommitted because certain items like clause 2 and 4 were not considered because at that time the chairperson had not entered and yet these are very fundamental clauses to that Bill - The addition of certain definitions and deletion of clause 4. Clause 4 had provided that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What do you mean that the clauses were not considered?

DR LYOMOKI: They were not moved by the time we started moving -(Interjections)- I was here when the House started and we started from item No.3 and those amendments were not moved because the chairperson had not entered.

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson?

DR LYOMOKI: The chairperson of the committee. [Hon. Members: “Are you sure?”] Yes, I have been here from the beginning of the session. If you look at the issues for amendment, Item 1 and 2 were not moved unless it was taken that they are records of this, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill belongs to the minister. The Bill, which we are handling, does not belong to the chairman of the committee. The minister was here when we called the House to order. I put the question to clause 2, clause 3. I think the problem you have is you want to move an amendment, which you could not competently have moved then. Now you want to hide under recommital to bring that amendment. But still then, I would say, did you tender your amendment to the committee and it was refused? If you did not, then it does not come here. Therefore, you have to be clear and say, I have an amendment- 

DR LYOMOKI: No, Mr Speaker, these amendments if you can look at the schedule we have were supposed to be moved by the committee but the problem we have is that by the time – I am just trying to assist the chairman, Mr Speaker, because -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you want the chair itself to move these amendments since you say these were amendments by the committee?

DR LYOMOKI: I requested the chairperson to recommit. We have been stakeholders to this Bill and these have been fundamental matters. So, I am begging the chairperson to recommit those two matters.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, may I request the House to recommit - these are not clauses, this is additional information to the clauses; that is the definition one, which has (a) and (b): (a), talks about dismissal from employment and (a) talks about transfer. The definition from Clause 44 to 45 and Clause 4 talks about deleting it. The justification is to avoid overcrowding the industrial courts with cases, and to avoid contradictions with other laws.  So, if these are recommitted, then they will give (a) a better interpretation of the meaning of dismissal from employment and termination of employment. Mr Chairman, during the committee discussion  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will explain that. Your prayer is that we recommit for the reasons given. So, honourable members, we have heard the prayer that we recommit those two clauses. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

Clause 2

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, this refers to definitions and insert the following new definitions: 
(a) Dismissal from employment means the discharge of an employee from employment at the initiative of his or her employer when the said employee has committed verified misconduct. 
(b) Termination of employment, means the discharge of an employee from an employment at the initiative of the employer for justifiable reasons other than misconduct such as expiry of contract, attainment of retirement age, and so on. 
(c)	Light work means work, which is not physically, mentally and socially injurious to the child.  
I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think these amendments are clear.  I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed.

Clause 4

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Mr Chairman, clause 4 is deleted and the justification is to avoid overcrowding the industrial courts with cases and to avoid contradictions with other laws.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, the proposed amendment is to delete clause 4. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.15
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.16.
MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Employment Bill, 2005” on recommital and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.17
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

4.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Employment Bill, 2005, be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled,” The Employment Bill, 2005”, be read the third time and do pass. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE EMPLOYMENT ACT, 2005”

THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations, the Bill passes (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH BILL, 2005

4.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded

MS BAKOKO: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the purpose of the Bill, “The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005” is to provide for safety and health for persons at work such as factories, plantations and other work places where hazardous work maybe found. 

It also spells out what should be done before anyone operates a factory. This includes measures such as the labelling and guarding of dangerous machines as well as the training of persons working at any dangerous machine, which may cause injury, disease and death. It also caters for institutions or organizational measures that are necessary to monitor and deal with safety and health at work. 
 
The Bill also spells out the duties and obligations of both employers and employees in ensuring health and safety for all persons at work places. It points out the methods and measures that should be put in place to ensure healthy and safety at work.  It also seeks to operationalise Articles 34 (4), 39 and 41(a) of the Constitution.  

It seeks to repeal to the current Factories Act, Cap 220. I will repeat again that the current law, which is meant to operationalise and give effect to the above cited articles of the Constitution were enacted way before the coming into force of our Constitution of 1995, and these laws are outdated; they are a source of frustration for the concerned people. They do not give proper and adequate effect to the Constitution. In fact, in many cases, the current provision outrightly contradicts the Constitution. 

Therefore, the Bill, Occupational Safety and Health, Bill, 2005, which I lay before you, seeks to give the correct and adequate effect to the Constitution as well as to meet the International Labour Standards, which are critical in the international trade in this globalized world. I beg to move.

4.20
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr Avitus Tibarimbasa): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Sessional and Social Services Committee on the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005.  

Introduction: 

Mr speaker and honourable members, the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005 was presented for first reading in this August House on 27th October, 2005 by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This Bill was referred to the Committee on Social Services for scrutiny.

Summary of the Objectives of the Bill: 

The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005 provides for safety and health of persons at work.  The Bill expands safety and health from just the factory to the work place in general.

Background: 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the labour legislation review has been along process involving extensive consultations with the various stakeholders, the Occupational Health and Safety Bill is one of the four bills that are a culmination of a long process of a dialogue between Government and institutions like Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions, Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions, Central Organization of Free Trade Unions among others.  

The existing legislations do not confirm to the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, which recognize and uphold workers and employer’s rights and obligations.  The specific articles that relate to work and the work place or working environment include: Articles 25,29, 34,39,40, 41, 42, 43 and 44.)  

The existing laws are archaic and restrictive, and do not address the challenges and needs of the new work environment and modern labour market.  Therefore, there was need for a legislative framework that responds to these challenges and needs.  

Uganda is a signatory to a number of international conventions that relate to labour market and work environment, among others. Harmonization of our domestic labour with international labour conventions is long over due. 

The security of Uganda’s current and feature external market is dependant on the reforms in our labour environment. The reforms are necessary ingredient for Uganda’s survival in the global market.  

There has been a global development of new concepts in the labour environment. This has created a need to restructure our labour laws to be in line with the new labour developments and labour concepts.

Methodology: 

The committee met with various stakeholders who included: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, Members of Parliament representing workers, the Federation of Uganda Employers, the National Organisation of Trade Unions, Central Organisation of Trade Unions. The committee also scrutinized and took into account submissions of various NGO’s like Platform for Labour Action and other interested individuals.  

Observations and recommendations: 

The committee observed that health and safety in some work places is given little attention.  Occupational health hazards in work places are worsening in many places. It is our hope that this proposed law would go along way in addressing the existing bad situation.

Conclusion: 

The committee is in full support of the second reading of the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005. 

Some amendments have been proposed to address the concerns raised in this report. At an appropriate time, the relevant clauses will be amended. Mr Speaker and members I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much members of the committee for the report. Now the debate is open if you have comments to them.

4.26
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank Government and the committee for having brought this law in place. I would like to agree with the committee that we urgently need this law so that we can survive in the global market.  

Honourable members, Uganda is a member of the African Caribbean Pacific and European Union Negotiation Group and the European Union has a common agricultural policy; there are generally agreed practices in agriculture, whereby the details of the conditions under which the employees on agricultural concerns has to be specified. They should know the conditions and if we do not have such laws in place; it will be very difficult for us to market our goods. We are also signatories to the WTO, whereby such practices are also required to be fulfilled. So, I stand to support this report by the committee and we should pass it without a lot of delay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.28
MRS SSENTONGO NABULYA (Worker’s Representative): I want to add my voice to the previous speaker in thanking the committee for the good work done. I would like to support the report of the committee and ask that we expeditiously pass it without much ado, because we are all convinced by the fact that this Parliament established a Select Committee on Industrial Relations, which traversed Uganda so much that the Members of Parliament here witnessed the working conditions that the people of Uganda undergo.

Surely, if each one of us had an opportunity of looking at the conditions of work that workers are going through, there is no hesitation of passing the Bill; let it become an Act that can be enforced to help the lives of the people of Uganda.  

Indeed, I thank the committee and when I read through the Occupational Health Bill, it is worth passing, so that we can protect our own people. I thank you and I want to support the Bill and the Report.

4.30
MRS OLIVER WONEKA (Women Representative, Mbale): Thank you Mr Speaker.  I also stand up to thank the committee for the work done and for the minister for having brought this law. This morning, we got a report from hon. Dora Byamukama having led a Select Committee on Industrial Relations and I thought we could benefit from hon. Dora Byamukama’s experience on what the women experience out there.  

For example, in the flower industry, if they traverse the whole country, what did they find as far as pregnant women are concerned? When it comes to coffee factories, what did they see? In the coffee factories, I know that coffee dust is very dangerous, did they find that workers are being tested, for example for TB; because I think it will enrich our contribution in dealing with this Bill?  I beg to support.

4.31
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and to say that this Bill is a culmination of a very long process of consultation. At one time, in 2000, the workers brought a Private Bill on Occupational Safety and Health and we conceded and the Ministry of Gender and Labour took it and the outcome of this has involved many stakeholders, including the Law Reform Commission.  So, by the time the Bill was printed, many concerns – in fact - all concerns were brought on board and that is why, we will support the Bill. There might not be many amendments because a lot of concerns and a lot of stakeholders were already consulted.

This Bill actually is supposed to have come before the Worker’s Compensation Act, because health and safety of workers at the work place should be catered for even before you are talking of compensation. If there is a good legislation on Occupational Safety and Health, you sort out many issues before compensation comes up.  So, I just wanted to support the Bill, thank the ministry and also the committee for the work well done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.34
MR AMON-REEVES MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the minister who brought this law to Parliament and also thank the committee for their brief report, which is straight to the subject matter.  

Mr Speaker, you will note that in Uganda most employers don’t take care of the employees in connection with their security at their work places. I visited one of the places - I do not know whether I can say it, it may not be allowed - but their hour of work is from 3.00 a.m. up to 5.00 a.m. That makes it very difficult for any person to see them work unless one is their customer and is going to pick iteMs

These people are given something like porridge mixed with milk, and with a lot of sugar; that is breakfast. When they work, they are paid on a daily basis, but when you look at their arms, they are completely finished especially those who do the loading.  Since these are Ugandans and their representatives are here, I better mention the place; this is Uganda Clays. Go and find out about the people who work there and see the conditions under which they work. Now that the law is in place, I think you are going to protect these people. 

Other areas include factories in Jinja and in Kampala. I am happy that the law is going to be here and the worker’s representatives are going to rescue the situation. I want to thank the minister and the committee and Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, this ends the debate –(Interruption)

4.36
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I had already requested that the annex to our report be made part of the record, but permit me to make some few comments so that our colleagues can also share with us what we found out when we went into the field.

We visited several places and one of them includes – when you look at page 14, of our report, it includes Still Rolling Mills, and when you look at page 14, it is clear that they have occupational, safety and health issues.  We noted that according to the area Member of Parliament, managers and management do not cater for the protection of workers. In effect, these people were smelting some metal pieces and those who were smelting were not wearing gaggles, nor did they have gloves and boots and it was evident that there were issues of occupational safety and health. 

When we went to southern range Nyanza, on page 15, the issue of protective gears came up and we noted that some workers did not have gum boots, gloves, masks, ear plugs for the noise in the weaving section, and indeed if someone works in this weaving section for a long time without such gargets, they may eventually have problems with hearing.

When you look at Kakira sugar works, on page 16, we noted that some workers do not wear helmets and yet this is a very heavily mechanized industry, which definitely needs works to wear helmets. On Kakira, we also noted the need for overalls and gumboots for people who cut sugar canes, their skin seems to get used, so they go out cutting sugar canes without gumboots or overalls and we noted that this is an occupational safety and health issue.

When we went to Tororo cement industries, the amount of dust in the air, the level of pollution was very high and we actually found that the workers were on strike for several reasons and most workers do not wear protective gears. And one of the issues that were raised as was raised in the House is that there was employment of Kenyans as casual workers and Indians are security guards and this had made the workers very angry.

When we went to Busenero coffee factory in Mbarara, we found out that the workers are not provided with any protective gears, there is a lot of dust and noise and what attracted us to this particular coffee factory was because one young boy, a 14 year old boy, had lost his arm while on the job in this factory. So, when we talk about occupational safety and health, these are real issues.

We went to Rwenzori commodities, Kikumba tea estate, and again, on page 18, you will note that management intends to provide protective gears that is gumboots, raincoats and masks helmet. 

When we went to Apparel Tri Star, we also noted that some workers did not have masks and some who have them do not wear them and fluff from the Apparel enters their noses and therefore, there is need for more education and more monitoring to ensure that protective gears are used.

When we went to nice house of plastics, we found protective gears being used, earplugs and masks.

When we went to Mukwano, we found that they had protective gears and Mukwano was quite impressive in that they even showed us how their workers eat and where they eat from; management has lunch with the workers. We learnt about their level of employment and how they treat their workers.

When we went to Rose Bird limited, there was a lot of concern because in the flower industry there is use of chemicals, and although protective gears like gloves have been provided, sometimes the workers do not use these gloves, which leads to problems with their hands and we noted that one person had a case of pus and that this particular problem comes depending on the level of chemical content in the body. This obviously shows that the issue of chemicals in the flower industry needs to be taken very seriously.

Mr Speaker, I could on and on, but this is just to give you an illustration on the issue of occupational health and safety, and as noted in our report, when you look at issues of HIV/AIDS, and issues of Ebora, this brings home the fact that we have to take this law very seriously. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This ends the debate. As far as I have followed I do not think that there is any matter, which the minister has to reply; maybe all there is to do is to put the question on the motion.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru):  Mr Speaker, and honourable Members of Parliament, I want to thank colleagues again for the support they are giving me and the ministry and the committee on this particular Bill. I just want to say that the bill they are about to legislate actually caters for all the fears that have been raised by all of them.  

True, we have had problems because our laws are very archaic. I said it in my opening remarks that these laws are outdated; they are not even in line with our Constitution, which made provisions that we should have a health environment. So, that is why we are here legislating and I want to thank them for the support they are giving, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005” be read the second time.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH BILL, 2005.

4.43

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

DR LYOMOKI:  Mr Chairman, there is a definition for a worker, and in the definition section, the definition phrase reads as follows: “ but does not include a domestic worker,” I move that it be deleted. The justification is to widen the scope of the definition. The definition on the “occupational injury”, we delete the words, “or disease,” appearing immediately after, “the injury.”

MRS BAKORU:  We have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what is it? Do I repeat clause 2.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that on the definition of a “Worker,” the phrase, which reads as follows: “but does not include a domestic worker,” be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard the proposal that we delete – 

DR LYOMOKI: The justification is to widen- because in initial phrasing it meant that domestic workers are not covered and yet we know that there are many workers and others who are suffering from this type of situation.  So, we agreed in the committee that that phrase be deleted. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, the initial definition of a worker included the fact that we should not define a domestic worker as part of what is included here. So, we decided to delete that bit, which means that they should be included. Because here it says that, “A ‘worker’ means, a person who performs work regularly or temporary for any employer and includes a public officer, but does not include a domestic worker.” So, we decided that that part should be deleted because a domestic worker is also a worker.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BEN WACHA: Maybe the Chairman of the committee should assist us; this is in his report. What is the problem?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, after my discussion with my group, we agreed on what they have said. I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put a question, clause 2 as amended stand part of the bill -(Interruptions)

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, we have another definition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, this is what I said when we were dealing with the other clause, if you want to have an amendment, you write it down.

MR LYOMOKI: It is written; it is with you on the report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then if it is report, why are you the one dealing with the report when you are not a member?

MR LYOMOKI: We are moving away and the Chairman is not moving, so what should I do?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, the Speaker is a bit enthusiastic; you know he belongs to that labour group. I am very alert and I am ready to present the report. 

Now we are on (d), “Occupational Injury,” delete the words, “all diseases,” appearing immediately after “injury”. The justification is to streamline the definition of, “occupational injury.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

 Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Looking at clause 9, I see that the inspector has powers to prosecute and I do not know whether his powers can be checked in this law, which we are legislating. Because I have seen even in the case of the labour officers they have caused industries to fail by coming up with fictitious cases and conniving with magistrates.  I do not know whether there is a law that can check the excesses in case there are fictitious cases here.

MR WANDERA: I would you like to give examples of those labour officers and the factories, because this is a serious allegation and the people you are talking about cannot come here and speak for themselves, but it is important if action can be taken against them.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, honourable Colleague. I have seen it in newspapers many people being brought to court and if you take trouble to go to the districts you find so many cases, which are never followed up because people have been made to pay money; many industries have failed. I do not want to mention names here, but I wish you could take trouble to know how many industries have failed because of those cases at the districts. I am stating it here; you may take it as simple as that but –(Interruptions)

MR BRUNO PAJOBO: The member who is speaking is from Mukono District where I also happen to come form.  Can he give us an example in Mukono where a company closed because of District Labour Officers?  Can he really state it?

MR MUGAMBE: Mr Chairman, I never specified Mukono, but for sure I know of flower industries that failed in Mukono because of such cases, and they ended up closing.

MRS SSENTONGO: I think let us be sincere. The reality on the ground is that health and safety is so bad that it has gone to the extent of people losing some parts of their bodies. The example I can give is the Rwenzori company. I am sorry to mention this but it is true that I was approached by a certain Policewoman who visited a patient in Mulago. By the next bed was a young man lying with half of his right palm cut off completely, and the employer, who is here in Kampala, just damped him there and had no treatment. 

To date the labour commission is fighting for the compensation of this young man and the employer is denying that he does not know him as one of his workers. The reality is that the labour commissioners and the inspectors for labour are not allowed. If we continue protecting these people our children are going to get finished and they will be incapacitated for life.  

Let us be sincere, we are trying to put this law in place to help our children. I have not seen or heard of any industry that has failed to work just because the employer had been prosecuted for not fulfilling obligations to his employees. 

The reality is that employers are exploiting these people and even damaging their lives. Let us have this law in place; we may even need to protect these inspectors. For example, my neighbour said that there are employers who tend to work in the night shift and they use all the bad conditions with workers; they have no protection whatsoever.  

So, this law is going to help us out of this kind of confusion. If we give the inspector the right to prosecute there and then, it will may reduce on this kind of situation and protect the lives of the workers. Thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: Mr Chairman, that is the information I wanted. That is all.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, members major concern has been on occupational safety and health.  I have visited some of these workplaces and I know what is happening there. I do not think that the labour officers have got some fictitious cases that my colleague is talking about. In fact the level of prosecution is inadequate that is why members have been supporting hon. Dora Byamukama report. 

The centre of that report is occupational safety and health. So the provision, which we are talking of here, which gives powers to those labour officers actually enhances that process. So, I think that section must stand, Mr Chairman.

Clause 9

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 9 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that the word “advisory,” appearing in sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) between the words “health” and “board” be deleted. The justification is to correct a technical error. It appears on the last page, I think there was a mix-up. The committee –(Interjection) 

On the last page of your work, except that there has been a problem of mis-numbering, but this was removed and it is on your report. Mr Chairman, I beg to move. I am just assisting so that we do not recommit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe the committee is not interested in pursuing its amendment, because now it seems you have taken over the work of the committee.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, I concede because I had not seen it, it is at the end of the report. So, I concede and I thank him very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that clause 10 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, I beg to apologise, the report has got a number of typing errors and it is making our work a bit difficult. Before I come to clause 18, I beg to go back to clause 13.  

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall come back later on recommital.

MR TIBARIMBASA: In Clause 18 2(b), substitute the word appearing between the words “risks” and “health” with the word “to.” Again, in clause 18, amend the head note by inserting the words “and control the,” immediately after the word “monitor.” The justification for clause 18(2)(b) is to correct a typing error, and to be more explicit on what the employer is to do to dangerous substances identified in the monitoring process.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 18 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR TIBARIMBASA: Clause 21(1)(c), Mr Chairman, substitute the words “all other tests” appearing on line one with “monitoring.”  The justification is clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 21 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.
.
Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, the chair has an amendment. 

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, there is another typing error in the report, clause 27.The clause referred to in line one as “clause 21” should be substituted with “clause 26.” The justification is to correct a typing error.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27 as amended, put and agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now before you go to clause 28, who typed these Bills; the first one on employment there were errors, not one not two not three, this one is the same, what happened? 

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, these reports come from the Government printer –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The Government printer does not have somebody to assist in proof reading?

MR TIBARIMBASA: I will find out, Mr Chairman, from the Clerk to my Committee and let you know how these documents come to reach us. But the problem is; it is a typing error from the printery, I am very sorry.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 76 insert a new “Clause 10,” not “Clause 11,” to read as follows: “The minister shall make regulations for the efficient training of boiler operators.” The justification is that competent personnel should handle boilers. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, put and agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 112, agreed to.

Clause 113, agreed to.

Clause 114, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to.

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118, agreed to.

Clause 119, agreed to.

Clause 120, agreed to.

Clause 121, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 5, agreed to.

Schedule 6, agreed to.

Schedule 7, agreed to.

Schedule 8, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRMAN: There is 113; chairman, could we deal with it?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, there are two issues. One is on page 3, on the arrangement of clauses. On Clause 50, you correct the word, “wholesome,” and amend the word appearing immediately after the word, “adequate,” to read as: “wholesome,” not as two words, but one. That is 50, on page 3.  Thank you.  The justification is to correct a typing error. 

The last one is Clause 13 (2) c, amend the words, “health and safety,” appearing on line 3 and, “such other subsequent provisions,” to read as: “safety and health.” The justification is for consistence with other provisions.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, now the first one was about clause 50?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Under arrangements, clause 50.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, what is the arrangement?  

MR TIBARIMBASA:  The arrangement now gives you the –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  I okay; I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 50 as amended stands part of the bill. 
                                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 13, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.23
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.24
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.25
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that we adopt the report of the whole House on this particular Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH BILL, 2005

5.25
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs  Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, The Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005” be read the third time and do pass. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT, 2005”

THE SPEAKER: Okay, congratulations, the Bill has been passed and I congratulate the minister, the committee and all of you for the work well done.  Thank you very much. We have been able to utilize the power maximally because there was no load shading today, but tomorrow we shall have a problem. We come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.24 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 28 March 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)



