Tuesday, 28 March 2006

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for enduring yesterday’s long sitting in which we were able to complete handling two important labour laws. Thank you very much, but we still have a lot to do. Therefore, I appeal to you to be more diligent to attend so that we clear the work, which is pending before us. As you know, the budget process is starting next week, maybe Monday. I do not know when the President is going to send us what he is supposed to send us but we are supposed to handle the matters affecting the budget starting next week. So, it is important that you schedule whatever you have so that you can attend to Parliamentary work. 

I want to take this opportunity to introduce Mr Katende of ILO who has come here to observe what we are doing with the labour laws and there are a number of trade unionists and employers who are interested in what we are doing since yesterday especially when we created the paternity leave, which many people are happy to hear about. 

And in a special way, I want to take this opportunity to introduce to you members of staff and students of my former school, St Mary’s College Kisubi. They are here to observe and witness how you debate. They are members of senior and junior debating clubs in that particular school. You are most welcome to Parliament where there are a number of OBs who are sitting here, hon. Kawanga, hon. Bakkabulindi, hon. Omara Atubo and many others. They are here, so feel comfortable. You are protected.

2.45
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the point of importance affecting the people of Pallisa County. Two days ago, at 2.00 a.m. the police went and surrounded the homes of my campaigning managers and nine of them were arrested. As we talk now, they are in Pallisa police custody and the whole sub-county is put under tension. People are on the run and the people who were arresting them are saying, “Why did you vote for a candidate that we did not want?” Now I am seeking guidance from the Prime Minister whether it is an offence for me to contest on the independent ticket and win elections overwhelmingly by majority vote. My people are paying by getting arrested. 

I am happy to note that today I went to the DPP, I explained the problem to the DPP and he told me to put this in writing, which I have done. But even before the DPP took action, I received another call from Pallisa that these nine people had been taken to Mbale; that is Maruku. 

What I know, Mr Speaker, Pallisa is good at framing cases against people and I am reliably informed my opponents are framing a case against us. I am worried there is a myopia trying to put me down but under God’s grace, I pray I will get out of it. I request the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General or the minister concerned to put at least something to cool the people of Pallisa and to make the people of Kameke settle down. Otherwise, they are not sleeping in their houses because of these unnecessary arrests of my supporters. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think the information has been received and I hope the appropriate authority should handle it so that this fear is arrested. It will be handled.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS RATING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

2.47
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Government Rating (Amendment) Bill No.4, 2006 be read for the first time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is hereby tabled. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to study and then make necessary report to the House soonest.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) BILL, 2005

2.48
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time.

Mr Speaker, the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005, which I place before the House is one of the four labour Bills that we produced during our long process of law review and this law is a 1964 law. It is outdated and is a source of frustration of all stakeholders concerned. 

The purpose of the Labour Disputes, (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 is to ensure industrial peace through fast resolution of labour disputes. It outlines the mechanisms for handling labour disputes and permits strike action to take place where this mechanism has been exhausted. The said mechanism has been shortened. The Bill sets out the industrial court as a special labour court, makes it the apex of labour disputes settlement and it rises to the level of a High Court.  

The Labour Disputes, (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 also allows employers as well as workers in groups or even individuals to bring disputes to the industrial court at no cost to them. It prescribes a reduced timeframe for disposal of disputes, and the Bill seeks to repeal the current Trade Disputes, Arbitration and Settlement Act, Cap. 224.

I wish to table the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 for a second reading and I call for its urgent consideration and approval by the House. The stakeholders: the employers, the workers and the Government have waited for a very long time, in frustration, for these Bills and the security of our internal markets depends on the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can we hear from the committee chairperson?

2.51
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE OF SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr Avitus Tibarimbasa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of the House, this is a report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005.  

Introduction: 

This is one of the four labour Bills that were presented for a first reading in this august House on 27 October 2005 by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Bill was referred to the Committee of Social Services for scrutiny.  

Summary of the objectives of the Bill:  

The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 ensures industrial peace through fast resolution of labour disputes. The Bill lifts the Industrial Court (IC) up to the status of the High Court, proposes costs of the IC to be charged on the Consolidated Fund and proposes timeframes for disposal of cases in the IC.

Background: 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the labour registration review has been a long process involving extensive consultations with various stakeholders. This Bill is a culmination of a long process of a dialogue between the government and institutions like Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions, and Central Organisation of Trade Unions, among others. 

The existing legislations do not conform to the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, which recognises and upholds workers’ and employers’ rights and obligations. The specific Articles that relate to work and the work place or working environment include Articles 25, 29, 34, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44.  

The existing laws are archaic and restrictive and do not address the challenges and needs of the new work environment and modern labour market. Therefore, there was need for a legislative framework that responds to these challenges and needs. 

Uganda is a signatory to a number of international conventions that relate to labour, the labour market and work environment among others. Harmonisation of our domestic labour laws with international labour conventions is long overdue. The security of Uganda’s current and future external market is dependant on the reforms of our labour environment. The reforms are a necessary ingredient for Uganda’s survival in the global market. 

There has been a global development of new concepts in the labour environment. This has created a need to restructure our labour laws to be in line with the new labour developments and labour concepts.

Methodology:

The committee met with various stakeholders who included the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, the Members of Parliament representing Workers, the Federation of Uganda Employers, the National Organisation of Trade Unions, and Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions. The committee also scrutinised and took into account submissions by the various NGOs like Platform for Labour Action, and other interested individuals.

Observations and recommendations: 

1.	Powers of labour officers: the committee observed that the labour officers are hampered by the challenges that are either related to obsolete laws or funding gaps. Furthermore, the labour officers are sometimes rejected and denied access to some workplaces that operate at night yet the existing law gives them power to do so. The committee observed that the work conditions in the night shifts are worse.  Access to work premises during the night by labour officers is important in enabling labour officers execute their duties.

	The committee noted that some employers are not comfortable to have labour officers do inspection at their workplaces at night. The committee is satisfied with the powers given to labour officers to execute their duties in protecting the safety of employees. The committee recommends that more funds be allocated to the Directorate of Labour to enable it fulfill its mandate.

2.	Recruitment of labour officers: to date since the commencement of the decentralisation policy, most districts have not yet recruited labour officers; districts do not take this position as a priority. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government ensures that all districts recruit district labour officers among priority positions in local governments and be properly funded.

3.	Industrial Court: the committee has time and again decried the lack of adequate funding of the industrial courts. To date industrial courts have no proper facilitation to cater for office and salaries for their staff. Since the industrial court is a semi-autonomous institution under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the labour Bills have lifted its status to the level of the High Court, the committee recommends that its funding be charged directly on the Consolidate Fund without depending on the handouts from the parent ministry.

In conclusion, the committee is in full support of the motion for second reading of this Bill. Some amendments have been proposed to address the concerns raised in this report. At an appropriate time the relevant clauses will be amended.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much members of the committee for the report on this particular Bill. The debate is open now.

3.00
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to put it on record to thank the Government for having brought this Bill, and this Bill talks about trade disputes’ arbitration and there was a time when there were a lot of misunderstandings between workers and employers and it took the intervention of the Leader of Government Business, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, and he has been able to assist the process to coordinate it. We think that it is right at this moment to record our appreciation as workers to the Government and also the Leader of Government Business and also the Minister of Labour. Thank you very much. (Applause)

3.01
DR STEPHEN MALINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one concern and that is on page 1, the summary of the objectives of the Bill. In there it says that the Bill lifts the Industrial Court up to the status of the High Court, and I have no problem with that. It proposes the cost of the Industrial Court to be charged to the Consolidated Fund and proposes the time frames for disposal of cases in the Industrial Court. 

What I do not understand is whether what statement means is that the costs of the trade unions, when they go to court, and that of the employers, will be paid by the taxpayer? I do not understand that. Or does it mean the day to day running of the High Court will be met by the taxpayers, which is normal? But if we are going to pay the costs of the labour committees or the employers I think that is unfair to the taxpayers of this country.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give hon. Mallinga information that the rationale of this sentence is that the Industrial Court has been operating without this Bill or without this law and the funding has been so uncertain that you will find you do not have a building for the Industrial Court. You find that the Industrial Court has been either evicted from a room or from an office because of non payment. So we are saying we are just making it legal that the Industrial Court is facilitated right from the Consolidated Fund. It is something that every case – like you have the High Court that all these cases like judges are really paid from the Consolidated Funds. This is what this statement means.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Like my colleague has said, I just want to add some information for this House that now and again we decry the minimal budget that the Government has always extended especially during the time of budgeting to the Ministry of Labour. 

Most of the ministry’s departments, especially the labour department, are under-funded. And when it comes to disputes, which are inevitable in the day to day activities as you know that conflict is human more so when it is work and employee, these kind of cases that are always being taken to the Industrial Court are always put to a stand still just because one, the Industrial Court is not housed, there is no housing, and there is no proper accommodation for the Industrial Court. 

Two; the activities of the Industrial Court had drawn to a halt for many years just because there are no funds to run the operations of the court – I mean to work on disputes of differences between the employee and the employer. 

Three; the officials of that particular Industrial Court have no facilitation whatsoever to move from Kampala to Jinja to Mbale to Nakapiripirit or wherever. So that is why the committee looked at it with a wise eye that it is worth having this fund taken out of the Consolidated Fund so that we can make the Industrial Court operative and also serve the workers because they are part and parcel of the development of this country. Thank you. Take it kindly, please.

DR MALLINGA: I thank the honourable member for her explanation. I have no problem with that but what this suggests is that if there is a dispute between an employer and a trade union then the Government pays -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No it does mean that, it does not mean that.

DR MALLINGA: Okay, if it does not mean that then I am very happy. Thank you very much. 

3.07
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First of all I would like to thank the Prime Minister who has been in actual fact disturbed by us all the time about these laws, and his kind response has brought these Bills here on this Floor. I thank him and let us all workers say that he has been very helpful in this. 

I also want to thank the Minister of Labour for fighting in the last 15 years to bring these laws here. These laws have been in other places for the last 15 years and we have been fighting to bring these laws here. I am thanking the Minister of Labour with the entire group, and also for the good work they have done. Thank you very much. 

I hope the only thing, which I am worried of, is the implementation of these laws. They are very good, they are very nice and we are all happy but implementation of these laws should not be like other laws, which are just kept away and then the effect is not felt by the people. I am hopeful that the Government is going to empower the Ministry of Labor to supervise and work to help the workers of Uganda to enjoy these laws, which we are struggling for.

I also want to comment briefly on the funding of the Ministry of Labor and the District Labor Officers. I do not know how we are going to make sure that these people work; whether the mother ministry will be able to supervise right from the district levels; I do not understand. Because the way these people are funded, even if the ministry is funded, how they are going to fund their District Labor Officers is really a problem. Sometimes these people may get either vehicles or motorcycles, but to get petrol of ten litres is a problem. So we think that the Government is going to make these laws to work and empower the District Labor Officers and the entire labor movement to work.  

My appeal also is to fellow trade unionists to put in more efforts to make sure that these are enacted. But I also appeal to them to see that the law is implemented and that these laws will assist the workers of Uganda. I thank you for giving me time. 

3.10
MR WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report, but I want to make a few observations. 

One, is the passing of this Bill going to give labour officers more powers? Because when I look at the labor officers at the districts, do people there appreciate the role of labor officers? Because many of the labor officers deal with the issues that are not directly related to the districts. If the Indians are mistreating our workers there, if the factory people are mistreating our workers there, does the district have the authority to enforce what the labor officer will decide on those people? 

For example, when we were in the Committee of Natural Resources, we visited Tororo Cement Industry. We found workers mixing cement. We went with the Executive Director of NEMA and people were mixing cement with bare hands; they were packaging cement with bare hands and the gate was closed. For us they opened because we were being escorted by the Police. In such situations, will labor officers because of this Bill have automatic entry in those factories to make inspections?

Secondly, the other time we were told in AGOA during the AGOA problem that those Indians even told the honorable minister that “We do not know you” and the hon. MP for Workers was there. If you get a simple labor officer from KCC here going to AGOA where a minister is not known and a Member of Parliament is not known, who is representing workers, what powers will these labor officers have? Or you need to be provided with Military Police?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, honorable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you regards your major question, “Will this passing of the Bills empower the labor officers?”  And the answer is, yes, this Bill is not going to work in isolation. We have already passed the Occupational Health and Safety Bill, plus this one. 

The provisions that have been lacking to empower the labor officers is what we are concentrating on now. Once we pass this one, what will be remaining is the implementation part of it. In other words, the combination of the two laws will empower the labor officers.

MR WOPUWA: Thank you for the information, but I am hoping it is going to be the case because the situation where the minister and a Member of Parliament are thrown out, I do not think those people are aware of these laws. The minister will need an opportunity to sensitize the district leaders to know that the labor officers have work to do.  

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: I just want to inform the honorable member holding the Floor that his argument that some Indian threw out a Member of Parliament and a minister is not true. Because it was me who ordered that guy and that is how this problem was resolved.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, may be let me abandon that since it appears sensitive. Before I joined Parliament I had the opportunity to work in districts and we had labor officers. But as coordinator of government programmes, I learnt one thing. The Ministry of Labor and Gender had literally abandoned the labor officers. 

Unlike the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education, there was almost no linkage between the Ministry of Labor and the labor officers there and what we did as a district - because we were short of staff - we deployed them as assistant chief administrative officers in the field because they were redundant; they were not facilitated. How is this Bill going to address the issue of funding, because local governments are already constrained under the unconditional grant and the wage Bill? How is this Bill going to increase on the funding?

Lastly, was it wise to have decentralized labor officers? Because most of the labor officers are dealing with issues, which are directly under the central government and yet labor officers are answerable to local governments, and yet they have also to survive in that environment because as human beings, they do not want to make enemies.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I just want to inform the House and the honorable member that the debate about decentralization of labor officers took place during the Constitution amendment. At that time the hon. Members of Parliament representing Workers had moved that we should remove the issue of workers from decentralization, and we passed in this House that it was wise to allow the policy of decentralization. At that time the honorable member did not support us. 

So I am wondering why he is bringing the matter now when the thing now is overtaken by events. The Constitution clearly states that there is a policy of decentralization and we cannot now provide in the law the issue of decentralization when the Constitution has already provided for decentralization. You cannot now contradict the Constitution.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, apparently you have ended the debate.

3.16
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I want to add my voice to the colleague who appreciated the effort that was put in by the Prime Minister towards bringing the Labour Bill to this House. It has indeed been a hurdle for a number of years. I think over 15 years these Labour Bills have never been tabled here despite the fact that we had revised them again and again at the tripartite level. 

Now, I have got a few things that I want to respond to, specifically to the colleague who has just been speaking. It is true that labour officers have been almost treated as if they do not exist at the district. I think this comes right from the head office of the Ministry of Labour. 

Like I have already said, the budget of the Ministry of Labour is very negligible - I think it is the smallest of all ministries in the government. I do not know why and what criteria the government uses to allocate so little funds to such an important ministry. 

The Ministry of Labour should be a core ministry in this government, if development is to take place and if Uganda has to keep that status of “Pearl of Africa.” If you neglect a worker in any given country, do not expect development because you must first motivate the workers. But, if you have not motivated the people who are to enforce the labour laws, how do you expect the workers to be motivated anyway? It is absurd! It is high time that the government looked at labour, especially the department of labour, as core in development. 

It is true that government labour officers in Uganda have been neglected. If you went down to the districts - I can give an example of Lira. I went to organize workers in Lira and I found a certain young boy who was grabbed by a cotton-milling belt, which was not protected, and his leg was cut off.  Now, the Ministry of Labour official who is there is only single-handed and is running about three other districts, is not facilitated, and is not mobile. And where he comes from to go and help the other boys was a bit far, so it was a problem. When I went to find out what really happened he said, “I am not facilitated, I do not even get my salary in time.”  

When he approaches the local political leaders, they seem not to understand what labour is all about, because it does not bring in money immediately, which is being needed like other departments of government. So, I think the brother has a point that, decentralization has done us more bad than good in terms of labour. Labour is neglected and it is really suffering in the hands of the local district leaders. I hope the Ministry of Local Government will come up this time to sensitise the local leaders, to understand that the labour officers are equally important and we need them, and must be facilitated at an equal level like any other department in the government.  

It is true we cannot neglect this. If the Ministry of Labour officials at the head office go without salaries for some period, how do you expect a district labour officer to come up with good facilitation and better pay –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Sometimes I do not get impressed by some of the rhetoric Members of Parliament advance here. The purpose of the workers representatives in this Parliament is to see to it that the workers are treated properly. You should influence the budget to see that your area is properly covered. One of you just said that he participated in the Constitution amendment to make sure that labour officers were decentralized. Now you are saying that that is a weakness, where were you at that time? You are representing the workers of this country; do not blame us when we protect the employers. Thank you very much.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, for your good information. But it is good that you are all equally here and I think you have children who are workers; they may not be your real children, but at least some kind of relationship. You have some people who belong to your own blood and they are workers, what were you doing? And you must recall, and the Hansard can show, that we have always been complaining about the budget for the department of labour. It is not the first day we are complaining about this. What else can you do, anyway? Maybe you have other strategies, you can try to advise me; I will apply it. Thank you.

The issue is that, it is high time we looked at workers in this country as people who are important. They are important and workers are part and parcel of development; do not think that you will develop in any way without looking at the conditions of workers of this country. You must motivate the workers if you want them to produce well, and you have to begin with the parent ministry that caters for their interests, and then be able to do the needful for the workers.  

I want to thank the Prime Minister for the good work done, the Ministry of Labour and all those other officials for their effort. But, I beg everyone to support this report and pass this Bill without much amendment. Thank you.

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking only one clarification. I want to be clarified about this arbitration, whether this covers the minimum wage because we have young people being employed and exploited. I do not know which labour law is going to protect the workers in terms of their minimum wage. 

3.23
MR PETER CLAVER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to comment on the observation in paragraph two which says: “Furthermore, the labour officers are sometimes rejected access to work places….” I want to find out when these labour officers are rejected access to work places and where do they report, because this is a very serious problem, our workers seem to be rejected by the government because of the so-called investors who think that they can mistreat our people anyhow. 

For instance, one time I was in an Ethiopian restaurant; the way they treat a worker in Ethiopia is not the same way they treat a Ugandan working in a restaurant. It is quite different and the way they order them is really unfortunate. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I propose that after passing these laws, our workers should be given copies of these laws so that they may know their rights, because the so-called investors mistreat our people here and when they kind of accuse them, they think that they are sabotaging investors. I, therefore, request that workers should be informed or sensitised of their rights through their parliament representatives. Thank you very much.

3.25
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a fact that the most important resource, for the development of any institution or industry, is the human resource. This means that the input and output of that resource in any sector is very vital and hence, in striving to develop any country like Uganda, the focus should be on workers and workers at all levels, especially if you want to fight unemployment. For that matter, the passing of these laws, though late, is very timely. 

Let me give, an example, Mr Speaker, of some of the jobs which are very important, particularly in the service sector. They are despised and yet they are very important and would create employment. These district labour officers are talking about - in fact, they should not even confine themselves to the government workers or these other special companies. They should also go in to look at the conditions of some of these workers who work in say hotels and bars, because those are the vital sectors. 

The cleaners, for example, should be given their special status. I have taken one of the officers I respect very much in this Parliament and I always stop to ask, especially when I come here over the weekend, he is the one in charge of cleaning this institution. You find him so keen on his work and I take special interest in that.  

So, if we put emphasis on quality of labour at all levels and the status, for example, in an institution like this Parliament, the status of a cleaner, the status of an office messenger is recognized and valued and rewarded accordingly. Through that we are going to fight unemployment; so is the case in other industries.  

Mr Speaker, in this era of globalisation, we cannot avoid to harmonize laws with the international community because labour is also global. You are no longer restricted to work only in your country; we also get our people going to work outside. So, it is important that we harmonize our laws with the international community. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to say much, but I want to say that this sector and its funding are very vital if you want this economy to develop. We should put emphasis on improving the quality of workers in this country at all levels, irrespective of their standard of education or the type of work they do. The input is very vital for the development of any of the sectors in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.30
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the ministry and the committee for coming up with this Bill. Mr Speaker, arbitration really is the way forward. The title of this Bill is not very clear –maybe I will need guidance, when we are at the committee stage, whether we need such a title or one title can handle the Bill comprehensively.

THE SPEAKER: It is dealing with disputed –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Yes, but putting it in brackets may cause some legal problems during arbitration –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, they could have said, Labour Disputes Bill. But, I think putting it in brackets, they wanted to show that you understand it, it deals with arbitration, with settlement - but you can make your amendments. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, disputes can be handled through arbitration, through other non-arbitration means and that is why I was referring to it in such a manner. You can decide to opt for other means. But going to the point, I want to say that I agree with the committee’s proposal that the Industrial Court should be independent in terms of its financing and management of it’s workers. This is very important for it to be effective. 

We have experienced delays in the past, when the Minister of Finance managed this Parliament’s finances; we had a lot of problems until we become autonomous in management of our finances. I really feel that we should find experts to go and support the Industrial Court.

The recommendation by the committee that the matters of financing the Industrial Court be handled directly by the Industrial Court instead of the Ministry and Minister of Finance, then it becomes part of the Budget, may bring some problem.

I would urge government, especially the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Finance, that there is a study about Uganda workers output.  In fact, we are the lowest in the region and this has affected movement of foreign direct investment.  A Kenyan worker’s output per man per hour is higher than that of a Ugandan worker and, therefore, investors prefer to go and put their business where employees do best. Peter, as a hotel manager, will not come every hour to say, “Now this floor is dirty, the table is not organized, clients want water” etc. That has affected our development and, therefore, I agree with my sister that government needs to ensure that the workers rights in this country are respected, that the employers motivate the workers.  

Mr Speaker, for all these years I have been in Parliament, I have raised the issue of Tororo Cement Industry. The condition is very pathetic there! We have raised this matter with the head of state and even with the Minister of State for Labour from Tororo. The minister was even directed to make a report. The committee of hon. Dora visited Tororo and in yesterday’s report, there is a statement describing the poor state of the affairs of workers in Tororo Cement Industry. I hope that when this Bill finally comes into law, will help to ensure that the working condition in that factory improve.

THE SPEAKER: We dealt with that Bill yesterday?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Speaker, some Members are whispering that I was not here. True I was not here, because I was paying my last respect to a very known citizen, who has been the Vice-Chairperson of Tororo Elders Forum, Canon Atonu Solo, who passed away in Mulago Hospital and as the area Member of Parliament, I could not miss paying my last respect and that is the reason why I was not here. 

Finally, I want to urge government that the implementation of this bill, when it finally comes into law, should not be delayed because we have passed several pieces of legislation but implementation delays. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I support the Bill.

3.35
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this Bill but with one request that government’s attitude towards labour improves. The fact that these laws have taken this long to come to this Parliament is a reflection of the attitude that government has about labour. It appears that they have more interest in employers than in their employees. Consequently, we more or less left the employees to their fate. I have been associated with labour officers for a long time. But as one honourable member has said, they have actually been abandoned in the districts. They have no way of enforcing these laws. 

So, it would not be of any use passing this law if these people are not going to be empowered to enforce these laws. You find a labour officer in an office, which hardly has any equipment. People go to him, but he hardly has any stationery to assist them. So, what the labour officers do is to refer these poor labourers to court to have their matters sorted out there, and this includes even the simplest of matters. 

I do not remember when I last heard of an arbitration matter in this country. The industrial court and the industrial judge who used to be a very powerful institution in this country, is forgotten. If you asked honourable members where the industrial court sits, I am sure many people would not even know that there is a place like that. 

So, let us do something about our employees, they have an employment policy. I have asked so many times about the minimum wage and nobody ever answers this question. So, if somebody has to be protected, what kind of protection do these people have? And where is the training institution for these labour officers?

Finally, Mr Speaker, if this law concerns employees, how do they get to know about it? Who helps them to know their rights under these laws so that they can go out and have them enforced? People cannot enforce rights that they do not know about. Unfortunately, most of the employees we have do not know about these things. And government is one of the biggest employers, how does it treat it’s own employees? How are they paid? Are they paid regularly? Are they paid on time? Is the pay adequate? If government cannot give an example in this regard, how can the other employees do it? And finally, if government cannot pay its pensioners pension, how do you expect other private employees to do the same? I support the Bill.

3.38
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Again I will say that I am humbled by the enthusiasm of the honourable Members of Parliament in supporting this Bill. Yesterday, as we debated the two bills, which were passed, I could see the support that honourable members gave us because they also believe that it is important for us to pass these labour laws. We also know that there is evidence in countries, where labour laws have been reformed, there has been transformation. Their economies have changed, the status of the workers has changed, the relationship between the workers and employers and the government has also changed. 

In the last five years, as we have been working on these laws, we have developed what we call a bipartite relationship between employers and workers and also a tripartite relationship between government, workers and employers, which has actually enhanced the relationship and understanding between the social partners. If Members have seen fewer strikes, it is because of that relationship. If Members are saying that where is the court, we do have an industrial court, and if there are fewer cases, it is not because there has been a negative attitude, but because there is a good process through which people are understanding and resolving conflicts. 

The industrial court has been lifted in this Bill to the level of a high court. The purpose is to make it have recognition and profile and also to access similar resources like a high court and a high court judge; so that it will have premise and everything else needed, so that it will also be able to move to the different parts of the country with available resources and that is why we proposed that the funding should come from the Consolidated Fund.

Several Members have talked about the powers of the labour officers. Yes, the enactment of this law is definitely going to increase the powers of the labour officers. And the district labour officer’s powers to enter at a work place, whether during the day or at night was already passed yesterday in our Employment Bill. And the powers to deal with disputes and forward them to the industrial court are what we are talking about now in this current Bill.

Several Members have talked about the funding of the labour sector. I only want to I thank you. Five years ago, the funding of that ministry was very miserable. What we have is not enough and it is really Parliament, which can change things. So, I want to urge Members in the same spirit that since we are starting the process of budgeting, that that will be at the back of their minds, because they are the ones who can change a lot of things, like the minimum wage. 

The relevant law for the minimum wage, which is called Boards and Councils Act, is not yet before this House. We have taken note of all the things that the Members have said and we are aware of it and at the appropriate time, we will discuss that. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion before you is that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005” be read the second time.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) BILL, 2005

3.40
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr Avitus Tibarimbasa): Mr Chairman and honourable members, Clause 10(1)(b) is amended to read, “A judge who shall be deputy chief judge.”  The justification is to clarify on why the two judges with the same qualification are both members of the Industrial Court.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Who is a deputy chief judge?

MR TIBARIMBASA:  In the Bill it was just “a judge” but the amendment we are making is that it should be “a judge who shall be deputy chief judge.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the national Chief Justice or Deputy? Do we call him a judge? Well, as of now, the second command to the Chief Justice is the Deputy Chief Justice. Is that what you want to adopt in this also, or is it different?

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, in the Industrial Court, they used to refer to the head as “the president” but now it is being changed to “chief judge.”  Therefore, the deputy is going to be called the “deputy chief judge.” That is as far as the Industrial Court is concerned.

THE CHAIRMAN: What will be the ranking of this chief judge from the Chief Justice of Uganda? The judiciary in Uganda is headed by the Chief Justice and second in command is the Deputy Chief Justice.  Are you creating a parallel office to that of the Chief Justice? The Deputy Chief Justice is the head of the Constitutional Court. 

MR TIBARIMBASA: That is what we thought but it cannot work. I suggest we leave it as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: So it is a judge.

MR TIBARIMBASA: We maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Is there another amendment on Clause 10?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Another amendment is on Clause 10(6)(i). We suggest deletion of the words “most representative” appearing on the second and third lines respectively. And on (ii) add letter “s” on the word “federation” appearing on the third line.  The justification is to correct a technical error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Mr Chairman, in Clause 18(2), insert a full stop after “her” on the third line. And delete “and the witness shall not be required to answer the question or to produce the document.”  The justification is to avoid repetition. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Mr Chairman, in Clause 25(1) substitute the phrase, “a labour officer” appearing on the first line with “the minister”. The justification is that, it is the minister who has powers to appoint a board of inquiries and not a labour officer.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33 agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40 agreed to.

Clause 41

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 41(i) amend the head note to read, “remuneration, allowances etc” and insert a new sub clause 41(1)(b) to read, “Any expenses incurred in carrying out this Act into effect shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund.” The justification is for accountability and to cater for proper and timely funding of the Industrial Court. (ii) Renumber the provision into 41(1)(a) and 41(1) (b) respectively. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43 agreed to.

Clause 44 agreed to.

The First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule agreed to.

The Title

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Chairman, the long title of the Bill is amended by substituting the word “labour” appearing on the first line with the word “trade”. The justification is that the law that is being repealed and replaced is the “Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

The long Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.56
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.57
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.57
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House in respect of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TRADE DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) BILL, 2005

3.58
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005” be read a third time and do pass. (Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I thought the Bill we are repealing is the one entitled, “The Trade…” and this one remains “Labour….”

THE SPEAKER: I thought so. Honourable members, there is a short title and a long title. The amendment was in respect of the long title, but the short title remained as it was. Therefore, the motion is - is it not the case honourable minister?

MRS BAKOKO: Mr Speaker, I remember at the end the chairperson stood up and moved that we amend the title from the “Labour Disputes” to the “Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement).” 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the amendment was that the long title be amended from labour to trade because the long title refers to a Bill that is being repealed, which does not change the title of this Bill. Therefore, the title of this Bill remains “Labour Disputes…” because the long title refers to the Bill, which is being repealed. The Act revises the law relating to industrial relations to repeal and replace, “The Trade Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act.” However, the heading of the Bill or the title remains. Therefore – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005” be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should know there are two titles: There is a short title and a long title. The amendment was in respect of the long title.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations! The Bill is passed.  Honourable members, as you know, we are not operating on Jinja power but on our generator.  Therefore, this brings us to the end of today’s business House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 March 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)

