Wednesday, 21 March 2012

Parliament met at 3.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and do apologise for the delay. The Commission was finalising the budget for 2012/13 because we needed to send it to the President tomorrow. That is why we delayed. I hope we shall work expeditiously and finish what we had programmed for the day.

3.55
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that IPU has really kept you busy. We are proud of what you are doing. The Ninth Parliament is making history and we should take note of that.

I have looked at the Order Paper and I have seen that the issue of cotton is on page 2 under notice of business to follow. This is a matter of grave concern to the poor people of Uganda, particularly from the northern and eastern regions, and I understand that there are quite a number of rural farmers now in Buganda who are growing cotton. We are talking about a matter that touches about 20 million people in Uganda. I am a farmer and I have always identified myself as such, and many of us who are here have grown up farming in one way or another. 

My concern is that before we begin the garden for the next season, we want to know the fate of cotton in Uganda. We want to know whether Government is concerned about the corrupt and evil practices that are happening in the cotton subsector. 

We have been able to identify one particular item - the issue of the cotton development fund which the last Parliament banned but it has been reinstated. We banned it because we realised that it was illegal and a robbery of the poor farmers. This money amounted to about Shs 46.8 billion. After collecting it from the farmers, the ginners and Cotton Development Organisation sat down and decided to distribute this money. 

According to one of the reports, which were presented by the minister, the money was given to the ginners. We, the poor farmers, are giving a donation to the investors who are rich. We are really concerned. The price went down. The government transferred the burden to the agricultural committee, and this is the second month and the agricultural committee has not given us a report. However, if the report is going to contain farmers paying a cotton development fund, which is robbery, it will create a disaster in the sub sector.

I want to raise this matter with the Speaker, and I hope that you are concerned because your roots are from farming, and I know that most of us who are here will support Dokolo and the northern part of Uganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope our committee will have something to say about that.

3.59
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. In 1998, the Government of Uganda did construct the road from Mubende to Kyenjojo. In 2000, the Ministry of Works and Transport processed the land titles of the concerned landlords where the road was to pass. In June 2007, when hon. Kasole was the MP for Buwekula, he did address this issue to the Minister of Works and Transport. For your information, Madam Speaker, the landlords have never received their land titles. They approached me last year and I wrote to the Ministry of Works and Transport. The letter was written on 25 August 2011 but up to now, I have not received any communication. 

My worry is that we are having many land disputes and we are getting many landlords coming up to claim land. I want to inquire from the minister in charge of lands; are the land titles safe? I think it is high time the Minister of Works and Transport gave us an explanation why land titles are not yet out. At the end of the day, these people are being deprived of their economic survival. 

The people in Buwekula are watching but I have run out of words to explain to them. The Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, please explain if the land titles are safe. I have got a list of all the landlords who did surrender their certificates for mutation. I do not know whether the land titles are still there. I think it would be good for people to know and to get assurance that the land titles are coming out.

4.02
MR JACK WAMAI-WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): In today’s New Vision, there is an article entitled: “FDC, Suubi linked to Market fires”. Madam Speaker, this is an insult to the people of Mbale. I raised the issue of markets catching fire on this Floor of Parliament last week and it generated a debate for about an hour. It is an insult to the people who voted for me, and everybody knows under which party I came to Parliament. They voted for me overwhelmingly and I even beat my rival with a big margin of over 10,000 votes. How could people who voted for me turn around and burn their own market. 

The fires have been going on in different markets in this country such as Owino Market, Kasubi, Gulu, Mbarara and Jinja. What is of interest is that the government accepted and made a statement on the Floor of Parliament that they were going to come to the aid of the people of Mbale. I went and told them that the government had accepted to come and assist people who lost all that merchandise. Is it really fair for the Minister for Presidency to come and make such a blatant statement insulting the people of Mbale?
 
It is like mocking a person who has lost a wife that he is the one who killed her. This is an insult, and we want Minister Muruli Mukasa to come and apologise to the people of Mbale. We take this seriously, especially the people who have lost their merchandise. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that a whole RDC gets a secret letter and starts producing it in public when it is marked “secret”.  If it was not secret, then it is important that the Minister of Security really comes up and produces evidence to confirm if it is Suubi and FDC that are burning markets. Failure on part of Government should not be passed to other people. 

You all recall that children were burnt in Buddo; I do not know whether it is Suubi or FDC that did it. It is absurd! We need a formal statement from the Minister of Security saying that it is FDC and Suubi that are burning the markets. He even appears to be a minister of insecurity; the letter he wrote is dated 23rd 2011 while Mbale market was burnt just about five days ago. If he knew that these are the groups which are burning markets, why didn’t he put safeguards in place to stop this fire?

We want the Minister of Security to bring a statement, with attached evidence, that FDC and Suubi are the ones burning markets. As we talk now, our party President, Dr Kiiza Besigye, and the Lord Mayor have been properly tear-gassed because he was trying to visit his city.
 
4.07
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I am here on a matter of national importance affecting the agricultural sector, especially the crop sub-sector. Balaalo nomads from Western Uganda have reached Obongi this time. They have created problems in Obongi - destruction of people’s food crops in the gardens, environmental degradation including compacting of the soil and distortion of the drainage system of the soil because of the large number of cattle, and they move through gardens making it difficult for the land to be tilled. 

They are very dangerous security wise because they carry firearms. They are armed with AK47s and even sub machine guns. There is a problem of depletion of water resources. People in the rural areas who do not have boreholes drink from pools of water that are in swamps or streams, but once the cattle come they drink all this water and human beings are left without water to drink. There is not even dirty water but lack of water.

There is a problem of land conflicts, which are on the increase. The Balaalo are very powerful people; they have money, cattle and even alliances within high-ranking places of Government such as the Army and Police. They use these connections to grab land from the communal pieces of land down there. Conflicts have shifted from individuals to clan level. In Yumbe, for example, there is a very big conflict between the two clans of Gotri and Kechuru. 

My prayer is that the Balaalo should be made to leave West Nile safely. The origin of their firearms should be explained by the minister, and they should be disarmed and helped to resettle. Leaders of West Nile should unite like the people of Acholi, Lango, Teso and so on to make sure that the Balaalo issue is resolved once and for all. We do not want intimidation and land conflicts in West Nile.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Zerubabel Mijumbi Nyiira): Madam Speaker, you will remember that when this issue of cotton was brought here, there were a number of resolutions that were passed. Eventually, these resolutions were passed over to the Parliament committee on agriculture and we have not received the report from the committee. The ministry is waiting to receive this report and respond more comprehensively.

THE SPEAKER: I know that I sent them out to the countryside; maybe they will let us know. 

4.12
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): I must thank hon. Ssemmuli for the information he has brought. I sincerely apologise to the people of Mubende for the time Government has taken to return the land titles to them. I am going to work very seriously with my colleague in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to ensure that these land titles are secured and returned to the people.

THE SPEAKER: Who is responding to issue of markets and Balaalo in Obongi?

4.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On what hon. Jack Wamai raised about what is in the newspapers, I was not aware of this report. I will take it up and find out if there is such a report and the basis of that report.

On people armed herding cattle in Obongi, - I do not know who Balaalo are - I would like to get more and better particulars. Is the problem that they are armed? If the problem is that they are armed, then of course it is important to find out if they are armed. I thought that was a legitimate question. If they are armed legitimately – (Interjection) - I do not know if they were grazing on common ground or they were trespassing on someone’s land. So, there are many questions for which I will get in touch with the honourable and get better particulars and see if there is anything wrong so that appropriate action can be taken.

MR FUNGAROO: With due respect, Rt hon. Prime Minister, you are the Prime Minister of Uganda and you are the Prime Minister of the people of Obongi too. The people in my neighbourhood, from Acholi, Lango, Bunyoro in the area of Bulisa, are witnesses to this problem of the Balaalo. We are actually very far away from where they come from. If up to now you are not yet aware of the fact that they carry firearms and that they cause destruction and problems, I am very sorry, but we can give you the information you need – (Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to give further information to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. In the Eighth Parliament, this House came up with a committee to investigate the activities of the Balaalo and their ownership of guns. When the Prime Minister stands up to say he does not know the Balaalo and their activities - That particular committee has never even reported to this House. You were the Minister of Security during that time when this committee was being sanctioned. I would believe that possibly, you would be in a better position to tell the House how far the Balaalo went because a partial report was produced in this House. I believe the Prime Minister should be in a position to know that the Balaalo is a live thing in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a debate. Hon. Fungaroo has raised the issue so that the government can respond. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am privileged to receive details in a document that I think hon. Fungaroo has submitted about the problem of Balaalo nomads in Obongi County. It is a voluminous document. I undertake to go and study this with the relevant government departments. If there is any problem, we will find out and we will report back. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I heard hon. Ekanya Godfrey, without your permission, yelling from down there that the Prime Minister is a mulaalo and he has conflict of interest. I heard him say that. So, is it in order for hon. Ekanya to make such serious statements? (Laughter) In case we establish that he is a mulaalo, would he be the best person to give this statement to this institution of Parliament since there might be conflict of interest? Is it in order therefore?   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, fortunately he must have whispered to you. I did not hear what he said. 

Honourable members, there were many matters of national importance; some will be handled tomorrow. Today we have dealt with four and we shall deal with the other four tomorrow. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE FUNDING FOR ARBITRATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND HERITAGE OIL AND GAS LIMITED

(Debate continued)

4.22
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I wanted to confirm that the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi is not a mulaalo because by Balaalo, we mean the nomadic pastoralists. He comes from a community which is agriculturalist, actually from the sub-county of Katete, which is my constituency. Actually, he is being invaded by Balaalo too. (Laughter) 

However, the reason I rose was different. I rose on a point of guidance because I heard the clerk call the next items. Yesterday when you were adjourning the House, you did say that we should consider the report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee together with Item No. 4, which is consideration of the supplementary schedule. We would like to request you – I am now speaking as a parliamentary commissioner - to allow us finalise our discussions with the Minister of Finance. So, my request is that you alter the Order Paper to consider the Companies Bill first to enable the commissioners finalise consultations with the Minister of Finance on matters he is going to be engaged in on items No.3 and 4. I thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
4.24
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the proposal being raised by hon. Baryomunsi because as you may be aware, this afternoon before we came here, we had a Commission meeting and there were very serious issues that were being considered. So, we would like to interact with the Minister of Finance so as to enable us have a better way forward.  This is  a kind proposal that we are putting forward to defer debate on these issues by altering the Order Paper in order to enable us conclude on the discussions that we have been engaged in with the Minister of Finance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues that the Commission is engaged in are very important and so I will accept their request. Let us move to the Companies Bill. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2009

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Companies Bill, 2009” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by two ministers. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the Companies Bill is one of the 23 Bills that were pending when the term of the Eighth Parliament expired in May 2011. In October 2011, this Parliament resolved to save and retain the Bills to be considered by the various relevant committees of the House. The Companies Bill, 2009 was reprinted and I reintroduced it together with other Bills sponsored by my ministry on 23 February 2012. 

The object of the Bill is to amend, replace and reform the law relating to the incorporation, regulations and administration of companies and other associations and to make provisions for related matters. The existing Companies Act, Chapter 110, is based on the United Kingdom Act, which has been revised several times, whereas the Companies Act of Uganda has not been revised comprehensively since enactment. 

Due to the passage of time, some aspects of the Uganda Companies Act have become outdated especially in the light of the present day policies, international obligations, globalisation and technological developments. I hasten to add that the one key principle in the Bill is that it aims at dealing with only core company matters and leaves other issues related to companies to be dealt with in other relevant laws. 

We passed the Capital Markets Authority Act and this particular Act provides for matters relating to prospectus, offers and similar matters previously contained in the Companies Act. In addition, Parliament in 2011 passed a new insolvency Act, which was promoted side by side with the Companies Bill, which now provides for bankruptcy of individuals but also covers matters related to liquidation of insolvent companies previously covered by the Companies Act.
 
The Companies Bill comprises 10 parts and seven schedules; it is a very long Bill as you notice. Of course, we propose amendments and these ones will be elaborated more by the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and I did not go into that. Suffice it to say that this is a very key Bill and when passed, we shall be facilitating the investment climate and processes in Uganda. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.
 
4.30
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is indeed my pleasure that we are submitting the report on the Companies Bill, 2009 being one of the last Bills in a series of commercial legislations that this Parliament, but in particular the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, has been considering in the last few years.
 
This is the report on the Bill. 

Introduction 

The Companies Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 23 February 2012 in the Eighth Parliament and was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. This was one of the Bills saved by the Ninth Parliament in a motion moved on 26 October 2011.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee held a stakeholders workshop and discussed the Bill with representatives from the following institutions: The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Judiciary, and the Uganda Law Reform Commission. The committee also conducted study tours in the United Kingdom and South Africa to benchmark the principles being introduced in the Companies Bill. 

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend, replace and reform the law relating to the incorporation, regulation and administration of companies and other associations and to make provisions for related matters.
  
The current law in Uganda is based on the United Kingdom’s Companies Act, 1948 which has been revised several times in the United Kingdom since its passage. The Companies Act of Uganda has however not been revised in a comprehensive manner since its enactment, except for a few isolated amendments. In 1996, the Capital Markets Authority Act revised only the registration and regulation of public companies. 

As currently written, the Companies Act, while it will not obstruct private investment reflects an older jurisprudence and needs an overhaul to make it compatible with modern rules of business. Due to the passage of time, some aspects of the law have become outdated, especially in light of the present day policies, international obligations, globalisation and technological developments. There is, therefore, a need to produce a new Bill that reforms completely the company law of Uganda and puts it on a basis fit for the 21st century.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed the following:

1. 	The Bill provides for provisions relating to single-member companies separate from those provided for other companies. This is causing repetition of the provisions. The provisions should be merged since a single-member company will be run like any other company.

2. 	The Bill introduces table F on page 310, which contains principles of corporate governance. These principles will promote efficient and proper management of companies while protecting all the stakeholders in a company. All public companies should adopt table F in whole, and non-compliance with the code should attract a default penalty. Private companies may adopt table F but once they do so, they must comply.


3. 	The Bill provides for procedures on how a company may be converted from one status to another i.e. re-registration of a private company as a public company, re-registration of an unlimited company as limited, re-registration of a limited liability company as unlimited, re-registration of an unlimited company as limited, re-registration of a public company as a private and single-member company changing status. The current Companies Act does not provide for detailed procedures on how a company can change status.

4. 	The Bill requires all companies to hold an annual general meeting. This is however costly, especially to private companies. Annual general meetings should only be compulsory for public companies.

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I am also happy to report that out of 20 members, 18 members signed the report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and your committee. The Bill meets the requirements for us to proceed.

4.37
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairman for the report. Members from the previous Parliament, you will recall that we considered this Bill partly but we did not complete just because of a few provisions. I have inquired with the chairman and he says he has accepted the provision of a one-man company. So, I propose that since the Bill is technical, we go to committee stage immediately and we debate within the committee. This is simply because for most of the provisions, the chairman and the committee agree. If there is any provision that requires understanding and debate, then maybe we debate within committee stage and we do not waste more time. I propose that we go to the committee stage immediately.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: The introduction says that the Companies Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 23 February 2012 by the Eighth Parliament. Can you clarify on whether this is correct?

4.39
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to raise some observations and seek clarification from the chair and the other legal minds we have here.

When we pass these commercial laws, their intention should be to facilitate the business environment. When you register a company, as observed in the amendments, in the memorandum and articles of association the objects are so many - a company can trade in this, in the other - and that is allowed. However, when you come to the trade licensing - I know there is a Bill in the offing about trade licensing - you find KCCA, for example, and I want to see whether this is illegal, will require a company that deals in supply of stationery to have a trading licence. The same company, if it offers some other consultancy, must have a trading licence. If you are using the same company as per the listed many functions in the articles, at the end of the day it makes the business environment meaningless. I cannot pay for a trading licence for the so many functions I listed in my articles and memorandum of association.

You interfaced with so many people but I do not know whether you interfaced with Ministry of Trade; why can’t they have a standard trading licence that maybe covers all categories? I am not registered as a company. If that was the case, then you would require a company to register for a specific item; say for companies dealing in oil, you can say your sole function is oil exploration. But if my objects allow me to deal in various unlimited things including trading in aircrafts, must I really get a trading licence for each and everything? This may not be for this Bill but I think it is related. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point hon. Tumwebaze has raised is important. One day I was watching TV and one of the women traders in this country said it is so difficult to trade because she must spend so much time going to about seven different points to get clearance for this and that. So I hope the ministers for trade can consider shortening the process for our people so that they can do their work.

4.42
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is really about the object of the Bill. The object as stated is to amend, replace and reform the law relating to the incorporation, regulation and administration of companies. I appreciate that the current Companies Act is really obsolete; would it be of any harm if instead of maintaining that object of the Bill we just say, “to repeal the Companies Act”? 

In my opinion, this Bill is really going to be a completely new law. However, if we have to maintain this object of amend, replace and reform, then we will have to change the title and call it “The Companies (Amendment) Bill”, which I think is not going to be very healthy. The best way to go is to have the object as “to repeal the Companies Act” because this is going to be a new law which I think is better for our current business environment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that is the intention but the minister will explain.

4.45
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the minister. I want to find out whether the memorandum is reading 2009 and there is no change. If that is the case, then the certificate of financial implications is also reading 2009. That means the implementation of this law will have a budget problem. I just hope that at the end of this or maybe by tomorrow, the minister issues a new certificate of financial implication so that we are up to date. 

Secondly, I have read the report and they are only talking about limited liability companies and yet we have companies that are operating here with symbols such as “public limited company” as in the UK and “pty”. I do not know how you are going to integrate these concepts from different countries since Government has allowed them to trade here. 

Madam Speaker, if you spend time looking at this law, it basically facilitates international companies. Most youth of this country that are required to register companies will not be able to meet the requirements. It says, for example, that if your company has not traded for one year and you have not filed returns, it will be de-registered. We have asked Government to allow the Registrar of Companies to open offices in every sub county. This is because you will find the youth from as far as Tororo, Kamuli, Kotido and Kisoro having to come to one office. I hope this law will permit us to decentralise, otherwise we shall just legislate for international companies here in Uganda. 

I hope when we are in committee stage, we shall create provision for our local people who have not gone to school but are required to tender - even small businesses in a sub county under NAADS are supposed to tender. For the Youth Fund, NUSAF and others, you are supposed to have a registered company, file returns and then tender. These are very serious matters. We should not legislate only for Tullow, Standard Chartered Bank, Stanbic and the rest and forget the local people of this country; it will be a betrayal - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. Right now we are facing a problem with the youth who want to get loans from the money which was released by Government. One of the conditions for anybody to get a loan is that they must have a registered company. I wonder how somebody from Kalungu, Villa Maria, who sells bananas, can register a company yet they have a capital of only Shs 100,000 to run their business. I think that is very important, but I will come on later with my other submission. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I hope that through some arrangement we can have a provision to cater for growth. In development, there are about three levels of growth. We in the city are now considered to be in the third stage of growth, but in the rural areas we have our people who have brought us here. There should be a provision for the Registrar of Companies to be decentralised. 

Secondly, there is a provision for an electronic data system already. Hand-written returns to the Registrar of Companies should be accepted because in some villages there are no typing facilities. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the committee chairperson wish to respond at this time? Let us have the Leader of the Opposition and then the minister. We shall then have the chairperson to respond if he wishes.

4.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, on page 5 of the report, number four, the committee is recommending that private companies should not hold annual general meetings. I do not know how they will sign accounts. Are you telling us they will not sign accounts? In order to sign an account, you have to make a return every year and the return is the accounts. So, whether they are one or two, they should hold annual general meetings. I do not think this is tenable.

This is a very good law and it has come at the right time. We have been using an obsolete law and so this one is overdue. One thing I have noticed is the single-person company. I am yet to come to terms with it yet. You are saying a single person forms a company which is unlimited. That means it is unlimited in liability. Likewise, when you are a sole proprietor, you are unlimited in liability. In any case, there is no way you will separate this single company from an individual. I really need to come to terms with this issue; what is this single company? Can someone say, “I own 100 percent shares”? What is the difference with me saying all the capital is mine, as much as it is not in shares but in cash form? So, what is this “limited”? I need to understand it.

I also want the committee to educate me about governance. All companies must now have an audit committee - that is mandatory - and these committees must be separate from the internal ones. An audit committee does not mean that the committee is tied to good governance. These are the people who are not board members but come from outside the company. 

I do not know what article we shall enforce so that we have real good governance. The reason companies are collapsing is because their owners are involved in the day to day management and even fraud. In some cases when they are asked a question by the internal auditors, they sack them. The purpose of the audit committee is to promote accountability both within and without and make the board members and the owners of the business accountable.

Madam Speaker, I also wanted to make a proposal, which I want the committee to look at. If a company has been formed by five people or maybe two and now it is employing 100 people, if that company collapsed, 100 people with families will be unemployed. How can we safeguard these companies? In reality, they have become part and parcel of the public by employing 100 people from the public. How do we safeguard them so that these companies are run in such a way that they can survive? Let them collapse in an economic sense but let them not collapse because of individual mismanagement. This brings problems to the 100 people they have employed, who could have been employed elsewhere but have been stuck in this company for the rest of their lives. 

Finally, the Companies Act has come but we do not know when you are bringing the Cooperatives Act. These things should have moved together, unless we put a provision here that now this part will in the meantime handle cooperatives. In the villages people have formed co-operative societies that are limited. How do we help them because the current law is quite obsolete and it is one of the worst laws? In fact, it is an inhuman law. I am a culprit of it in the sense that one person sits here in Kampala with a registrar and he comes and says, “All you members have been sacked and I am in charge”, even in your own business. When he takes charge, he even mismanages it and puts it in a worse condition. So, when are we having the Co-operatives Act? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the colleague for giving way. The need for strengthening the co-operatives legal framework is very important because the message we are sending out to people is to form SACCOs. There is a co-operative in my constituency that got a loan for a milk cooler from DDA and people entered into a contract with DDA. Now the executive members go and choose at will not to remit the loan repayments to DDA. What happens? The DDA sends notices and the people who misused the money do not even inform the general assembly, and at the end of the day DDA takes away the cooler. So, we either stop the separate legislation and take them to be companies or we have a clear framework. Really, it is very important. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I do not think we need a separate law. I would imagine that the Companies Act should be able to deal with this. You can register as a business under the Companies Act, because as we talk the economy is liberalised. This business of having two laws is bringing a lot of conflicts and these are big problems we are having. By the way, they also use the word “limited” which means they are limited by either guarantee or share. I do not know what the other guarantee could be. The learned chairperson will tell us. I would propose that maybe in this law, at an appropriate time we could say that co-operatives or any business unit being formed as a limited company should comply using the same law. I do not know what would happen. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Attorney-General to respond and then the chair.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the members who have made contributions to this Bill. 

Hon. Frank Tumwebaze commented on problems encountered on getting trade clearances. Did I see the minister responsible for trade around? On the one hand this is an administrative matter and on the other it is also prudent that we have to ensure a co-ordinated way of doing business. If you realise, even in this Bill we are doing away with the ultra vires rule. It originally provided that the company’s objects are limited to those stated in the memorandum and articles of association. Now with the abolition of this rule, companies should be able to transact any business that is within their reach. I think that is clause 52.

If you say, if you have got a certificate of incorporation, you get only one trading licence and you have got to do various activities - I do not want to mention names but hon. Ekanya has some examples - really, you would even be cheating the government in terms of revenue. However, from a more proactive point of view, we could look at related activities and work out an arrangement with Ministry of Trade to see that that is taken care of.

Hon. Epetait, if you repeal a law it means you have left nothing. So, if you said the law is repealed, that is period. At one point when Amin was overthrown, we had the miscellaneous repeal law, which repealed most of the laws that were in existence then and nothing was put in place because we simply did away with them. But this is a better terminology. In my view, the long title of this Bill captures an Act to amend, to replace and to reform the law relating to the incorporation, regulation and administration of companies to make provision for related matters. I think this is good enough. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I gave two scenarios. I said if you want to say the object is to amend, replace and reform the law, then the title will have to change because you are saving something from the parent Act. The title would then become, “The Companies (Amendment) Bill.” However, if you want to call it the Companies Bill as it stands, and yet to the best of my knowledge this law is a new law that is doing away with that obsolete 1948 law that we have been operating on - That was my argument; if you want to maintain this object then we amend the title.

MR RUHINDI: I do not think we need to go into all this. Maybe let us look at the last clause of this Bill. Look at clause 300 on page 250. We should look at everything together: “Repeal and Savings. The Companies Act enforced immediately before the commencement of this Act is repealed.” In other words, you have repealed it. This is a replacement. If you said, “The Companies (Amendment) Bill”, it means that there are certain provisions which are not here which are in the other Act and that this is an amendment. This is not the case. We are amending, we are reforming and we are replacing, and in that particular clause it is specific that we have repealed. Can I go on? 

Hon. Ekanya, I think it is now a settled matter, out of the many rulings of the Speaker and her guidance, that all the saved Bills have been reintroduced without the necessity of producing certificates of financial implication. I do not need to go into details about that. In any case, if this Bill was supposed to be passed in 2009, the idea is that if it was passed then, the respective ministry should have put in place mechanisms for its implementation, meaning that that financial component is already taken care of in our budgetary measures. 

On the issue of public limited companies and so on and so forth, you were citing the example of those other countries. This is why we have the Capital Markets Authority Act, and this is why we have transferred some of the provisions in the companies law to that particular Act to provide for incorporation and management of public companies. In fact, in this particular Act, you will notice there are few adjustments. For instance, to form a public limited liability company, the minimum number of people required would be seven, but now we are actually saying I think above 50. I need to cross-check. There are a few things which have been adjusted, but they exist and they are being managed through another Act, and we passed the amendment, I think last year.

Decentralisation; I agree with you entirely. You may be aware that the Uganda Registration Services Bureau is no longer under the administration of Ministry of Justice. It is on its own. It is a body corporate. It is a parastatal and it has a new management; the Minister of Finance before she became minister was the chair, it has a board of directors and they are doing a good job. They are decentralising. 

Even the Ministry of Justice as I speak, we have got several regional centres; Mbale, West Nile, Mbarara, Gulu and we are actually keeping on improving as and when resources are available so that the people you are talking about together with hon. Ssewungu from Kalungu can be catered for at regional level. 

I did not capture the issue on tax returns, maybe if my colleague did; he will help me answer that one.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raises an important issue on a one-man company, but I will also benefit from the experience of the chair and his team who travelled to South Africa and UK. Our idea for bringing in this was to facilitate quick formation of companies and quick movement of business. Let me give you an example. You are talking about sole proprietorship. Sole proprietorship does not have a corporate veil. In other words, you cannot actually have a sole proprietorship with the word “Limited” at the end, but with a private limited liability company or public, it has the word “Limited” at the end, meaning that its liability is limited unlike in the case of sole proprietorship. The idea is to protect this individual who comes, for instance, from London or America, comes here and wants to have his business and also to have his interests protected, which can only be protected under that corporate veil, unlike in, for instance, a partnership or sole proprietorship. This is the focal idea of having a one-man or one-woman company in my opinion. Corporate veil to protect the interests of the investor - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Attorney-General, clause 4(iii) (c), “...a company not having any limit on the liability of its members in this article, referred to as an unlimited company”. The Act is also recognising a company’s unlimited liability. That means even a sole proprietor is also with unlimited liability and can be recognised as a sole trader. Are you seeing the word “Unlimited”? So, can you help me to know why, this clause 4, sub-clause (iii) (c) – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I do not see the contradiction because (c) is one of the categories and “unlimited” - if you have an unlimited company, it means that your liability is not limited. What is the contradiction?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am saying that now, Nandala-Mafabi and Co., that means my liability is unlimited. You are saying I can form a company as an individual and again I have the word “Unlimited” because my liability is not limited. My argument is that, I am saying that under this sole proprietorship, you can register the company, but you will not necessarily deal as a company, but the name, and you can trade.

MR RUHINDI: Let us read the whole thing; (iii) “The company may be in -
(a)	a company having the liability of its members limited by the memorandum to the amount, if any unpaid on the shares respectively held by them in this Act referred to as a company limited by shares...”

Actually, that is the company we are talking about. We want the one-man company to fit in this particular category and your liability is only limited to the unpaid shares.

“(b)the company having the liability of its members limited by the memorandum to the amount that the members undertake in the memorandum to contribute to the assets of the company if it is being wound up in this Act, referred to as a company limited by guarantee...” 

That one is actually a popular company because most of these NGOs are formed through that vehicle, including Obote Foundation.

“(c) a company not having any limit on the liability of its members in this Act referred to as an unlimited company...” 

I think the best we would do is to understand this particular definition by reading, because a definition must be referring to a company in the context. I think the best is - I have to look at the text itself to see where this has been used and then I can get back to you and then,

“(d) private or public”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My question is, since you have agreed to an individual to register a company to be a limited company or unlimited, can’t I form a company under (c) because you are saying a sole proprietor now can form a company? I can form it limited by shares or limited by guarantee or unlimited. If it is unlimited, what is the difference between unlimited with me as a sole proprietor?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to get back to this. I want to look through the text of the Bill and then I will get back to that issue. I think it is important that it should be clarified.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I think the issue of clause 4, page 19, as reflected here on page 5 on any one or more persons may for a lawful purpose, form a company. On the same single member companies, I think with due respect, Attorney-General you need to consider this again. If you address your mind to Salomon V. Salomon, that company was basically – there was a big debate on the issue of whether it was a company or not. You remember, almost 99 percent of the company’s shares were held by Salomon. The rest of the shares were held by the members of his family. The veil of incorporation had to be lifted to determine whether it was really a company falling within the definition of a company under the law. The debate was whether this gentleman was using the company to defraud others. 

Now, much as you are telling us that it is very good to come with a single-member company and so on, so that we protect the interests of investors who will come here; the question is, how about when the interests are bad interests? For example, we have these Indians selling kabalagala and calling themselves investors. To me, the intention of the law giver must be clear. This aspect of a single-member company must be given more time and should not even appear here unless we want to encourage more fraud in Uganda. Any two or more persons forming a company would be very excellent unless you are going to re-interpret this law and try to understand it in the context of the economic interest of this country. Thank you very much.

5.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will not add to the justification which has been given by the Attorney-General on matters, for example, of protecting an individual - giving the corporate veil to an individual who wants to do business. I think the most important thing is to realise that even most of the companies we have here are one-man companies; a man, his wife and children and so on. It is just a realisation -(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I also want to go on record as I give information to hon. Tashobya. We have so many shrewd Ugandans who have mastered and specialised in conning people. We have had TEAM, Dutch, COWE, so many companies. It is the same people changing faces and names and they keep conning people. It is like we are legalising and giving them a leeway such that today they can go and register as individuals, the following day, they deface and change the names. I want to ask the chairperson to kindly bear with us and we drop this thing of a one-man company. It is not feasible and tenable as far as the current situation in Uganda is concerned. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, the point I was trying to make – even the example he is giving is adding to the case I was making. Even the fraud which has been taking place, we have not been having one-man companies here. So, that does not really answer the issue you are putting forward. 

Also, the matter of investment; making it easy for individuals who want to trade - the way you are describing people who want to form companies to do business for whatever reason, but also, as an avenue to formalising business for private people who are doing business and maybe for the future, to be captured in the tax bracket of the country. This is a practice and a reform which is taking place everywhere; in Europe and even Africa. I think our people should benefit from this innovation and practice.

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude so that we can go to the second reading.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I think it helps as I continue. Actually, colleague, the case you are citing of Salomon V. Salomon emphasises the point that we need a one-man company because you have to keep on lifting the veil to know who is behind the company, when in fact we know that these companies are one-man or one-woman. The emphasis is more on what we have put in other provisions. For instance, if you look at Part 4 of this Bill on management and administration, you will see many provisions which have been improved. For instance, sanctions for failure to file returns and do many other things, the penalties are stiff. That goes to the question of governance. There is a colleague who raised the issue of governance. That part handles the governance issues. 

My colleague, the chairperson, has agreed to help me. He is very well versed with cooperative matters. He will address this issue on the need to revise and amend the cooperative law. 

5.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much. I will be brief because most of these issues raised have been responded to by the Attorney-General. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised a matter as to why private companies should not be required to hold general meetings. My response is that this should be optional. If some members feel that they should have general meetings, those general meetings should be held. But if, for example, because a one-man company is a private company, to impose that requirement does not make -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Tashobya Stephen, you have annual returns. These annual returns must be signed and discussed. Even if it is a one-man company as we are saying, the one man must have his annual general meeting or her annual general meeting to deal with -(Interjections)- how do you sign a return? That is why I am agreeing with my brother that this one-man company - I am still hesitant. But -(Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Literally, company means someone is accompanying you to do something. Now, are we going to change the name or it is going to remain a company of an individual? I think even the spirit in which the law was capturing it -(Interjections)- no, I said literally meaning. I am protected. Members, let us listen. Not only that, but even now, if a foreign investor comes to Uganda; he makes his one-man company - and I think we should be advancing to formulate laws such that when an investor comes here to form a company, we should have laws protecting the interests of Ugandans. He should even have more than 20 Ugandans in his company. If we allow them to make a one-man company, aren’t we killing our economy and leaving it to the investors abroad?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I want us to be realistic. This very House has been complaining, especially when we were dealing with the Youth Venture Fund. We said we should not require the young people to have a team of more than four people. Now we are saying we want the young people to be solo; now you are saying, no, no, make them more. Please! 

5.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When there is a new idea, we always have this sort of debate. The innovation of a one-man company should not be looked at as a Ugandan affair; it is now worldwide. We are far behind other countries. 

If you have had time to look through this Bill, you should have noted that most of the provisions are actually word for word of what is going on in the Western world: America and South Africa. All countries that have had a modern way of doing business have gone this way. So, it is not a local matter.

You see, if one person has got some money, he chooses either to invest with anybody or to go alone. It is you who is dealing with him who should take note that I am dealing with a one-man company. But we cannot legislate here and say: “If you want to do business, come with others”. Modern business does not work that way.

So, we shared experiences and some of these questions were actually answered. In countries like South Africa, where most of these provisions have been affected for a long time, we have seen it working. I was on the delegation to South Africa and we met some of the biggest law firms on the continent. They told us how they have been operating. 

About unlimited liability, you who are doing the business should know that this one has had his liability limited. Others opened up and it is a matter of choice. It is sometimes about confidence building and this itself allows you to change. Even if you registered as an unlimited liability, you can change and register as a limited liability; it has that flexibility. One-man companies happen. I run a law firm, Katuntu & Co Advocate, but it is a sole proprietorship. I work with over seven people within my firm, but I own it. So, it is not like when you say so and so, and company, then that means there are other people accompanying you. I think the word confusing is company. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My conclusion on this is that the annual general meeting could be one person. But there should be an annual general meeting and someone to sign his return. If you do not do it, then they will not file the returns. 

But to hon. Abdu Katuntu, my Attorney-General, for professionals, world over, it is only when you go to the consultancy world – you can call it PWC Ltd because you are going to deal in consultancy. But if you are a lawyer or accountant, you remain alone for one reason; because you are supposed to be held liable individually and not with others.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have just one clarification for hon. Nandala-Mafabi in respect of the other issue. I have gotten some consultation here which can help us. You notice that clause 4(3) generally refers to the categories of companies. For each of the categories listed in that clause, the promoters of the company choose through the memorandum the category of company they wish to form with regard to liabilities. 

The question of liability nationally, arises or is relevant in two areas. One, when the company is being wound up. Two, when the company is unable to pay its debts; when the members then choose to have unlimited liability. Then in accordance with clause 19(2); on page 29, the members can be called upon to contribute to the payments of the debts of the company without any limits to the amounts of contribution. I hope you agree with that. It is because of that – this emphasises the issue of knowing the number of people who can be called upon to pay for the liabilities of the company. 

In other words, these are forms of companies; it is your choice to form a company which is unlimited or limited. When you make it limited, it protects you. And the one-man company, which we have in mind can either be with limited liability or unlimited if you, chose in your memorandum, that you need unlimited liability.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point of the audit committee raised by hon. Mafabi, yes we agree with you that audit committees are a good practice and we also support the Bill that compels public companies to adopt Table F, which contains good governance practices, including the audit committees. 

I think it was hon. Ekanya or was it hon. Mafabi, who raised a matter about companies which embrace so many people and all of a sudden they get financial problems and collapse for reasons beyond the control of the owners and directors. This is a good observation and I share the same views. 

Our experience is that the Companies Act goes further to provide mechanisms of bailing out companies that may be in such stress. But in our consultations, much as we appreciated the importance of that legislation, we thought that the ministry responsible would come up with a separate legislation to provide for those scenarios which we support.

Lastly, I agree entirely with the views of hon. Mafabi in respect of the cooperative law. The current law we have was amended in 1991. But since then, a number of changes have taken place. My experience in that field was that in the 1990s, there was an exercise of reforming the cooperative law and amending it. Even as a backbencher, I have posed this question: When are we getting the cooperative law in place? It is unfortunate we do not have the responsible minister here. But it is important that this law comes up. 

For example, you may also realise that the working of cooperatives has changed. It is the same law that governs the running of SACCOs, and yet SACCOs have changed from the traditional saving society we knew in the past. So, it is very urgent, not only for the cooperatives, but also for the economy. Let this cooperative law be amended and brought before this House sooner than later. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Companies Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2009


Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Chairperson?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes that under clause 2 on page 16, we insert the following immediately after the words, “book or paper” - we add, “Capital Markets Authority” which means the Capital Markets Authority established by the Capital Markets Authority Act. Madam Chairperson, after the words, “book or paper” we are proposing definitions for the word, “dormant company” as a company that is not doing business and does not have accounting transactions in a financial year. The justification is to define the words, “Capital Markets Authority” and “dormant company” that are used in the Bill.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, I think it would be better if we first considered the rest of the clauses and then we consider the interpretation clause after we have gone through the rest, because there are certain clauses within the Bill that we think should also go to the interpretation clause. Maybe we would handle it later.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it the only one in the interpretation?

MR TASHOBYA: This is the only proposal whose interpretation we have, but in the course of time, without prejudice, we may pass these; but in the meantime if any come up, they can be brought up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us leave the interpretation section because in the main body, we may alter certain things. We will do it at the end.

Clause 3

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you do notice that this Bill has got 300 clauses, and if we go clause by clause, putting a question to each clause, it may be quite cumbersome to your Chair, and we may also take a lot of time. I would suggest that we adopt the method we used when we passed the Bankruptcy Bill, which is now an Act. You would put or read the clauses say up to 20, and then 20 up to 40, and then if there is anyone with an amendment or proposal within those clauses, the amendment would be put and then you put one general question to all those and then we move on. Otherwise, we shall never finish.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members. I will just ask you to be alert so that if you have areas that you are interested in, we will call out – I think the bulk of the amendments are up to 19, isn’t it? Is it okay if we called 10 clauses at a time? 

Now, honourable members, I put the question that clauses 3 to 10 do stand part of the Bill – 3 to 10 are the ones that have amendments. Yes, honourable chair.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much. In clause 4 which is on page 19, the committee proposes that under sub-clause (1), we delete the words, “Any two or more persons associated for a lawful purpose may” which is at the beginning of the sub-clause and replace them with the words, “Any one or more persons may for a lawful purpose, form a company.” The justification is to provide for single-member companies.

The committee proposes that we delete sub-clause (2) of clause 4 and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment of sub-clause (1) already provided for under sub-clause 1.

Clause 5 on page 21; we propose that sub-clause (3) should be deleted because it is also a consequential amendment to clause 4.

Clause 7 on page 21, the committee proposes that we delete paragraph (C) of sub-clause (1) and replace it with the following, “The memorandum of a company may also state the objects of the company.” The justification is that the Bill is proposing to abolish the Ultra Vires rules and as such, making it mandatory for a company to include its objects in the memorandum which makes proposed amendment, is not necessary and is unsustainable.

Under clause 10 on page 23, the committee proposes that sub-clause (1) be re-drafted as follows: “A company that has included in its memorandum its objects, may, by special resolution, alter its memorandum with respect to the objects of the company, so far as may be required, to enable it to – “ and then we continue to provide for (a) up to (g); and then, (2) “A resolution under this section may be passed - (a) by the holders of not less in aggregate than 15 percent in nominal value of the company’s issued share capital or any class of them, if the company is not limited by shares, not less than 15 percent of the company’s members; or 
(b) by the holders of not less than 15 percent of the company’s debentures entitling the holders to object.

Sub-clause (3) should be re-drafted as follows:

“(3) An application for the cancellation of a resolution altering the memorandum shall be made to the registrar within 21 days after the date on which the resolution altering the memorandum was passed.” Madam Chairperson, the justification is to draft the provision in a simpler manner so that it may be easily understood. 

We propose that sub-clause (4) be re-drafted as follows:

“(4) On application to the registrar under sub-section 3, the registrar may make an order cancelling the alteration or confirming the alteration either wholly or in part.

(5) Where parties propose an arrangement, the registrar shall adjourn the proceedings in order to allow an arrangement to be made for the purchase of the interests of the dissenting members and may give such directions as he or she may think fit.

(6) Where an arrangement is proposed to be entered into in accordance with sub-section (5), no part of the capital of the company shall be expended in any such purchase.” 

Madam Chairperson, the justification is to draft the provision in a simpler manner so that it is easily understood.

In sub-clause (7), in reference to the word “minister”,  we propose it should be deleted and replaced with the word “registrar”; and 

In sub-clause (8), we propose that it be re-drafted as follows:

“Where a company passes a resolution altering its objects, 
a)	If no application for cancellation is made by the registrar under this section, it shall, within 14 days from the end of the period of making the application deliver to the registry from the report of its memorandum as altered; and

b) 	If the application for cancellation is made, the registrar shall stay registration of the resolution for alteration until the application is heard and disposed of.”

Madam Chairperson, we are proposing that we delete sub-clauses 9, 10 and 12. The justification is that the amendments effected to the above provisions render these provisions of those sub- clauses redundant. In addition, matters of registration and change of the company memorandum and objectives should be matters to be handled by the registrar of companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Tashobya, before you go, in your report, I have seen sub-clause 11; I just want to confirm that it is not being deleted. 

MR TASHOBYA: I confirm this, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it is 9, 10, 11 and 12. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, on the method of having so many clauses considered at ago, I hope Members are following very well. I have some proposed amendments. Clause 5 is talking about the meaning of a private company; clause 6 is talking about the meaning of a public company. The reason I proposed that we deal with the interpretation clause later was to the effect that isn’t it prudent for us to transfer these interpretations of the meaning of private company and the meaning of public company to the interpretation clause. 

Secondly, under clause 7 - requirements with respect to the memorandum; I noted that in the first place, we have a very big volume of the Bill, and when I looked at all right from sub-clauses 1 to 3, it is literally lifting what is in Table E. In the shadow of page 306, Table D, it is what is stated in clause 7; sub-clauses 1 up to 3 is a repeat of what is in the table. So, I would like to propose that instead of labouring to have all these write-ups in clause 7, sub-clauses 1 to 3, we would say that, “The memorandum of every company shall be printed in the English Language using the format shown in Table D of the schedule of this Act”, and that would provide for everything instead of having all this repeated again. That would look much more organised.

Similarly on sub-clause 4, which talks about a company having a share capital, its information is also repeated in Table E on page 308. So, why wouldn’t we just say, “A company having a share capital would be registered using the format shown in Table E of the schedule of this Act? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much. The Attorney-General may also have something to say, but our understanding as a committee as you may realise, is that this is a very big deal and we are trying to make it easier for purposes of having to bring some of these matters in tables within the Bills, to make it easy for court users and ordinary users to follow when reading the law. Instead of having to turn from this schedule to this schedule. It becomes easier when those provisions are put, for easy reference, to court users and others in ordinary language using this. We addressed our minds to this matter, but we thought for easy flow, it makes it easy for users to have it put in the manner that it was put in the Bill. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, of course, the chairperson of the committee has stated that it is for the ease of the lawyers, but if there is no contradiction, I have no problem with it. But on clause 7 (1)(c) which says, “The objects of the company and the committees proposing ‘may’…” that is where I am getting disturbed because when a company is being formed, it must have objects. The objects must be clearly stated. The moment you say “may”, you are not making it mandatory, whereby somebody may say, I have formed a company and when you question him he will say, the law says you “may” and this is where the problem is. So, on that, Mr Chairperson, I want us to agree with you that we retain the original clause 7(1)(c)as it is; “shall state the object of the company”, but the moment you make it “may”, it is quite dangerous for us and somebody can start dealing in drugs and say, “I never stated it because the law does not say I should state what I am dealing in”, and that is the purpose. If they state the objects, then we can see what relates to what he is trading in, and what he is supposed to deal in. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I think what the chairperson had explained is that they are trying to simplify life for business users – hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you may be selling Malewa in the highlands then you chance upon a very good opportunity of selling coffee, which is not in your objectives. Should you be caught because your objectives are only about selling Malewa?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right, Madam Chair, but if you read these memoranda, you will realise that they state the principal objectives for their formation, before talking about any other business. The purpose is to try to – you see you cannot do business like construction when your initial business is not about construction. To be a contractor, you must have formed a company with engineers so that you can do construction at any one time you wish. Also, for you to deal in drugs, you must have formed a company to do such. So, at least, let them set the main one; the other one can be part of any other.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other matter I wanted to talk about is on the users. I don’t agree with the fact that the Companies Act is for the lawyers only. I think even ordinary people who form companies would want to have this law easily accessible and understood. So, let us not complicate their lives.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. When you are starting a business, you must state its objectives at the beginning. The moment you are not sure, it means you are going to deal with a business that you are not sure of, in which case you will be gambling.

In most cases, when you register a company with a clear memorandum of understanding, the principles are stated together with the capital. And when they are going to value it, they know the capacity of the company they are dealing with and that is determined from the memorandum of understanding. The objectives must be stated clearly to the person registering that business.

MS NANTUME: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to first of all request that if the chairperson of the committee is reading, he should keep telling us the page from which he is reading in order for us to follow. This is because this book is too voluminous.

Secondly, since this is a Bill which we are going to pass into a law – and because I have not been hearing properly – I would like to seek some clarification from the document they have given. On page 5, there are amendments proposed by the committee to the Companies Bill, 2009. For example, they propose that the word “dormant company” should mean, “A company that is not doing business or does not have accounting transactions in a financial year.” When I look at this, just like hon. Geoffrey Ekanya said earlier, these companies are usually competing each financial year because they all operate in a competitive market. So, when a company fails to get business within one financial year, does that mean it qualifies to be dormant? If so, then what are the penalties? Is it blacklisted? Does it need to be re-registered? What can be done to it, because it will still need to be in the market? 

If I were to decide, for a company to be regarded dormant, such company ought to have had no business for at least three consecutive financial years and not just one year. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, I think it is in the interest of the owner of the company. If you are doing nothing, you should not be taxed on anything. It is prudent that you state your position that for the last financial year, your company did not have business and so, you should not be subjected to paying income tax. All you need to do is to file returns to show that you did no business and your interests will be protected.

MR EKANYA: When you file nil returns, they will ask what you have been doing during the last year of operation, against which they will charge a standard fee, which you have to deposit with them. We need to find means of making that correction.
Recently, I had to pay Shs 500,000 for me to get clearance while they investigated whether my company had been dormant or not –(Interjections)– no, the company had been dormant and I filed returns.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I don’t have any problems with the provision proposed by the committee on dormancy of companies. However, allow me make some clarification on hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concern about the words, “may or shall.” Shifting from the ultra vires rule is fundamental. Under the correct arrangement, third parties are deemed to have constructive notice of their objects. Many business people have lost cases that way because – you know what we do because many of you have companies. If I were to ask you the objects of your companies, you may not actually go up to the tenth. Now you can imagine third parties being deemed to have constructive notice of your objects, and if not, and they transact business with you and they plead that they did not know, they would lose the case.

That is what we are trying to do away with so that you can do anything and let that anything be regulated within the legal framework of the entire country. For example, if you are importing drugs, they will get you. If you are doing something that is illegal, they will get you too. But we should not punish third parties that are dealing with you simply because they are not aware of your objects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For me, the definitions are important because as I was saying, everybody needs to understand the type of company they are forming. Yes, this is known to us, but we should help those who don’t know. 

Clauses 3 -10, as amended

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 3-10, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 3-10, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 11 – 20

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, any amendments, chairman of the committee?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. On page 26 of the Bill, the committee proposes that clause 11 be re-drafted as follows: “It shall be lawful for a company to register in addition to its memorandum and articles of association, such regulations of the company as the company may deem necessary.” The justification is to allow companies that may have regulations outside the articles of association to register them.

Clause 14 on page 27 of the Bill, sub-clause (1); we propose that this should be re-drafted as follows: “A public company shall, at the time of registration of its articles, adopt and incorporate into its articles, the provisions of the code of corporate governance contained in Table F. This is a matter that was raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The justification is to make it mandatory for public companies to adopt the code of corporate governance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are deleting the word, “Subsequently”? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it is “mandatory upon registration…”

MR TASHOBYA: Yes. In sub-clause 2, we propose re-drafting as follows: “A private company may at the time of registration of its articles or subsequently adopt and incorporate into its articles the provisions of the code of corporate governance contained in Table F.” The justification is to allow private companies that may desire to adopt the code of corporate governance to do so. This is re-drafting sub-clause 2 of clause 14. 

Thirdly, we propose to add new sub-clauses 4, 5 and 6, immediately after sub-clause 3 to read as follows: 

“4) 	A company that has adopted the code of corporate governance shall annually file a statement of compliance with the Registrar and the Capital Markets Authority.

5) 	A company that fails to comply with sub-section 4 of this section shall be liable to pay a fine of 50 currency points.

6) 	The minister shall, in consultation with the Capital Markets Authority by statutory instrument, amend Table F.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification is to ensure that companies that have adopted the code of corporate governance comply with it. And secondly, the code is a living document that contains principles that change from time to time. Therefore, it is necessary to keep updating it.

The next proposal is on clause 18 on page 28. The committee proposes that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 18 to read as follows: “Form of registration of a company - 

1)	A company shall be registered by filling out the particulars contained in Form 1 in the second schedule to this Act. 

2)	On filling of the form under sub-section 1, the Registrar shall register the company and assign to it a registration number, if the registry is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the Act.

3) 	On registration of the company, the Registrar shall issue a certificate signed by him or her that the company is incorporated and in the case of a limited liability company, that the company is limited.”

The justification is to ease company registration.

The next clause is clause 19 on page 18. We propose that sub-clause 1 should be deleted. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment of the clauses we have amended above.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am happy with the committee on clause 14 because of its importance. If we had left it like that, it would be very dangerous. 

But we are trying to cure many things here, to ensure good governance among other things. We have found out that a man sits at home; registers a company in one of his children’s names, who is a minor; and goes to the Registrar of Companies to register it. Or he can register a company using minors and they have a legal entity. 

In fact; this thing was common with the Butabika land. We got a problem with many officials in Government who had registered companies in the names of minors and the minors got land. 

How do we cure that? Is there no way, where in addition, we require that they provide pictures of the shareholders or directors of the company or registration from their areas of residence. Because you have gone ahead to agree with clause 19(3), which is very good, that, “Where a company or its directors are involved in tax evasion…” how can a baby be involved in tax evasion. The moment you remove the veil and find a baby, what do you do? How do we sort this out at registration? Don’t you think we need a provision for pictures? 

MR RUHINDI: If we read carefully through the Bill, you can find the relevant provisions. But I can answer from the general principles of company law. A minor can hold shares, but cannot participate in the management of the company, and to me that is very critical. A minor cannot participate in the management of the company. If you deny a minor from holding shares, you can easily be said to be even contravening the Constitution, on the issue of property rights. Because if I am bequeathing, God forbid, if I am making a will and I am about to demise, and I have one child who is two years old, is there any reason why I should not actually bequeath my property to my child. But of course as a diligent parent, you will make sure that that child is brought up by somebody who will raise them until the child is of age to take charge of management of the company and your property.

MR EKANYA: What the Leader of the Opposition is raising needs to be understood. We are talking in the context of corruption. What has been happening and what is happening outside there is that people incorporate companies in the names of minors, which they run and manage. You cannot trace them yet they are stealing public money and investing it in such companies, and yet the records in the Registrar of Companies indicate it is a minor. I know the process to follow if you want to transfer shares or make alterations. You have to go to the Chief Magistrates Court and declare your intentions. How do we cure that? 

The chairperson has talked of issues of currency points. Madam Chairperson, on the issue of fines and penalties, we need to have a statutory instrument so that every time, because of inflation or changes in prices, we do not limit the hand of court on this. The issue of currency points and fines should be put in a statutory instrument, which the minister can vary upon laying it on Table.

So, we need to find out how we can address this problem of people stealing public money and putting it in the names of minors. It is too much. When I was chairing the Committee on Local Government Accounts, there were companies with invisible directors. In the Registrar of Companies, you find that there are no records.

MR SEBUNYA: The Leader of Opposition has proposed that we attach photographs, but in case people have registered companies when the shareholders are offshore companies, how do you require an offshore company to have photographs of somebody from Barbados? So, it is quite difficult to implement. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give the House is that of the current system of land registration. When you go to either the register or transfer your land into another person’s name, they ask you to hand in that person’s photograph, and if they are minors, they ask you for their birth certificate so that they can be identified in case anything happens. But what is happening now in the registrar’s office is that even fake companies register and cannot be traced in case of fraudulent deals. We should emphasise this and have people’s places of residence, identification and photographs, it will cure the problem. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would like to stress to the Attorney-General that I have not said that minors should not have shares. Yes, they should have shares; they should even own property. But for as long as they are still minors, somebody holds their property in trust. That will also answer the issue that my brother, hon. Ssebunya Kasule has brought up. 

We got interested in one company, which was being compensated by the Government of Uganda and their company’s registered headquarters were on one of those Indian Ocean islands that I should be able to remember shortly. What happened was that we compensated them about $100 million - it is one of the sugar companies, anyway - and this country has a population of 61,000 people.  So, when we would pay them money, they would just go back to the island; back to London; and then to Uganda, and bring back that money in form of loans. They would come and say they were lending that company money and yet it was making losses. They would come back to us and make interest, which was also tax exempt. 

So, Madam Chair, why I am bringing this out is that if we brought pictures, definitely the proprietor of the company coming to register as a resident company to do business with us, will need to have their photographs archived by the Registrar of Companies. Otherwise, without a picture, we shall remain with a lot of fraud going on.  With that in mind, I would like to ask the Attorney-General that even if it is a baby, please have their photograph. 

MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you, Madam Chair. This is for the record; where we have reached in PAC with regard to Dura Cement, the same incident happened. There is a person called Rawal, who registered a company here and when you try to ask the PS of the Ministry of Energy whether he knows the particular person, his office and address, he can’t tell you. But while he was registering his company, he was based in South Africa, where we tried to locate them, but they are not there. So, the issue of companies registering - for example, Rawal was given a compensation of $60 million through the Dura Cement project to extract limestone for making cement. 

Now, what the Leader of the Opposition is saying is very important. How do you come to register a company and we don’t know who you are? This is very common, Madam Chair, even in schools, where for instance, there is a person who opened up a school, which is also registered as a company, and hired buildings. He failed to pay the teachers and rent for the buildings and was thrown out. The person is being looked for to pay taxes, teachers and rent, but he is nowhere to be seen because of the poor system of registration. When he got the company certificate, he went to the banks and got loans, and it is the landlord footing the bills because he used the buildings as his collateral.  So, when you talk about pictures, what is the fear? It is very important.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have remembered; the country is called Bermuda Triangle, which is one of the tax havens. Madam Chair, in order for one to open an account in a bank, they ask you for your utility bill and a picture to prove that you really exist. So, for a company, we should also ask for its utility bill, and the utility bill in this case will be this person who is a promoter of the company; to give so that we can identify the person. This will control the numerous openings and closures of companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, do you have a problem with it? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I absolutely do not have a problem with that, why should I? If the shareholders can be identified – in fact, one of the provisions in here is that after registration of your company, it will be given a number and in all communications on your letterheads, that number should appear. So, what is the problem of having in the registry the photographs, for instance, of the shareholders and it is particularised that this photograph is so and so, a shareholder. In fact, they are doing that in Lands now, and it is somehow helping the situation, by the way.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. We shall propose so. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Chair, I would like to propose that under clause 18, on registration, the shareholders/directors will attach their initialled current photographs and maybe you can ask them to bring the village identification card of their residential areas. This will help in case somebody misappropriates public resources like the TEAM Company, and so can easily be traced.

MR OROMAIT:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would, in addition to what the Leader of the Opposition has said, propose that the photographs be updated. I, for example, opened up an account in 1992, and when I came here in Kampala - of course they knew me in Jinja - I was denied  withdrawal of money because I had completely changed. So, I would propose that the photographs be updated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Periodically with the returns?

MR OROMAIT:  Of course, when you grow older or bigger, you tend to change. So, I propose that the photographs be updated with time. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, I think that could be put in the regulations, but of course, changes in individuals also - some people change in a very short time and for others it takes a very long time. But I think science may also - with the photographs, I think science can reveal where it belongs regardless of the time during which it was taken.

Of particular interest was the matter raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we should also have photographs of residences. I think that is very difficult and if you are talking about business people, we are changing addresses from time to time. People are renting; so, to ask that you furnish the details of the rented house you are in and next time, maybe they increase rent and you move away, I don’t think that is very important.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, much as I agree with the photograph idea, there is something else I am observing. There are types of twins who are identical and I want to tell you that I have ever had this situation in my village where identical twins - when they talk of identical and not fraternal twins, they have a lot of similarities to the extent that when one develops a pimple, even the other develops it.

There was a situation in my constituency some years back, when I was young, when one Kato would steal people’s food. When they would arrest him, he would say, “No, I was not the one; it was Wasswa who did it”; and people would leave them until both of them were eventually killed. So, it would be better that photographs be accompanied with thumb prints.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know we are moving into a situation where we shall have national identity cards, and where we shall have our finger prints taken. Already, most of you, I think, have got the financial cards and you cannot borrow money in this country anymore until you have produced that card which has your picture. I think that some of these things are being solved. Even when you are identical, the finger prints cannot be the same.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, we had proposed initials, which means a signature or thumb print, and we had included it.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, concerning the issue of photographs, I heard the Deputy Attorney General saying that he has no problem with it. I think for a small company there may not be any problem, but if you take the public companies for which we were buying shares on the stock exchange like Stanbic, how many photographs are you going to keep, and some of them have shares in East Africa as these companies are being traded over the borders. So, I do not know how you are going to keep track of these photographs. This is just a thought because I heard people talking about shareholders. Are you going to keep photographs of all the shareholders of Stanbic? Maybe we can get clarification on that issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, you have a very serious point. When it is a public company, it might have a million shareholders; that is true; but there are those who promote the company and that is why you have been seeing that in such cases, those who fill in the returns will be either the managing director or the company secretaries. That is better for them as they are the ones who were the first promoters. Even when they are opening the account for a public company, there will be pictures of either the company secretary and the managing director. So, do not worry about that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 11-20 be amended as proposed by the chairperson as well as by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 10-20, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 21-30, agreed to.

Clauses 31 to 40

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we delete clause 34. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment in respect of a one-member company. We also propose that clause 35 on page 45, sub-clause 3, should be re-drafted as follows: “Upon registration, a limited liability company shall add the initials ‘LTD’ or ‘limited’ at the end of its name.” The justification is for better reading.

Under clause 40 on page 47 - the head note, we propose that we insert the words “or limited” and two, we propose that in clause 40 we delete the reference to the word “minister” and replace it with the word “registrar”. The justification is to dispense with the use of the word “limited”. The registrar should be given the powers to supervise the operations of companies.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if the minister does a wrong thing, where does a person appeal because you said the registrar and now you have gone to the minister. Why haven’t you put court here in case I am not agreeable with the minister’s decision?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we are dealing with the names of companies.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, but a minister can refuse or give me a wrong name or delete my name. I must have where -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If the registrar declines, you want a point of appeal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I must have somewhere to go.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have seen that the minister has been given, in clause 40, a lot of responsibility to make regulations, to invoke - It says, “The minister may appoint or recommend a registrar, revoke licences on this, appoint or revoke the recommendation made to the minister” - I thought this would constitute part of the regulation or statutory instrument. 

We have been arguing that such statutory instruments or regulations must be laid here in case we want to query them, and where no issue is raised upon such a regulation or statutory instrument after maybe 14 or 21 working days, it becomes impossible. This is delegated legislation. So, Chairperson, you need to see how we can check regulations made by the minister so that the power is not abused.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We stand over clause 40? Okay, I put the question that clauses 31-39 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 31-39, as amended, agreed to.


Clauses 41 to 50

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that clause 41 should be moved and inserted immediately under clause 19(2). And the justification is to provide for a chronological arrangement of the provisions since both sections deal with the effect of registration of the Memorandum and Articles of Association.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 41 to 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 41 to 50

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we delete clause 51. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to clause 4. And in clause 55 on page 56, the committee proposes that in sub-clause (2) we delete the word “transaction” in line one. The justification is that it is repetitive; in other words, the use of the word “contract” suffices without the word “transaction”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, why are we deleting clause 51, yet under clause 4, we are not talking about a single company. So, these are contracts with a single member of the company. Now we are trying to define what will happen if it is a single company, and that is the import of this. Clause 4 deals with “any two or more”. So, we cannot delete clause 51 because it is not the one dealing with a single member. So, this one must stay; I hope committee chairperson, you are seeing my argument. Clause 4 on page 19 says, “Any two or more persons…” This is for two or more. And clause 51 is talking of a contract for a single member of a company. Since you have agreed to have a single member, then this should stay. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we amended clause 4. So, whether it is a single member or more, it is still a private company.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at this Bill, but I have not found where the duties and responsibilities of companies are being introduced. And yet you know that most of these companies transfer their costs to future generations. I would like to introduce a clause where we create a company social security fund, whereby if you register a company, a certain percentage of the profits is paid to that fund to restore the destruction of the environment. Or, if the company goes under – like when a commercial bank is opened, Bank of Uganda requires that it sets aside some money so that in case you fail to perform or you are liquidated, it will be used to pay customers. 

You also know that companies worldwide abuse women’s rights, like the one in Bugolobi; the environment is being destroyed and at the end of the day, companies have a very flimsy action of corporate social responsibility of advertising in the pretext of helping the community. In other countries, companies are called upon to create a fund which is jointly managed by the companies and government. That way, people can have recourse in order to reduce the costs being transferred to future generations. So, I want the committee chairperson to think about it and maybe we can re-commit “duties and responsibilities of companies”.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Ekanya has a good point, but I think this is not the home for his ideas. He needs to think of another legislation through which his views – because we are talking about formation, management of companies and so forth, but you are talking of social responsibility, which should be in other legislation. And then you may have to tap into the resources of these companies – that is a different legislation.

MR EKANYA: If the Registrar of Companies dissolves a company and that company has assets, for example, or if it was hon. Ruhindi’s company, but he did not have children or declare next of kin, where does such money go? We need to create a fund where such money will go. Hon. Ruhindi may be died in a plane crash (God forbid) and did not give these details that money should go to a pool. On the other hand, a company may be liquidated, but has a lot of debts, there should be a fund. You need to think about it because I am looking at clause 53, which allows a director to bind the company – there should be a clause here that we need to put.

MR TASHOBYA: I just want to re-echo what the Attorney-General said in response to hon. Ekanya’s point. I think you cannot have that type of legislation in a general law like the Company Formation and Management of Companies. If such a position were to be incorporated, it would be put in a law relating to a specific company. If, for example, you are talking about an airlines company – you know the industry of airlines – the law about people dying in a plane and so forth will be put in a specific law. If it is a bank and people’s money gets lost - those would be put under specific loans regarding those aspects you are talking about. I do not think this law is the right place to include your proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you talking about corporate social responsibility? 

MR EKANYA: What I am saying is this: We have thousands of companies in this country; there is a clause here talking of corporate governance. The principle of corporate governance demands very high standards, but because the public is too weak to sue companies, you find that companies do not comply with corporate governance. I want to give you a case, Madam Chairperson, regarding companies that were licensed in this country to process fish. They caused a lot of damage to Lake Victoria. What Tanzania did to all companies processing fish in Lake Victoria was to introduce a fish cess in order to replenish the fish stocks –(Interjection)- No, I am giving you a case. So, in this case, what some countries do is this: If you register a company and you are making profits, there is a fund to which you contribute money. So, if you cut trees, destroy the environment or introduce chemicals by bringing old computers and old refrigerators that are causing sicknesses like Cancer in this country, the government and the people of this country have recourse where they can get funds to restore what we call transferred costs to future generations.  This is the best place to put it, so that if hon. Ekanya you are going to register a company, when you are filing your returns, a certain percentage a year on your tax goes to that fund which Government can use to reduce the cost being transferred to the future generation.

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Tashobya was whispering something to me here and I want to say it out loud. Why do you target companies when you are making that kind of fundamental legislation? When you are making such legislation, it is a policy issue and you look at all forms of organisations. You look at all people and you make a policy, and you say, you must make a contribution to this matter. This is why I am saying your proposal is good, but it is not in the right form. Please look for other avenues and vehicles through which your ideas can be properly channelled.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: For instance, under the communications sector, all these telecom companies must pay a certain amount of money to the Uganda Communications Commission for the Rural Communication Fund. So, now if you catch them here, you catch them there and everywhere. The idea is very good, but I think we should find a good form for it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is a good idea. But if we try to bring this, then it will be very expensive for people to register a company. They could easily run away. But I understand his idea. If you look at table F, we can introduce something there and say that before a company is registered, it must have maybe a NEMA certificate if you want. You can look for a way. I think let us study it further and by the time we  conclude the law, we can find how to deal with those issues which deal with social responsibility like destroying the environment. I think we shall do it.

But Madam Chairperson, still on 51, there is a reason why they brought 51. I have read through it. If you read 51(1) it is trying to separate the dealings of a one-man company from the owner. If you read very well, it is to avoid this thing of assuming the company is mine and I am in it. You have seen it, it is saying, “...for their transactions, apart from normal business, it must be in writing.” This is the reason why this 51 is here. The reason is to separate the owner of that company from the business. 

So, Madam Chair, I would plead with the Chairperson to allow 51 to stay because it is trying to make sure that the owner is separated from the one-man company.  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you Madam Chair. Maybe the Chairperson should look into what is binding a company in good faith because when you read that, “The power of the board of directors to bind the company,” that is clause 53, “The power of the board of directors to bind the company or authorise others to do so in favour of a company dealing with that company, in good faith shall not be remitted by that company’s memorandum.” I do not know what the yard stick for good faith is, because most of the companies, if you are dealing with them, you will encourage folding because somebody can do it and he says I am doing it in good faith and then - I do not know what the yardstick is for good faith when you are binding the company.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you very strong on this issue? On 51? Is it fatal?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we are still consulting with the Attorney-General but maybe for the moment, we can stand over it as we consult with him.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clauses 50 and 52 to 60 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 50, 52 to 60 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses, 50, 52 to 60, agreed to.

Clauses 61 to 70, agreed to.

Clauses 71 to 80, agreed to.

Clauses 81 to 90, agreed to.

Clauses 91 to 100, agreed to.

Clauses 101 to 110

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would propose that we take 100 to 105 because the next one is registration of charges from 106. Maybe we deal with that. I am asking because I do not agree with some of these charges.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to take 101 to 105?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That one is okay because they are under the same heading. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clauses 101 to 105 are okay. You have issues on 106?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 101 to 105 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 101 to 105, agreed to.

Clauses 106 to 110

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it says, “Registering a charge.” Why should you charge somebody when, for example, I go to the bank and I am asking for money, and I am registering my debenture, they always charge me Stamp Duty and that is final? Why should I again pay more money to the registrar for registering my debenture? So, I propose that these charges should be removed because we are already paying Stamp Duty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Attorney-General why do you want the charges to be registered? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson I was being bothered with a clause here. I would appreciate if hon. Nandala-Mafabi restates his concern.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My concern is that there should be no charge on registration, whether I am registering my debenture or creating an instrument to borrow money. This is because I have paid Stamp Duty. Why should I pay the Registrar of Companies more money? We are making the transaction more expensive.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, he is saying that, for instance, if he has paid Stamp Duty to the land office he should not be required to pay again for registering that charge.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson I can see that this section applies to sub-rule 3. The charge is for the purpose of securing any issue of debentures; it is just in sub-rule 3. It is listed for the purpose of registration of these charges.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members the charge here as defined is a form of security for payment of a debt or performance of an obligation consisting of the right of a creditor to receive payment out of some specific fund or out of the proceeds of the realisation of specific property, and includes a mortgage. It is a security.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think my reading of 106 is that this is ordinary business practice. If you mortgage your property, for example, and this property belongs to a company, that has to be registered with the Registrar of Companies as a charge on the assets of the company.  It does not mean that you pay any specific - this particular clause does not create an additional financial obligation on the company. It only creates a requirement that you register mortgages and debentures if they have any bearing on the assets of the company. Once you have paid Stamp Duty, that is sufficient evidence of payment; then you are required to go to the Registrar of Companies and have this entered on the record. I would request the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw his objection.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, having heard from the Chairperson of Rules, I have withdrawn with costs. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that clauses 106 - 110 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 106 - 110, agreed to.

Clauses 111 to 120

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification. We have not enacted the Anti-Trust Legislation in this country - I wish the minister could listen to me - and as such -(Interjections)- yes, Anti-Trust Legislation to avoid illegal monopoly. You find one company dealing in import; they deal in shipping; they deal in clearing and forwarding; they deal in warehousing; and they deal in transportation; under one name, and that has been a problem for URA to compute tax. So, because I am thinking, I need you to guide me; under what clause can we take some temporary measures as we wait for the Anti-Trust Legislation? Is it under 116 or which clause, because this is very dangerous. Kenya has moved very far and I even remember the President directed that action be taken so that there is fair competition to comply with world trade rules.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, hon. Ekanya continues to come out with very good ideas not meant for this Bill. Otherwise, we shall actually find ourselves importing everything into this Bill and we shall never finish. I think the best will be to ask the Minister of Trade and Industry to expedite the enactment of the Competition Law. 

It is Anti-Trust I know, but the Bill under or being drafted is the Competition Law. Let me tell you why it was not been expedited; because it was one of those meant to be expedited together with the Consumer Protection Bill. It is because the East Africa Community Secretariat started developing an East African Competition Law and I think they are thinking - I cannot actually speak for them - but I think their thinking was, let us wait for that one which is actually at a regional level, which will take care of our concerns too. That is a good question to be put to the Minister of Trade. But to bring the provisions of that law into this Bill is really a bit misplaced.

MR EKANYA: Publication of names. I have just given you an example. We are trying to resolve a question of companies confusing consumers. In 118, you are saying, “Shall pay and keep painted its name on the outside of every office or place in which its business is carried, in a conspicuous position in eligible letters”.

The issue is you have your aunt, she is only looking for one service from this company, but you find this company deals in five activities. It is called Ekanya and Co. but dealing in five activities. You move to this office and they say, “No, go to this”. How do we resolve that? It is a serious matter. Kenya has moved very far in resolving this and it has helped Government to raise substantial amounts of money; so, a name dealing in what?

THE SPEAKER: What problem do you have with the name?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have said you have - I do not want to mention the companies, but you have these companies dealing in import, they deal in shipping, they deal in warehousing, they deal in transportation and they deal in clearing; one company in one office. So, you have TT (Uganda) Ltd. If the purpose is to make sure that you know TT Uganda, you are looking for a given service, but you have here just TT (Uganda) Ltd; we need to have detailed information, on what this company deals in and even to help URA auditors to stop issues of fraud. Let us go into detail here so that whatever service you are offering in those premises is known even for auditing books so that you do not use one name to deal in many things and then you evade taxes. You know those taxes, hon. Freddie Ruhindi.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want to say Ekanya Enterprises of fishing, import, export, agriculture, processing; something like that?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I think if you register a company, you put the object in the memorandum of understanding. Those things are always listed; what your company is intending to do, and when you separate them, somebody is taking advantage of one company. How many objectives will one company have? It will be cumbersome for companies who are trying to do the same business in the same way to reduce the cost for business to move. When you say that I am in clearing and forwarding and if I have transport, I should register another company; I would list it in the memorandum of association that this is the business I am going to do and I register it under that same company name. I do not see any problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 111-120 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 111 to 120, agreed to.

Clauses 121 to 130

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes amendments to clause 126 by deletion of the same and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment to clause 4.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 121-130 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 121 to 130, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 131 to 140

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes amendments to clause 136 on page 113, by inserting a new sub-clause 3 immediately after sub-clause to read as follows:

“In addition to sub-clause, where the registrar deems it fit, he or she may strike off a company from the registrar for failure to file returns under this section in the prescribed manner”. The justification is to empower the registrar to strike off companies from the registers that do not file returns. 

We also propose that we add a new clause immediately after clause 136 to read as follows: “Dormant companies - (1) Where the company is dormant, the directors shall notify the registrar within 15 working days from the date the dormancy starts and shall be exempted from filing returns for a period of 12 months-  that is one year. (2) If after the expiry of 12 months, the company has not filed the annual returns, the registrar shall require the company to file a statement of solvency and show cause why the company should not be struck off the register.”

The justification is to exempt dormant companies from filing returns and to empower the registrar to strike them off after the 12 months.

Lastly, clause 140 on page 117; “(i) In sub-clause (1) of clause 140, the committee proposes that the word “every” is deleted at the beginning of the provision and replaced with the word “public.” (ii) We propose that we insert a new sub-clause (2), immediately after sub-clause (1), to read as follows:
 (2) A private company may at the requisition of a member hold an annual general meeting.”

The justification is that annual general meetings of private companies should be held at the requisition of members of the company at any time. I think this is a matter which was raised by the honourable Leader of the Opposition. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, under clause 136(2), the registrar has powers to force somebody to pay. It is clear that if you do not file returns, you pay. If you do not file for dormancy, then you will take it as a period you have not filed and they will compute; whether it takes six years to come and you will file it; the payment is there. So, we have a fine and we do not have any problem with this. There is no need for us to ask the registrar to delete. This is one way the registrar can raise resources and enforce compliance.

Dormancy can be for a period. For example, a company – there is recess – you cannot spend 12 months only. Recess can be for five years, six years, but as long as a company is in dormancy, there is no reason to file nil returns. There is no reason. It can then be redundant and say, “I have filed nil returns; I have not traded.” Again, it is up to the company if it does not want to continue filing the nil returns to declare that I want to be de-registered; to be struck off the list. This clause of giving the registrar power to de-register is very terrible and can be used badly. Since there is a remedy for it, that he can get payment under clause 136, I believe this is sufficient enough to allow the registrar to move on. These new clauses which you are bringing are not necessary.

In clause 140, where they are inserting that the company “may.” It should not be “may” because the moment you are going to file returns when you are alone - to sign your returns; it will be assumed that is the annual general meeting. So, there is no reason. The moment you are doing this, you are trying to tell them that if you do not sign the returns, you are free because you may sign or not. I would say, even if it is a private company, it should have its annual general meeting or a special general meeting. Of course they are not by law, but an annual general meeting is by law at least for signing accounts, which they will take to the Registrar of Companies. 

MR TASHOBYA: Well, on the second point, if I may start with it; I do not know why the Leader of the Opposition insists that to sign annual returns and accounts, there must be a meeting. They can be signed without a meeting. Yes. My position is that you can sign the returns because if you are talking about a meeting, there are procedures. You have to serve notices. There are procedures of convening and conducting a meeting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Annual general meeting.

MR KAKOOZA: I think it is very important that if a company is to be really credible - if you do not file a return - I am finding it very difficult. If you are not forced to do it and you are going to transact business with public funds and other companies and you are saying, “you may or not”; how will people know that the company which they are dealing with is credible? 

If they force you to file returns or accounts, anybody dealing with your company will know that these accounts are proper and audited because here, even auditors may fail to audit your company to know that your company is liable and trusted. If you leave it and say, “I am not forced to do it,” the auditor will find it very difficult to audit your company because it is at your discretion. But when you are forced to file returns and accounts are signed, the company’s financial credibility is known and it is put on a list that it is credible rather than dealing with a company which is not trusted and its accounts are not signed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR KAKOOZA: I am proposing that a company should be forced. It should be mandatory not “may.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam, there is no dispute on this. If you say the registrar can de-register; a company can be involved in bad things because it knows if you do not file the returns, you will be automatically de-registered and this is a company which has committed crime. So, we should not give them way. 

So, clause 136 - for purposes of safeguarding the public, the people who deal with the third party, should stay as it is. They should comply and ask them to file returns. If they do not file, they are punished by penalty, otherwise, I will do something wrong like not pay URA and I say, “I am unaware they will de-register me.” If they de-register me, when you come I will say, “I am not on the register of companies.” That is what you must be careful about. That is number one. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, what do you think? Do you withdraw your proposal? 

MR RUHINDI: I think this provision is a little bit double-edged. The submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi is very good, but also, if you look at our register, we see dormant companies for 50, 40 years. Maybe we stand over this and provide a period of time. You may have been in limbo for five, 10 years; then we can consider de-registering and also make sure that any de-registered company is published in the official Gazette and in our local dailies so that everybody is put on notice. We can stand over it and think alongside those lines.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stand over 136? Okay, honourable members, I put the question -

MR EKANYA: 132 - and we recommit that aspect of statutory instrument that the Rules Committee handles, and bring it here so that we have a timeframe – so that a minister doesn’t wake up like that minister of works did to issue statutory instruments on the transport sector, which has had very serious impact. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members. I put the question – 

MR EKANYA: 132 and 133 because it seems we are legislating for some Commonwealth companies that are incorporated in Uganda. I know some of them, like UMEME – let me tell you, if you do not know them - DFCU and others. Now it seems you are making special provision for them here; why? Are Ugandan companies also having special consideration in UK? That is in clauses 133 and 132.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course the Commonwealth has historical links to Uganda. But that brings that question, what about the American companies and others?

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want clarification on deregistered companies. In case you registered a company and now it is one member company; and you go abroad for about ten years. When you came back, can you re-register it and start again?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification from the chair regarding this: “An instrument of transfer of a share registered in a branch registrar shall be taken to be transfer of property situated outside Uganda, and unless executed in any part of Uganda, shall be exempt from Stamp Duty chargeable in Uganda”. 

Madam Chairperson, my concern is that there are Government properties situated outside this country; how are they treated. Like in the UK, there are properties being abused and you are aware of that. But also, there are private properties of companies that have branches here. How do we differentiate between them?

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Ekanya needs an explanation, which I need to martial out, and answer it out at a later stage. So, I request Madam Chairperson that clauses 132 and 133 –(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, a branch register is actually defined under 130. So, to understand 132, we have to go back to 130 and it says: “A company having share capital may, if authorised by the articles, cause to be kept in any part of the Commonwealth outside Uganda a branch register of members resident in that part of the Commonwealth and this act shall be called a branch registry”. 

So, 132 now deals with shares that are registered outside Uganda. They can in no way attract Stamp Duty in Uganda; they relate to transactions outside our jurisdiction. And the presumption is that there is a tax regime that governs that jurisdiction. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this can only work where we have double taxation agreements. If there is no double taxation agreement, then this cannot work because we are talking about shares. You will make people open up companies in Bermuda because Bermuda is a Commonwealth country. Then they will come here and say, “We are from Bermuda and there we do not pay Stamp Duty”, and then you will have a problem. I think, as the Attorney General said, you need to reflect more on it beginning from now. Probably by tomorrow, we will have a better idea.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want to stand over 132 and 133?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. In fact, Madam Chair, what hon. Kevinah has just talked about – much as you gave the registrar authority to deregister, you must also find a way of dealing with those who come back after dormancy. Do they change the name; that should be worked on? 

And also, these currency points are too high. Charging me half a million for delaying to buy a return when I have even been dormant is too much. You may cause people to open up other companies instead. It should not be this punitive. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we stand over 132 and 133. I put the question that clause 131 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 134 and 135, agreed to.

Clauses 137 to 140, agreed to.

Clauses 141 to 150

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that on page 118, clause 141; that clause should be deleted. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment. 

And Madam Chair, clause 142 on page 119; the committee proposes to be deleted and the justification is that it is also a consequential amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 141 to 150 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 141 to 150, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 151 to 160

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that those clauses do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 161 to 170

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 161 to 170 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 161 to 170, agreed to.

Clauses 171 to 180

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 171 to 180 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 171 to 180, agreed to.

Clauses 181 to 190

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 181 to 190 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 181 to 190, agreed to.

Clauses 191 to 200

MR MULINDWA: I need clarification from the chairperson. As we amend the Companies Act, certain foreign companies have invested in Uganda. Some times, Ugandans are not allowed to get shares in these companies. For some political reasons, these companies have pillaged a lot of money and have left our country poor. Like at one time, MTN got a lot of money and our economy got problems. So, Madam Chairperson, I want to know from the chairperson of legal where have we captured something to contain foreign companies allowing our own people to invest before they register to operate in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause is that related to, hon. Mulindwa?

MR MULINDWA: Madam Chairperson, I asked for clarification because we may finish and yet nothing has been captured anywhere in this law to force foreign companies to allow our people to have a big part of the shares in companies, so that when they are to take away the profits, they do not affect our economy.

MR RUHINDI: Actually, what you are proposing is prohibited. (Laughter) It is prohibited to mandatorily require companies to have a number of local shareholders by operation of the law, and we do not want it. I think his idea is different; maybe I did not get it. I think his idea is that if foreign companies come here, do we have a law to require participation of local investors in those companies? My answer is no. 

We can only promote and encourage joint ventures by way of marketing our own business acumen, so that these foreign investors can be attracted to who we are and do business with us. To require, by operation of the law, local participation is more of sending away these investors. One idea why we are even actually proposing this one man or one woman company is because we had conmen in Uganda – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the minister is speaking as if we are living on the moon. The point that the colleague is raising is fundamental. Whereas you are trying to comply with world trade rules like EPAs, to which Uganda is not a signatory - the WTO negotiations are still on - most of these foreign companies are subsidised by their government. When they come here, they find companies of the likes of Mulwana and hon. Fred Ruhindi limping and yet for them, they come with all the support from their countries. So, they reduce costs and they make huge profits while our companies here collapse. That is one of the reasons that East African countries have not signed EPAs because they want us to open our markets and they come here with everything.

So, the point that the colleague is making is–(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I just wanted to take over from the point that you are making, that some of those foreign companies that invest here are subsidised by their governments. Is it in your estimation, therefore, that those companies that are subsidised by their governments would accept or would be willing to take on locals as co-shareholders or co-investors in ventures that have been subsidised by their countries? 

MR RUHINDI: In addition, for as long as these companies employ our people, pay taxes and fulfil all other obligations under our relevant laws, then that is fine. To require them to have local participation to say that, for instance –(Mr Odoi-Oywelowo rose_)-You want to help me on the Constitution? Okay, information from the honourable chair.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, Article 26 (1) of the Constitution says, “Every person has a right to own property either individually or in association with others.” This association cannot be state-enforced but has to be voluntary. When you are talking about companies, you are basically talking about shares which are property. So, how can you force any company to co-opt the citizens of Uganda? It would make a lot of political sense but it does not make any legal sense. I thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you. I would like to seek clarification. In some countries, they control what we call capital flight. I do not know whether in the Bill, there is something related to capital flight. Many companies here, the moment they are registered and start work here, they do not leave anything to this country and they just go with whatever they have gained from their business. I do not know whether we could have some controls in as far as capital flight is concerned. In other countries, capital flight is controlled to enable the economy to move on well.

THE CHAIRPESON: I think that is a policy issue. Like in Ethiopia, you cannot do business unless you have gone into partnership with the government. If you do not want, they just tell you to get lost. I think China is a big partner. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you. To clearly bring out this point, as you are saying, in some countries the owner of the company may be the executive director but then below him citizens of that particular country are given responsibility within the company. Now, hon. Ruhindi, the Attorney-General, is saying that our people are employed, but at what level? A man like Mr Birigwa, for example, brought Celtel to Uganda but because our companies’ law was not guiding or giving us that legal entity, he left and yet he brought a company where we saw him as the MD of Celtel by then. Within a period of time, we saw that Birigwa, who had brought the company, was thrown out. So, when hon. Mulindwa from Buwekula brings that point, it is very important.

Secondly, let us look at Sudhir who is a proprietor of hotels here. You find that even the Director of Imperial Royale Munyonyo is an Indian in Uganda and yet the executive director is Sudhir. In Crane Bank, you will find that almost all the people who are managing the bank are Indians. That must be captured in this Bill; citizens must have a role to play. We have the executive director who brought the company but then, where are the administrative structures where Ugandans take part in this? That is where we can see realities of income from these companies.

As I wind up, as a primary school teacher we even teach this topic in P7 - how Libya and Nigeria are losing their oil money. It is because of foreign people who come to drill and after drilling, they do not teach the natives how to carry out the mining and they go with all the income. That is very common. 

MR RUHINDI: I want to say, Madam Chairperson, that the views expressed by colleagues are not entirely misplaced but are misplaced as far as this Bill is concerned. 

You rightly pointed out that these are policy issues. We have reports here emanating from our committee on the economy and the minister here occasionally makes statements on the economy. Those are matters we can discuss when we are generally discussing those matters of the economy. But to say that in the Companies Bill – what about other forms of organisations and entities, shall we recall them and then put them in here? 

You can have a policy which can be translated into a specific law in whatever way. You can even put it in our investment code. We can also put it in the finance Bills. Actually, the Finance Bill always captures many of those issues and you know that. You are the shadow minister now, but you used to chair that committee; in terms of putting that proposal in here, no. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Ruhindi worked for the Uganda Investment Authority and knows very well that there was an Investment Act in the 1960s to the effect that any company which comes to invest here will only take away 50 percent of its returns and the rest should be invested here. We removed that, and the issue the members are raising is a serious one. 

If you go to the commercial banks, the lowest each commercial bank made here was Shs 40 billion in the last financial year. So, if they are 12, how much is that? That is Shs 480 billion, which was taken. I am just giving an example, but they are more than that. If you go to MTN - In fact, at the time when we were paying service fee on airtime of Shs 18,000 per month, that was being collected at the end of the month because it had nothing and they were taking it. 

So, what members are raising is that there are companies which come here and remove money from the economy, which should be helping the people. These companies first of all are registered in Uganda, in whichever way it is done. So, how can we fix it in a law to say that now that you have come, how do we handle you? If you come, according to our law we shall register you, and these are our conditions.

Madam Chair, the capital flight in Uganda in form of profits is on the increase, and it is so high because we do not have a law. You can even carry it in hard cash because we do not have a limitation on how much money you can carry in cash from Uganda. That is why you see the pressure on the economy, and the moment there is pressure on the economy it is the local ones who suffer because they are here and have nowhere to go. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to propose that maybe we have a Private Members Bill on that issue and we capture all the issues comprehensively, bring the motion here and put pressure on the government. If they do not move, then we attack their statutory Bills. So, can we task the shadow minister for trade? 

MR RUHINDI: With a motion of that nature, I do not know whether that member will not have problems with Article 93 because, in my opinion, it has serious implications on the resources of the country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Really, hon. Minister, for a Bill to say that if you are coming to invest here, ensure that you give employment to nine Ugandans like they do in Egypt; what has that got to do with Article 93? They are taking the money, how are they affecting Article 93? The money is going away; it is not even in your budget.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we have come a long way. There are issues to be addressed and answered. By the way, personally, I also have an issue in respect of that matter. Why was there a paradigm shift from that law he is talking about of the 1960s to the one of 1991? What happened with the liberalisation? We had the liberalisation policy, we had privatization, and so many policies. To think in terms of that Bill, I am not objecting. To me, let the private member go ahead with the Bill and then maybe we shall address it at an appropriate stage, but I can see it has serious implications. 

To me, the best would be to charge the Ministry of Finance to come with a statement on that critical matter as to why it happens the way it happens without controls. They can come with an explanation and after that, we may then think in terms of a Private Members Bill where necessary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the Private Members Bill is preceded by a motion, which is debated. The authority to bring the Bill comes from this House; we debate it and if the House thinks what you are saying is decent, we proceed with the Bill. Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 191 to 200 do stand part of the Bill.

Clauses 191 to 200, agreed to.

Clauses 201 up to 250

MR EKANYA: I am requesting the chairperson to clarify. We have companies in this country not meeting targets, companies where Government has issued concession. We issue concession to those companies and directors are getting abnormal pay salaries and they are not meeting targets; they are declaring losses. The directors are getting abnormal pay, what in other countries would be criminal pay. How do we take care of that? Article 218(a) talks about the amount of directors’ emoluments, directors or past directors’ pensions, any compensation to the directors, the amount to be shown; how do we regulate the amount that is paid to these directors that constitutes part of the laws and is transferred to us? 

I just want to give the example of Umeme. Do you know how much the directors get? I can give you another one, Dfcu; the Government of Uganda is a shareholder and some commonwealth company is active. I know a number of them. The directors are getting abnormal pay and at the end of the day, they are declaring losses and we give subsidies. Now in here, we are just saying the payments to the directors will be declared, whether they get Shs 1 billion – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, are we going on up to clause 220?

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are no amendments up to clause 250. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Madam Chairperson, on what hon. Ekanya is raising, I think if we go again for governance purposes, I do not know if that has been addressed in table F. A company can be formed and the directors incur the expenses and let a company make losses so that there are no dividends to declare to the shareholders. If they are working for public companies, like Umeme, for example - what Umeme is doing is that they are now taking our money early enough, which should have been in dividends - how do we handle that? Even the cost goes to us, the owners of the company. 

I think we should maybe put up an independent commission to determine, for example, the fees of the directors, which should be approved by the registry. This is because these guys will steal from us, from our public companies, let alone the ones which are private. We are talking of public companies. With private companies, the owner is private and he can draw his money even if he goes bankrupt. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, all of you remember the scandal that took place in the USA before Mr Barrack Obama became the President. There were these companies where the chief executives were paying themselves bonuses. The same thing was being done by public companies. At the end of the day, many companies made losses, which almost made the economy of the USA get into problems. They had to borrow from Middle East and China. We need to avoid that. We should leave it open that directors declare what they are paid no matter whether it will be Shs 1billion or Shs 2billion. Maybe we need to stand over that for the time being.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But will this give an answer to everything in all the sectors?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what we are trying to cure is – by the way, what they can do is to get money from the company in form of salaries and appear as if they are the ones lending it to the company to earn interest. These are some of the things that have been taking place.

I would like to propose that we stand over the remuneration of the directors as we think through how best to protect public companies. We will also be able to look at situations where they lend to companies, because it also talks about money lenders; it says here that a company should not borrow from a money lender. Also, the director should not lend money to the company unless that transaction is well documented. Otherwise, they will be getting interest from the company yet it is supposed to lend money for business purposes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood. I put the question that clauses 201 to 217 do stand part of the Bill – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chairperson, I have an issue to put across. According to the report, the committee is proposing an insertion of the words, “disqualification of directors.” Look at (v) which says, “A person shall be disqualified from acting as a director if he or she fails to allow the company to trade while insolvent.”

I find this proposed insertion vague because when a company is insolvent, it does not trade. Second, I notice that the phrasing does not hold water. Could the chairman of the committee give some clarification on that?

MR TASHOBYA: I am sorry, Madam Chair, but also grateful to hon. Muwuma for coming up with this. I had still been caught up in the matters that the honourable Leader of the Opposition raised. 

As it is stated, the committee proposed the insertion of new clauses immediately after clause 201 and the Bill is to be renumbered. The proposals are in respect of the duties of the directors and states thus: 
“The duties of directors shall include the following: 

(i) 	act in a manner that promotes the success of the business of the company; 
(ii) 	exercise a degree of skill and care as a reasonable person would do looking after their own business; 
(iii) 	act in good faith in the interest of the company as a whole, and this shall include treating all shareholders equally, avoiding conflict of interest, declaring any conflicts of interest, not making personal profits at the company’s expense or not accepting benefits that will compromise him or her from the third parties; and 
(iv) 	ensure compliancy with this Act and any other law.”

The justification is to specifically provide for the duties of directors.

Madam Chair, in the same vein, the committee proposes a clause for disqualification of directors to read thus: 
“A person shall be disqualified from acting as a director if he or she fails to: 
(i) 	keep proper accounting records; 
(ii) 	prepare and file accounts; 
(iii) 	send returns to the registrar;
(iv) 	file tax returns and pay tax; or 
(v) 	allows a company to trade while insolvent.”

The justification is to provide for grounds under which a person may be disqualified as a director. We further propose that a person disqualified as a director shall not: 
(i) 	be a director of any company; 
(ii) 	act like a director even without being formally appointed 
(iii)	 influence the running of a company through the directors; 
(iv) 	be involved in the formation of a new company; and 
(v) 	act in a way that promotes a company.” 

The justification is to provide limitations for a person disqualified from acting as a director.

We also propose that a person should be disqualified from acting as a director for a period of three years. The justification is to provide the maximum time within which a person can be disqualified from acting as a director.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Tashobya, though he has read it, has not seen my argument. I was saying that (v) should maybe stand alone because if you critically look at its phrasing, you realise that it is vague.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, even if that clause were to stand alone, I am still debating about this. You say that if a director allows a company to trade while insolvent, such a director should be disqualified. I know that in this country we have had situations where some Government companies, like the defunct Uganda Airlines, were more or less insolvent. At that time maybe it was Government policy or otherwise to maintain those companies even though they were insolvent. So, are you saying that such a director should be disqualified even when he does so under directives?

The other one is on page 15 where we are also looking at the qualifications of a person to be appointed director. We are also saying that a person disqualified as a director shall stay disqualified for a period of three years. Aren’t we putting into law things that are very difficult to enforce? Who is going to follow up on these, especially with private companies? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Ideally, it should be the work of the registrar of companies to monitor all these, and that is why companies have to file annual returns. If, for example, they say that hon. Kabajo Kiwalabye was disqualified last year and next year they see your name as a director, the registrar should pay attention to that because that his work.

On insolvency, if you are insolvent but you hold out that you are okay as a company, you create obligations that the company cannot handle.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I am not a lawyer but I know that insolvency is declared by courts of law. So, assume that maybe Uganda Airlines was going under, this is declared by courts of law. So, hon. Kiwalabye, it is not pronounced on the streets but by the courts, and the registrar must follow what takes place in the courts of law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose that a new clause be inserted as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 201 to 217, agreed to.

Clause 218

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stand over 218?

MR RUHINDI: Sincerely speaking, I was not comfortable with the proposal to stand over clause 218. This is because the discomfort among those raising the issue of salaries is a matter that can regulated without this Bill. By now, we have actually seen the full text and context of this Bill; to begin putting provisions of regulating salaries of directors in this Bill is anachronistic, to say the least. I believe that hon. Ekanya legitimately, and in good faith, has in mind companies where, for instance, government has shares and maybe government has not come out openly to take action.

Where are the concerns of a company addressed? They are addressed at managerial level, at policy level, in meetings of boards of directors and in general meetings. Actually, matters of a company are handled principally in a general meeting. In this Bill, there are even rights of minorities. So, to begin regulating salaries in a Bill of this nature is not proper. I do not think this is a matter to be stood over.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What you are trying to say is that directors’ salaries must be determined by the annual general meeting. First of all, before it is questioned, there must be something put in the guidelines. What we could say is that emoluments of directors must be approved by the AGM. They are the ones who should determine whether you get Shs1 million or not. That is in the case of a public company. In case of a government company, it is the government to determine the salaries or emoluments of directors. 

I would like to propose that we insert sub clause (11), that emoluments of directors shall be determined by the annual general meeting for the case of public companies, and for government companies by the government. The justification is to avoid directors deciding their own pay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t we now actually managing companies by doing this? We are now managing companies from here by law. Hon. Odoi, what do you think?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I was thinking to myself that the fears of the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Ekanya have been taken care of by the new proposed clause 201, especially if you look at (iii)(d). In (iii)(d), we impose a duty on the directors not to make profits at the expense of the company. If you are being paid a disproportionately high remuneration by a company that is not earning much, it will mean that your services are not commensurate with the pay. Therefore, you are making profits at the expense of the company. I am not sure that this does not take care of the concerns of the honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

But that said – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I am kind of getting convinced. So, what is the sanction? I will give an example of Umeme declaring losses and yet we give them subsidies and the directors get abnormal pay. In this case, what is the sanction? We are giving them subsidies and they are not meeting their targets but making losses. So, what is the sanction?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The sanctions follow immediately thereafter. If you do not keep proper accounts, if you do not prepare proper returns, if you do not pay taxes, you are disqualified as a director. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to go to your earlier guidance that matters of remuneration of directors and company employees are management issues. I do not think those are matters of legislation. They should come in a subsidiary legislation. I do not think they should come into this Act. I think these are management issues which we should not legislate on.

MR SSEBAGALA: Yes, they are management issues but we have experience, as hon. Ekanya has said, with regard to Umeme. We cannot just say they are management issues unless we propose other avenues that can lead us to what we want. We cannot just say these are management issues so Umeme should behave the way it wants to behave. I think we can find a way on how best to address the issues we have found out. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I can see us going to a proposal, which was in the Constitution, about a board for remuneration of public officers. I do not think we should disturb this Bill because it is broader. I do not know how we can force the Companies Act on all the sectors.

MR MULINDWA: Madam Chairperson, why are we sitting here? Why are we discussing this Bill? I think we are discussing it for purposes of regularisation. If we keep closing our eyes because this is administrative, we might end up making something that is deformed. I think the purpose of us sitting here is to regularise the companies so that they operate well and we avoid problems within companies. We may have to move a little bit into the administrative function if it is one of the causes of the companies’ failure to prosper. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This law itself is talking about companies not giving loans to directors. Clause 205 is saying, “Prohibition of loans and guarantees to directors”. If it can prohibit them from getting money through loans, what about salaries? They can avoid getting loans but get high pay. Even in America, after Enron, the American Government decided to pass a law to prescribe how a director is supposed to be paid.

Since we have got this opportunity and we have an example of Umeme, MTN and National Water and Sewerage Corporation, it would be ideal for us to do something this time. Failure to do this-Somebody was telling me MTN is a private company, but we are the ones who use and pay for it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over that one and reflect on it overnight. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, this provision of directors is big; it is from around 200 up to 250.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are specifically standing over 218. So, I will put the question on clauses 219 to 249.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clauses 219 to 249, agreed to.

Clause 250

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. In clause 250, the committee proposes that the head note should be deleted and replaced with the following: “Protection of members against prejudicial conduct.”  

In sub-clause (1), we propose that the word “registrar” should be deleted and replaced with the word “court”. The committee further proposes that we delete sub-clause (3) of clause 250. 

The justification for this is that matters regarding protection of members against prejudicial conduct may be issues that need to be scrutinised and be heard by court. 

In clause 251 on page 227, reference to section 161 should be deleted and replaced with “section 181”.  Madam Chair, this was a matter of cross referencing.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  I would like to ask the chairperson to assist me. Who bears the cost, for example, of a disgruntled member; is it the company or the member himself? If I have made an application for something, I should bear the cost but in this case I do not see who bears the cost.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the honourable Leader of the Opposition knows the process of going to court and who bears the costs when we go there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree, I go to court but I was trying to look at one case. Supposing I have gone to court and I say that I do not agree with the accounts of the company and I need them to be audited so that I get the right accounts, who will pay the costs?    

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 250 and 251 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 250 and 251, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 252 to 274, agreed to.

Clauses 275 to 276

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 275 (1) by inserting the words, “or electronic data” after the words, “bound books.” The justification is, to provide for electronic data to keep for company matters. 

Lastly, Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 276 on page 243 in sub-clause (1). We are proposing insertion of the words “or by sending an e-mail to the known electronic address” immediately after the words “in Uganda”. The justification is, to provide for service of documents by e-mail. Thank you very much. 

MR KABAJO: The chairman proposes that we should be able to use electronic data, which is okay as it is now. However, the problem we have with electronic data is that it can easily crush. So, as we allow people or companies to use electronic data, there should also be accompanying provisions for security measures to ensure that that electronic data has backup and is kept for a specified period of time, maybe two to five years. Otherwise, it might be that in future when we have a problem, somebody says that they only kept the data electronically and lost it. So, there should be additional safeguards. 

Even on 276, when you allow the use of e-mails in the place of using normal letters, we should be able to verify that this particular email actually originated from the sender. In that case, when you allow electronic email, you must then bring in the issue of electronic signatures where you can prove that this email came from that sender and maybe the sender can also prove that the receiver received it.

So, I would like to request that the committee maybe puts a little bit of thought into this because as it is now, they have not provided enough protection in case of use of electronic data and electronic mail. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, they are not substituting electronic data. They are saying in addition to the bound books, recordings, etc, they are now adding electronic data. They are not substituting.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, if I may further clarify. I agree with the proposal, and we passed here about three or four Bills from the ICT ministry on electronic transactions. The details of implementing how this can be managed are in all those particular laws.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clauses 275 and 276 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 275 and 276, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 277 to 300, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to the Second Schedule by proposing form 1, which has the name of the company, name of persons, providing for address, place of business, nature of business, proposed share capital and signed by the subscriber or subscribers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the second schedule be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Third Schedule

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Third Schedule is the one which has tables, so do we deal with the tables here? I have a proposal on table F, page 324, paragraph 18. 

It is unfortunate my colleague, the Minister for Finance on my side, has gone away. On page 322, paragraph 15, sustainability reporting is referred to, and I think he was talking about sustainability reporting. This table tries to address it; so those who get him, please tell him that his question has been answered. You remember hon. Ekanya was talking about issues of sustainability and under 15 on page 322, sustainability reporting is being talked about; health, environment- I think his issues have been captured.

On 324, it says the audit committee is supposed to consist of people who are outside the organisation for good governance, and that is the normal international practice. However, here on page 325 - audit committee, number 19 - they are saying the majority of members of the audit committee shall consist of independent directors.

First of all, we have not defined independent directors, but I saw something which said that an independent director is not part of the executives. However, what it says here is that the members of the audit committee will consist of a chairperson and at least three persons of high integrity, who will be members outside the board or staff of the company. The justification is that this is the normal international practice of good governance as far as the purpose of financial reporting and auditing is concerned.

I want to say that basically, these people should not be drawn from inside but from outside. One of the reasons is to safeguard the internal auditors because they are supposed to report to them. If they report to the management and there is a bad report, they can be sacked, and also to promote proper reporting. 

MR RUHINDI: It sounds like a good proposal but I wish to request that we stand over this particular 19.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But take into account the provisions of clause 17 because it is talking about national laws, international financial reporting standards etc.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Even in his Ministry of Justice now, you have an audit committee but the people who are there are some old civil servants and accountants. The old men who are coming from out are the ones who are the members of the audit committee. It is a very clear example; you can go and confirm this. So, if they are coming from out, it is a good practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we stand over the Second Schedule? Honourable members, I put the question that the Third Schedule do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The second, which was amended by the Chair and by you, the old second.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The second was just an introduction of a new schedule; it was one sheet. What we are dealing with is the Third Schedule, which is the one we stood over - (Interjection) - Okay, according to the Bill it is the second but according to the chairperson, it has now been re-numbered as third. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question on the fourth schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fifth Schedule, agreed to.

The Sixth Schedule, agreed to.

The Seventh Schedule, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Companies Bill, 2009” and stood over clauses 1,40,51,132,133,136,218 and schedule two of the Bill.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

8.26
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: I am registering those who stayed up to the last hour. (Laughter)

MR SSEBAGALA: That is exactly what I wanted to say, Madam Speaker. There are some members who really give in a lot and persevere as far as our duties dictate. I am very grateful - we have less than four ladies - I am grateful that you have persevered up to now.

Finally, we have a culture here that whenever some members come here to raise national issues, they walk away immediately; some walk away after getting a chance to make a contribution. I request that we should get a “golden book” where we shall record all members who persevere such that whenever you give benefits, you consider them. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, that is a very good suggestion and from tonight I will be keeping a “golden book”. All the members who are in this House now will be given special treatment. (Laughter) Clerk, please record all of them.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure. I would like to know if it is procedurally right to push submissions on matters of national importance to the end of the day’s business so as to avoid people coming - 

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean to hold them here?

MR BAKA MUGABI: Yes. They should be held here up to the end since they come, present their issues and then walk away.

THE SPEAKER: That is a good suggestion, so that they are obliged to stay. (Laughter) Clerk, please write down the names of all the members who are here because they have to enter the “golden book” today. We want to thank the clerk also. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in leadership there is the use of carrot and stick. If I had the powers, whenever there will be a trip, these are the first people I would have given the opportunity. (Laughter) That is a serious matter. 

Having said that, I want to comment on this business of members coming here, raising issues and going away and they leave us here to do business while they are away. If anyone loves this country, this law we are working on should have been the one to contribute to. I want to thank all those who have stuck here with us to the end. Thank you very much.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the government, I want to appreciate those members, on both sides, who have pushed to the end. In the army, that is over risking and sometimes that is where you win the war, and indeed, this is what we have done today. This is not our number; the House is big. I have always complained when you talk of contempt of Parliament, but this is it. (Laughter) Where is everybody else? This is very serious. So, I think, Madam Speaker, you have many things to improve on attendance. People who have come this far with you should be given advantage and whenever trips come, this should be the list. (Laughter) 

Secondly, matters of national importance should come last. I agree with hon. Baka because people must know why they are here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think from tomorrow I will only notice those who have stayed here until 8.30 p.m. as a start. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to bring this to the attention of the Leader of Government Business – [HON. MEMBER: “He is moving out”] – That may be contempt of Parliament (Laughter).

I also want to add my voice to those members who have thanked members who have persevered on both sides, especially Gen. Ali. He has always been here most of the time; he needs to be recognised. (Applause) This should go not only to the Speaker, but even the leadership on both sides. People always scramble for positions in the committees, in different fora; I think we can also extend this to the leadership on both sides to look at that as another form of reward to encourage people to work hard. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I will be brief. 

THE SPEAKER: I am supposed to be at a reception this evening. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, this is very useful. Some of us are very new in this Parliament and I cannot go without thanking my fellow members who are new and who have persevered up to the end. This is the only way we can learn the proceedings of Parliament. 

I used to tell some fellow teachers where I was head teacher that when you find a teacher teaching fools, do not say “that teacher is teaching fools, so let me leave him to teach them.” You go and learn how they teach fools to become understanding people. Some members think, “This is about rules and Bills, so let us go away”. We should be here, fellow members who are new in Parliament. Let us continue with the spirit of learning. When your committee is not taking place, go to the other committee and learn. I want to say bravo to new members on both sides. I wish the House was like this, balancing both on the government side and the Opposition. It would be moving well. (Laughter)

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of guidance. Last week, I again raised an issue of the national security formation system.

THE SPEAKER: You are beginning a debate now?

MR YAGUMA: No. I am just seeking guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: No. 

MR YAGUMA: We were advised that it would be presented this week.

THE SPEAKER: Can you raise it tomorrow? I am supposed to be at the British High Commission. I am the guest of honour but I had to finish this Bill. I will see you because you have stayed here until the end.

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. The House is adjourned until 2.00 o’clock tomorrow. I want to thank the Sergeant and the stewards for the stamina.

(The House rose at 8.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 March 2012.)
