Thursday, 21 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr George Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995

DR LUYOMBYA  (Historical Member): Thank you Mr Chairman for allowing me to contribute on this important Bill.  The Bill is important because, - (interruption) -

MRS OKER:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman. Is it in order for us to proceed with this Bill, when the Minister responsible for Health is not around?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Well, it the proceeding in this House demands the presence of the Minister to be around, that is another matter, but if we can proceed with the discussion, that is yet another matter.  But, hon. Members, order, hon. Members, we have 48 Minister in this country at the moment and it is very embarrassing when we come here and none of them is around.  We shall adjourn for 15 minutes.  The responsible for Health - we shall adjourn for 15 minutes.

(Adjournment for 15 minutes.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House suspends Rule No. 10 so as to facilitate the First Reading of the Uganda Wildlife and Training Institute Bill, be read for the First Time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Seconded?  Okay.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute Bill, 1996 be read for the First Time.   Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE AND TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL 1996.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, before the Minister for Information proceeds, similar treatment be given by proposing that Rule 10 be suspended so that he too, can read the statement. That is the normal procedure, because, once Parliament opens and a Member has been called to contribute, we come back to the debate, but if there is any other business to be transacted, we move according to what the Minister did.  Similarly, the Minister for Information will have to do the same. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION  (Mr Olal Latigo):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the whole House suspends Rule No. 10 in order to allow me to read the Ministerial Statement on the Ministry of Information.  I beg to move Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is that supported?  Proceed.

MR OLAL LATIGO:  Mr Chairman, in the recent parts, the Ministry of Information Engineering team have been going to our sites to try to restore the services of televisions and radio.  This one, is in connection with restoration of TV service station to Lira.  I wish to clarify on the reports which have appeared in the print media, especially New Vision about the restoration of UTV Services in Lira area. I do confirm that a lot of repair work has been under taken on the Odokomit transmitter which was damaged during the war of 1979.  Since that time, transmission service to the people of Lira was cut off; repairs progressed well and a transmitter is now back in service.  The Ministry engineers have therefore, been carrying out some tests on channel 7 which service Lira; the tests were done on Saturday, 9th March, using free recorded tapes.  The reception by viewers was excellent; this effectively means that television service is now back in Lira on a limited basis.  

It is the intention, however, to link Lira live to Channel 5 during live transmission from the Studios in Kampala.  For the moment, the live transmission to Lira from Kampala is not yet technically feasible, but work on that is proceeding.  The meaning of all this is that, Lira cannot yet receive live broadcasts.  Transmission for a while will be based on free recorded programmes; work is continuing to ensure that full broadcasts based on live transmission from Kampala is achieved at the earliest opportunity possible.  This achievement will even be more defined when the Satellite project being pursued is accomplished.  

Meanwhile, the Ministry grateful acknowledges the congratulations expressed by all to the Ministry to restore television service in Lira.  It will continue to strive within its limited resources to do the same, where we have not yet reached.  This will be in conformity with the Ministry’s policy which I have pronounced in this House, to improve services in all parts of the country, subject to the availability of resources.  The Ministry is grateful for the support of the House in this endeavour.

Mr Chairman, with your permission, Sir, may I take this opportunity to say a word or two about the New Vision and the Monitor stories of a week ago on me.  Mr Chairman and the House, on Monday, following the Womens World Day, a story was run in the Monitor stating that a Mr Latigo Olal was seen in the company of hon. Semogerere, Mrs Cecilia Ogwal in Rukungiri, running like crazy, like racing for 100 metres race, probably taking cover for their lives.  I would like to disassociate my name from that exercise and my physical presence in that area, as it was on that 8th, I was a guest of Honour in Bulisa County, in Masindi on the Women Celebration Day.  I spent a night in Masindi Hotel and on Saturday, I was just a guest trying to see the town of Masindi, I arrived here in the evening.  

On Sunday, following, I went to Mbarara, where I am a parent to Mary Hill High School, to discuss the academic performance of my daughter who is a candidate this year and when I arrived happily, only to be met by Monitor’s story.  I will ask the Monitor, I wrote to them, they are adamantly keeping quiet, -(Interjections)


Thank you Mr Chairman, on Wednesday, the New Vision also run a similar story and in the same manner of courtesy, that is befitted of a gentleman and a good citizen, and a democrat, I did approach the Editor and they said, they would run a story to say it was not me; they have since failed.  Since I have waited for them to do this, it is only - it is befitting to Mr Chairman, to hon. Members of this House, who wrote me notes and also asked me and expressed their concern particularly those of us who support the Movement, that it is black mailing.  I think it is true, I therefore, wish to state that, I was not the one and that these people, the New Vision, the Monitor, do not come up, we shall take up the cause which has been set in this Parliament, in seeking the opinion of my legal advisers to see that my name is cleared correctly.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Normally, after Ministerial Statements are read in this House, no substantial debates are expected to follow.  However, only few elucidatory remarks can be entertained.

MR OGWANG:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister, my Senior Colleague for giving an excellent Ministerial Statement in the state of affairs regarding his Ministry.  When we read in the Papers that Odokomit service station in Lira had started functioning, everybody in Lira rejoiced and in fact, it became one of the biggest achievements of the National Resistance Government; in that effect, many people were very eager to watch what is going on in Kampala, people who had been cut off were very happy to receive what was going on in Kampala and other parts of the country.  However, the Minister has just told that Odokomit service station is not yet ready to receive live transmissions.  In that effect, I would like to seek a clarification from the hon. Minister, when is this sub-station going to receive live transmissions all the way from Kampala, because, we are very eager to - I mean, with the coming of the elections, we are very eager to start watching live broadcasts of what is going on in Kampala.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well, hon. Minister, keep taking note on a few of these points raised and you answer once at ago.

MR OKWERA: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like the Minister for Information very much, indeed for restoring Television services in Lira.  I would like the hon. Minister to clarify to us, Mr Chairman, whether this Television service station in Lira is going to serve the rest of Northern Uganda.  If it is not going to do that, when is the rest of Northern Uganda going to be - would be at the benefit of viewing UTV also, Mr Chairman?

Secondly, I want the Minister also to clarify on the position of Bibia Radio transmitter.  It seems the Ministry is quiet about Bibia radio transmission station.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  My clarification I am seeking is similar to that of hon. Okwera.  Mr Chairman, we are aware that there is another station for television and on Goti Moro in Bobi in Omoro County, which is a county I represent and since the announcement that Lira station had been restored, people in Gulu have started asking when the Gulu ones will be restored, because this is a similar relay station.  So, I would like to ask the Minister to tell us when whether work is now going on this particular station, and when, if so, when the people of Gulu will receive television viewing again.

MR KABUUBI KASAIJA:  Point of clarification.  I rise to thank the Minister for his Ministerial Statement about his Ministry.  I do appreciate that the Television services have been restored in Lira but while I am also appreciating, I would have been more pleased if the Minister would have come to this House with a comprehensive programme about the television restoration, say, for Masindi, we need Television installation and there is nothing that has been done, even the gadgets were bought and they have been lying at the Ministry Headquarters for over five years, no action has been taken and I would also like the Minister to high light about this House, what steps are being taken to install or to have television services to other towns which are lacking this facility.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  While thanking the Minister for his Ministerial Statement, I would like him to clarify or give information about the steps his Ministry is taking in tapping television from a facility which was installed in 1970s and where the Ministry recently has established an FM station.  A Sterling engineer told us it is to tap television services from the Ombaki half satellite station.  I would like to get information from you.  Thank you.

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman, I thank also the Minister for informing us in his Ministerial Statement.  But, may I Mr Chairman, draw your attention, that last one and half years, there was a promise that Soroti mast had a little problem only; so that we can view television properly.  Will the Minister tell us; so that we are not jeopardised, because, when we hear Lira is going to get and we do not get, we are sisters and brothers; so that is a serious matter.

Secondly, there is also a station which is abandoned by Ministry of Information that is the Kabila external station.  This external was our pride during Amin’s time; what can you not do now so that - that external thing begins its normal work?

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  First of all, I am pleased and I am grateful to the hon. Members congratulatory messages for the work we are doing, we shall continue to do the same.  Permit me, Mr Chairman to respond to a few of the observations made here.  Hon. Ogwang expressed that people were happy in Lira but suddenly, they cannot see the television live; they wanted real. This is true, let us make it in conjunction with the television in Soroti.  The television services set in Uganda several decades ago as it is may be today in new setting worked as a relay system, like electricity is installed in series; when one is spot is off, the other one does not light unlike the parallel series which can light independently and so, essentially, television in Lira cannot work if Soroti is not functioning and this is what it is now. What is happening is that, Lira will have to depend on the recording made here - freely recorded, the news we are having in Kampala today will be played and received by the people of Lira tomorrow.  This arrangement is done by a smaller gadget installed in Lira to reflect that like video, this is just a video arrangement.  

Now, the people of Lira were also able to receive Kampala live and our engineers told us that Lira can receive Channel 5 from Kampala but the waves cancel each other and our engineers are trying to work such that, the transmission on Channel 5 from here, they received signals do not cancel these other when they are now being transmitted out to Lira and they think they can do it. So, Lira will be lucky on ingenuity of our engineers and also probably on the direct distance from here to Kampala but otherwise, the Soroti station is not merely a mast, Soroti station was another studio arranged to boost the signals received from Kampala for onward transmission through Lira and the North eventually.  But Soroti since has been damaged beyond repair, it cannot be repaired within our resources and as a result, Soroti may now will benefit and thanks to the august House, that we have been made our Bill passed, we have a law now established, it will benefit now from the satellite transmission which we think will be in place between June and July.  For the repair of that station, now, it will be absolute.  There was a similar station also in Mbale, but the mast presently in Soroti will be used to receive the signals from the satellite arrangement.  So, that one is in place and Hon. Okwera, Northern Uganda, when shall we get this arrangement?  Yes, the television transmission to Northern Uganda will be covered under the satellite arrangement and so will the rest of Uganda.

About six months or so ago, as when we were asking Parliament to pass our Bill, we were not sitting, the Minister for Information went to South Africa and already made arrangements and a company OBICOM came here, sent a team of experts to identify where our masts will be in Uganda.  They went throughout Uganda, district by district and we have got our locations in your districts where our masts will be put; there will be 22 new masts in addition to the present masts we have got in already established places and when the satellite arrangement will come there, you will get the television transmitted, there will get your radio, it will be a matter of having power and you will tap it from near your house.  This is the new arrangement and you have made it already.  Mr Chairman, the hon. august House has passed that law, we are in progress now and so this is true of Masindi.  Actually, Masindi, we have located the two positions, one in Hoima, another one in Masindi, I think near Kibale.  

With the Ombasi Satellite, I visited it twice - there are huge structures beyond the carcass of an elephant and very heavy on the ground; all of them destroyed and they cannot be restored.  We thought there was something left into it and it was Ombasi that provoked the Ministry of Information to think of another method of at least having Uganda covered, because, Ombasi television satellite was so effective and so clear and hence, the new satellite arrangement will cover Ombachi and the masts there will serve as Ombachi and Arua mast in addition to others which are also established in Moyo.

Mr Chairman, I think these are basically the several questions which could be answered in those categories.  Thank you Mr Chairman.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, Ombachi has been covered, Masindi has been covered, Eastern has been covered, now what is the problem?  Order, order.  What is this point binding you, hon. Members? 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The issue of Ombachi should be put very very clear, because, when the Ministers come to Arua, they give different statements. One time, the Minister for Transport said, Ombachi satellites could be repaired, on the other side, the Deputy Minister of Works, Transport came and said, he brought an art engineer, he said, no, the thing cannot be repaired, the people of Arua should dismantle those equipments for making bridges.  Now, what is the position really, because, if those equipments cannot be repaired, they should be used for other purposes, rather than to keep them standing there as monuments, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity again. Hon. Minister for Information in the names of Hon. Paul Etiang stood here and made it categorically clear that the premises where the television carcasses are sitting do belong to Posts and Telecommunications and not to the Minister for Information and also the arrangement at the time, transmitting was the arrangement made by the then His Excellency, Idi Amin; fuel was being transported from here and from barracks in order to empower the generator there to transmit those television.  That arrangement could not have been done under the Ministry of Information; otherwise, we would have gone dry.  But unfortunately, the war came, it got destroyed beyond repair, the premises do revert to Posts and Telecommunications.  The onus of providing television to Uganda becomes that one of Ministry of Information.  We have inspected those premises and we thought we could salvage it; no, hence, I made it clear here that, we have now decided that we serve the rest of Uganda with new satellite arrangement which is as follows; we shall have a studio here in Kampala, make our production in Kampala, bring the production waves right into sky and catch the satellite which we are renting a segment from, and that satellite will then beam the signals back to Uganda and if the hon. Member would care just a little bit to look at the back at the door there, that is the way it will look - up there - only that you take the reverse of that picture, the shower of the waves will be like that, it will be in Arua, in Ombachi and particularly in the Municipality, you will get it.  So, may I ask the Gulu Members that we have forgotten that one, we have improvised with a better, more up to date equipment.

Mr Chairman, there were two hecklings about here, I forgot to talk about Omoro mast.  Omoro mast in Gulu; I visited that one, it is an FM station, it was linked to Bobi and Bobi since was also destroyed, we have renovated houses in Bobi, waiting for our satellite transmission, so that our staff members should go there and also private members, - private citizens of Uganda have already approached us for sharing or hiring parts of our premises in Bobi to have FM Studios made and I think this is a healthy situation.  So, Omoro will go into production and Bobi is definitely is under repair and is waiting for transmission from the satellite arrangement. 

Mr Chairman, the Ntakabera, there was a huge arrangement for external services and Ministry of Information cannot undertake that, we were asking the Teso Commission if they could go and we privatise the Ntakabera, so that the houses there may be serve a new institution like a University or whatever it may be - we cannot, but Mr Chairman, it will be said, the premises in Ntakabera are not used, they are there about 21 senior houses, a hall and very big - so it could be well used for other purposes, but the purposes of external radio when we have our satellite, then will not need them any more.  So, I would kindly ask my hon. Friend, hon. Elyau to spear head at least an innovation, to try and get Ntakabera more useful to Teso and to Lango and to the rest of Uganda.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Any other further clarification on Ombachi?  (Laughter)

DR LUYOMBYA:  I stand to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, in so doing, I am happy that this Bill has at long last come to this House for Second Reading, because as far as I know, this preparation has been going since 1986 and it has under gone various modifications and panel beatings.  I congratulate the Sectoral Committee and the Ministry for having come out with a clear Bill.

Mr Chairman, I know about the old Bill, the Act of 1968.  This Bill has introduced new ideas which are in conformity with the development of the country in particular and the world at large.  Looking at the functions of the Council in the Bill, that is Clause 4 (e) says that it will be a function of the Council to protect society from abuse of medical and dental care and research on human beings.  The Bill is explicit on this. This is an important affair, Mr Chairman, because, the most important human right, is the right to life.  The medical workers in particular, the doctors, if they are not controlled and they are not made aware of their job, life can be easily lost through professional misconduct or negligence.  I am glad that this has been brought out.  I would have been happier if the draftsmen after (e) stopped (h) with (f).

(h) says, disseminate the medical and the dental practitioners and the public, if its relating to doctor/patient rights and obligations.  Mr, Chairman, this is another function which has been high lighted in this Bill.   Many of our people have suffered through ignorance; there is lack of civic education in so many field and under ignorance, people have suffered.  For example, very many people in this country do not know that they have got a right to sue if a doctor has been negligent and very many do not know that there is even a Medical Council which should be standing between the society and the doctors.  Yesterday, I heard some contributions, people complaining about the women not being attended and so on and so forth.  Surely, if the members were aware that there is a Medical Council, it is their right to lodge a complaint against that particular doctor to the Council and for investigations and if it is found that the doctor is negligent, he can be disciplined.

Another comment I would like to talk about is 4 (i).  Mr Chairman, I am a Minister phobic, that is, I do not hate the Minister and I know for sure that the current Minister is doing a good job and is principled but I am not happy with the last phrase in that section and at an appropriate time, I will propose an Amendment to have it deleted, that is, to have the Minister directing this Council.  Mr Chairman, I have served on that Council and there have been occasions when the Ministry or Government have failed to deal with their employees, that is, doctors employed.

MRS KALEMA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that what he is saying, and to inform the whole House, through you Mr Chairman, that what he has just said, that the Council has often played its role, but the Ministry has administratively failed, is very correct.  I remember, the hon. Member, who I know is a member of the Medical Council, I have once, after being to this House, I think it was in 1992, a case of a doctor in Kiboga hospital who had caused death to at least to those particular cases, two women died because their husbands and relatives failed to raise the money he wanted before he could carry out cesarean section, to remove babies from them.  These women died and it was taken as a simple matter, the relatives just took the bodies to be buried, I brought this case here and I must say, the Minister acted, that is the present Minister now, and Medical Council was informed, but there was some delay in asking that particular medical officer from Kiboga to come to be summoned or to be encouraged to come and attend the Council.  Now and again, I would ask hon. Luyombya after here, that your Colleague is still there and he has not attended, he said, they were surprised that he had not come for the Council’s discipline.   Finally, he came, but after he had been disciplined, I understand he was transferred.  So, I said to Dr Luyombya and also asked another doctor, where has he been transferred where there are no women who are going to die?  How do you transfer a murder to  another hospital, because there, he will also kill more people.  Any way, this doctor did not leave Kiboga for a whole year, Mr Chairman.  So, I hope if this Bill can be taken seriously and the Ministry really disciplines its medical officers, we shall be able to see a change.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, but hon. Members,  do not turn information into debates.  You know some of you are very clever, but I think  - Hon. Dr Luyombya, proceed.

DR P. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I just wanted to add as a bit of information.  Mr Chairman, at the moment, we have got Management Committees in all these hospitals.  In fact, if there is a problem for hon. Members to approach the Ministry for any reason, the Management Committee which are in their nearest proximity within the hospital, and actually these are set up with the blessing of Health Committees of the DRCs, should be able to take quick action to notify the Ministry of Health.  We should not wait to come to Parliament to complain about these doctors when we have got a machinery within these hospitals that will really discipline these doctors as quickly as possible.  So, I think it is also incumbent upon us, the leaders, to use this well democratic committees well set up in the hospitals to look after the welfare of our people.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, what I was driving at, was that, the Ministry and for that matter, the administrative wing have a role to play as far as their employees is concerned.  There are times when their employees have rebelled against their administrative directives and instead of disciplining them administratively, they throw or almost want to force the medical Council to take up those matters.  For example, if a doctor is transferred from hospital (A) to hospital (B) and for his own reasons refuses to be transferred, that employee will stop there, but there are times when the Minister almost is forcing the Council to do the job they should have done. So, Mr Chairman, I am very worried about the Minister being given a leeway to direct this Council.

Mr Chairman, another area which has been included in this Council which is new, is establish a register for specialists and then a register for health youths.  Mr Chairman, in 1986 when the NRM took administration, there was a lot of out cry about mushrooming clinics and there was a lot of out cry about the spread of AIDS using needles and unsterilised instruments.  But, the old act only talked about a medical practitioner, a registered medical practitioner did not talk about the place where he operated and therefore, legally, there was no way the Council could have closed these Clinics without meeting resistance from the owners and incurring legal resistance, but at least, this has been cleared in this Bill, that Health Units have to be registered and as I mentioned yesterday, with this era of liberalisation, it does not mean that only health workers or doctors, can open up these units; any businessman or anybody who has the money can establish a health unit but it is only, except that he has to employ the qualified staff to do the management and then on specialist register.  

Mr Chairman, it is a biological fact that the more complex an organism becomes, the more specialised it also becomes and therefore, in this modern world of rapid change and complexity, in medical knowledge and technology, it is important that we have to recognise specialisation and even super specialisation in the medical field.  Even as far early as 400 B.C. Hippocrates knew about specialisation and I will quote; he says,

“I will not use the knife not even on sufferance from sponge but will withdraw in favour of such men as are engaged in the work”.

By that, he was saying that, there are specialised areas where although you may have some medical knowledge, you should not tamper, but leave that sort of work to those who are specialised to do so.  

Another area that has been introduced in this Bill, is the private Practice the section, part 6 on private practice.  It is welcome, but I hope that the Council will use its means to make sure that private practice is not an urban affair, that doctors should not only concentrate on Kampala Road, but when registering them, they should encourage or try to give incentives for doctors who also open private practice in the rural areas and other areas. 

Another good section which has been included in this Bill, is the enforcement of continuing education.  As I said earlier, there is rapid change.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much and I thank hon. Luyombya for having given me way.  My worry about these doctors opening up private clinics in the rural areas, is that these areas are not attractive to these doctors.  In fact, in my own county of Gomba, it was not until last year when I persuaded one doctor to go and operate a clinic there once a week that we got the first doctor in that county and this is a county which is only about 60 miles from the city centre.  Now, in the circumstances, Mr Chairman, I am wondering whether my Colleague would accept a suggestion that whoever is given a practising license, is required by law to operate at least a clinic in the rural areas alongside a clinic in the city centre, I think this is only way of persuading them to go up country.  Otherwise, as things stand, I fear none of these people seem to be persuaded to go to the rural areas.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Dr Luyombya, wind up please.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, the section on continuing education. This is necessary, because, there is in life is a dynamic equilibrium and therefore, the constant change.  So, even knowledge has to be renewed from time to time.  It will also ensure that the quality of patient care is taken care of and it will remove dead wood from the medical service.

Mr Chairman, let me talk briefly on the financing of this Council.  I am glad that it is being liberalised and the Council is being allowed to operate an account of their own.  Otherwise, if it remains a department of the Ministry, it will not succeed in fulfilling its functions.

Mr Chairman, let me wind up by thanking the Ministry and the Committee again for the good job it has done as far as this Bill is concerned.  I am satisfied except for a few Amendments which I will move.  Thank you.

MR WASUGIRYA  (Kibukii County, Pallisa):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, but before I do that, I want to pronounce properly my name.  My name is Wasugirya Fred Bob and actually it means to greet.  So, when I say, obasugirye, it is a verb now from the word Wasugirya.

Mr Chairman, the medical profession is highly respected and internationally recognised.  As far as Uganda is concerned, Makerere has passed out over 3,500 doctors up to date, but if you now take stock of the number of doctors we have in the country, you may get surprised to find that the number is even less that 1,000.  It cost a country so much money to produce a doctor, in fact, it is a big, big fortune.  Now, one may I ask, what are the reasons why actually the number has dwindled so much?  Mr Chairman, during the 1970s there was the problem of insecurity and that one, I do appreciate, but something tagged to that, is also doctors running for green pastures.  This leads me to say, Mr Chairman, that this country has not been considerate enough to offer satisfactory remuneration to our doctors, and for as long as this continues, then this sub-section you are talking about, protecting the lives of the citizens of our people is - to me, does not actually mean much.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information.  I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that if one day he travels to Southern Africa, Britain, Canada, he will find all these Ugandan Doctors there and what some of them are saying, is that, not until our Government begins to pay a living wage which we have been talking about, they find it extremely difficult to adjust to our standards.  So, I would like to urge Government, through the Ministry of Public of Public Service that the expected living wage which we are told is coming from July this year, should be paid.  Otherwise, we have excellent doctors, many of them are consultants and I have a few friends who are manning some of these hospitals in South Africa, I want them back here.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Thank you very much, hon. Member who has informed me.  At one time, Mr Chairman, Uganda as a country, was ranking on top in as far as the number of doctors was concerned Africa South of the Sahara and North of the Zambezi and if all things were put at equal pacing, then right now, in Uganda, we would be very proud of our people of the population being in the safe hands in as far as health is concerned, but alas, as the hon. informer has just said, the majority of our doctors are not in this country.  Those who have actually used so much money forgetting passed out of the University and this is quite unfortunate.

My second point is to do with private practice.  Given that we have such a small number of doctors and then we are saying, we are giving them a lee way to practice, to own private clinics, I have fear Mr Chairman, that actually, our population will continue to be subjected to similar short comings; because, the experience I have is that, you find the medical doctors spending of their time in the clinics than in the Government hospitals.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the fear he is trying to express, in fact, he is answering it indirectly.  Now, how many Government hospitals do we have?  We find that they are very few and limited to urban areas, but if we do not give a go ahead to these people to open private say, clinics, in certain far areas to render these services to the Ugandans, then we may be denied the Ugandans who cannot be close to these Government hospitals to this service.  So, to me, I think since we are having fewer doctors as he has expressed, then, it is even better to encourage them to open private clinics even in rural areas, rather than saying that, we limit them because they are very few, hence, they concentrate in only Government hospitals and doing this also, we are denying them their chances of expressing - I mean enjoying their profession.  Thanks very much, Mr Chairman.

MR WASUGIRYA:  Mr Chairman, I do ...has got the obligation to look after his citizens, and as far as I know, poverty is prevailing in those rural places you are talking about.  At the same time, how are you going to allot time to these Doctors?  A Doctor is having a private clinic in the urban place and you want that same Doctor to own yet another one in the rural place.  
Mr Chairman, as I started I said, -(Interruption)

MR KABUGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, Doctors opening clinics in rural areas is not a new thing.  It has been there.  I remember in the 1960s, we used to have Dr Kiseka’s clinic running from Jinja Road, Seeta, Mukono, Nakifuma, Buikwe and then Kayunga in Bugerere.  Turning to the other side of the West, they used to run from Nakulabye, Wakiso, Kakiri, Busunju to Kiboga.  So, I do not see the argument that could keep us arguing about this.  These clinics are there, and very necessary and useful to rural people.

MR WASUGIRYA: Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is talking about the days of plenty; the 1960s, when the people had the money.  I am even wondering how often could such a Doctor visit all those places he is talking about?

Mr Chairman, next I come to what hon. Mayanja Abu was saying yesterday.  It is unfortunate we lost Professor Belcher.  But I am made to understand that Prof. Belcher had started a Post Graduated Masters Course in Orthopaedics.  I want to first of all want to get the assurance from the hon. Minister whether or not this Course will continue.  

I say this, there is a problem in Uganda.  When you move to most places in this Country you find that there are so many disabled people.  You are find that there are so many who were in encounter accidents and they end up being amputated, thereby requiring the service of Orthopaedics.  Now at the moment, if you have to get these facilities, you have to be referred to Mulago Hospital.  My concern is, that if the Ministry could actually work out programmes such that there are similar units opened maybe at regional basis, maybe as far as Eastern is concerned, if one is opened in Mbale, Gulu for North, Mbarara for Western, I think that would alleviate on this problem.  Few years ago, I had to carry ten people who had that problem from my Constituency; all the way from Pallisa and had to bring them this way.  You can imagine, the ten I brought wanted to get these wheel-chairs.  The wheel chairs are quite bulky.  I almost failed to transport these wheel chairs back to my Pallisa.  So, if we had such a facility in those places I have mentioned, I think it would actually come to our rescue.  

In conclusion, Mr Chairman, the Government should take this issue very seriously.  The Government should actually realise the plight of the Doctors we have however few.  Government should offer a living wage and be able to attract even those who are outside the country; who went for greener pastures to come back and share problems with us.  I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr Makumbi): Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I am very grateful for the very serious attitude the House has taken to this Bill and the support it has received.  I am encouraged that we are all concerned about the well being of the lives of people in this country.  First of all I wish to respond to the remarks made by hon. Elyau.  
It is very true that the maternal mortality in this Country leaves a lot to be desired.  It is not only this Country; it is in the entire developing world.  Our figures here of maternal mortality are in the range of 400 per 100,000 -(Interruption)- while in the developed Countries they are below 50.  This emphasizes what is actually going on.  But I would like to get to the root of the problem.  It would not help just ensuring that the Doctors are doing their up most best without us observing the preventive measures to ensure that the mothers who get prepared for delivering are those who should actually deliver.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, only recently, I toured the Eastern Region extensively, and I was alarmed at the frequency of premature pregnancies.  Mothers who had come to attend antenatal Clinics were more-or-less girls.  Hon. Elyau clearly remarked that these people died because complications arising from caesarian type of delivery.  If a woman gets pregnant at the right age, then she can even be delivered by a traditional birth attendant or a mid-wife, and not necessarily be subjected to a caesarian section.  Caesarian section is subjected after complications have come and premature pregnancy is one of the highest causes complications arise causing carrying out caesarian sections.  

So, Mr Chairman, I wish to echo what hon. Ruth Aliu said.  It should be taken very seriously that if we want to reduce our maternal mortality in this Country, we have to make sure that girls get pregnant when they are ready, not until we do that are we going to see any drop in these figures.  However, expert the Doctor is going to be unprofessional, it will take a lot of time to have so many Doctors in every village to be able to carry out caesarian sections and save these unfortunate girls.  

I have often mentioned it in this House that we should not wait to come to this august House to express dissatisfaction in professionally.  We have venues which are open to echo all these complaints.  Our offices at the Ministry, the District Medical Officer’s office is all ready to receive complaints of malpractice.  So we should not wait till NRC convenes to express dissatisfaction.  I wish to request the hon. Members that we as leaders of the Community should take our responsibility to make sure that those who are not aware of the Law are guided and all these cases are put to the Book.

Mr Chairman, it is true that probably the quality of service being rendered is not what it should be.  This should not be surprising because the health facilities which you see in place were probably planned for a population of 10,000,000 or less.  We are now more than 18 million.  As if that was not enough, as it has already been mentioned by some hon. Members, a good number of our Doctors and Health workers have left this Country either seeking greener pastures or because of insecurity.  So, the situation on the ground would need a bit of time before we see better health care delivery.  We also have to appreciate that health care delivery is expensive, unless our revenue collection and consequently budgetary allocation rises, we are not likely to see very dramatic changes.  

A question was raised about monitoring quality of service.  I wish to inform this House that my Ministry has been ahead in establishing a quality assurance department.  This Department is comprised of experts in every field who go around visiting units and trying to ensure that good health care is being delivered.  Indeed meetings have already been held with many District Health Committees and the Health Units have been visited regularly.  So, quality of service is being monitored.  

I wish to thank hon. Abu Mayanja for keeping the House awake and making some critical areas which I am afraid were more towards the drafting stage of the Bill rather than what with the professionals meant to put in place.  He appreciated the problem which we had, and I am quite assured that he does understand that it will not only be a problem of improving what we are trying to put in place but to improve the drafting side of these Bills.  But I wish to thank hon. Abu Mayanja for being a very responsible community leader.  Mr Chairman, hon. Abu Mayanja is one of the hon. Members here who regularly contacts the Ministry when he has any problems in his Constituency.  

I wish also to inform the House that the Private Practitioners do have an Association.  So, there is no need or concern over that.  

The issue of handling waste is a very big challenge to us.  I do not think that this is a problem my Ministry has to handle.  This is an area which has to be handled by either the urban or the rural authorities.  It will be too much of a task for the Ministry of Health to start clearing rubbish.  I think this is a speciality which should be assigned to the various authorities because we also have our concern as far as the handling of waste is concerned.

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that the idea is not that the Ministry of Health does collect this garbage.  It is that the Ministry brings to the awareness of those authorities concerned the danger which lies underneath that garbage.  

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in some of the nations, it is indeed the Ministry of Health because they are the ones who train Health Inspectors.  The Minister has said here that even pregnancies in the villages it is the awareness and public health education which the Government and his Ministry should undertake as one of the most important things this country needs urgently if we are to have a good country, and indeed even to conserve the environment because if the Health Inspectors would refuse even licenses to some of the operators, I think the Municipal and Town Council would comply.

MR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I do thank the hon. Members for the information.  But probably what did not come out very clearly is the new approach to public health which we have now, that it is a combined approach.  We do not only expect people who are conscious  or who treat the after amass of waste.  But we have to consider even those people who physically lift it.  It is quite clear that any type of waste is deplorable.  One does not have to make too much preaching about it.  It has to be collected.  But since we have gone to the stage of decentralisation and given the urban authorities more powers, we will be in the background to advise them and always come to their assistance if at all they need any experts on the consequences of not disposing waste properly.  

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of clarification.   Mr Chairman, implicity in the questions asked by the hon. Members to the Minister, was the responsibility of the Ministry to point out to these combined authorities he mentioned about the necessity to keep rubbish and other hazardous material under control.  But it seems that if they seek advice you will give it.  I thought that implicity in question was whether it is a responsibility of the Ministry to point out any hazardous material when health of the nation is at stake rather than to regard that he will wait for these people to seek advice as opposed to his taking initiative and his Ministry taking initiative to advise these combined authorities that do not do this or remove this.  I wonder whether he could further clarify this point.
  
MRS OKER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister regarding the issue that came out on the Media yesterday about the polythene papers and bags which are causing environmental pollution and hazard.  Secondly, I have great concern and would like to seek clarification, through you, about the issue that came in the Press from the Medical Superintendent, Lacor Hospital that five Doctors who are seconded to Lacor Hospital have since left and considering the gravity of the problem which is now in the region of the land mines injuring our people, and these people are to be rushed to the hospital either to get amputated or some lifesaving being done.  I would like to have clarification from the Ministry of Health as to what step they have put in place or taken.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, we train Health Inspectors and these Health Inspectors are seconded to urban authorities, regions, and Districts.  These are expected to be carrying out work regularly to ensure that the environment is protected.  We are also in the process of revising the Public Health Act which was put in place probably way back in the 1940s.  Once that is in place, it will give us more powers to come forward and deal with people who are not responding to proper disposal of waste.  

The question of Lacor Hospital was a big concern to us as a Ministry because even while Gulu Hospital was not operating normally, Lacor Hospital was the centre of referral in Gulu District; and even Kitgum.  I have come to understand that Doctor Kotti and his wife held the fort while the other Doctors had gone away.  But I have been informed that since then, they have been coming back one by one.  I have to get a radio call to confirm the actual number who have already reported to the Hospital.  But if there was more concern, I am quite sure, Doctor Kotti is a very responsible man, he would have reached out to tell us to ask for more assistance to be sent as we have done with Nebbi and Kitgum to some extend.

Mr Chairman, hon. Luyombya made a useful contribution. I wish to mention that probably his request to amend Clause 4(i) should not be taken in the light he took it because, as Minister may direct, was meant to give the Minister the opportunity to call upon the Council to perform some duties which are outside what has been reflected if at all the need arises.  it was not to overrule the Council.  As I said previously, all these are drafting problems which I am particularly I am not an expert on, but that is what we meant to be in place that from time to time, the Minister may call upon the Council to come forward and assist him in ensuring that proper medical and dental care is being rendered to the population. 

I would suggest that we leave that as it is unless among our legal experts one still sees and area where there will be a tendency for the Minister to exploit that avenue.

I have no objection to the amendment to Clause 9 1(d) because it only goes to emphasize the responsibility of the Council to approve registration as reflected in Clause 27, sub-section 2.  I am responding hon. Rodha Kalema’s problem which -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, since the hon. Minister has reached to Clause 9, those who contributed did not touch something on Clause 9, 4.   Mr Chairman, for my financial experience, Clause 9, 4, says, ‘the Registrar shall, within three months before the end of each financial year, submit to the Council a general Report on the affairs and activities with the Council’.   Mr Chairman, three months before is a quarter of a year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this should come at the Committee Stage.  Hon. Minister please.

MR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, the problem which was raised by hon. Rhoda Kalema was investigated by me in particular after a lot of outcry from Kiboga.  But I wish hon. Members know difficult to dismiss a public servant.  On my perusal of this Constitution, it becomes even more difficult.  So, we who have the responsibility of taking quick action about such people, should be given that understanding that we are not in a position to move as fast as we would like to.  I wish also to appeal to the hon. Members and the Community leaders that for people who have misbehaved and who have been suspended it is the responsibility of the District Administration to make sure that the individual is nowhere around the surroundings.  It will not take the Minister to come and remove a Medical Doctor who has been disciplined from an up country hospital.  It should be the responsibility of the District Administration to make sure that this Doctor leaves the premises as quickly as possible.

Hon. Wasugirya contributed and mentioned the number of Doctors who have left this country.  I am one of those people who have experienced this, not only as an administrator but as someone who has at one stage left this Country.  Indeed it was security to begin with, and it became more of an economic venture seeking greener pastures.  I do share the same sentiments that we should re-establish the respect of the health workers and remunerate them accordingly.  But we all know that our Budget does not allow for that.  So, there should be a stage where we should expect some sacrifice from the workers to make sure that we give time for the economy to revive.  Of course we, in this very House, are the ones who approved the Budget.  So, the responsibility is ours collectively.

MR WANENDEYA: point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is not really the responsibility of this House to work out salary scales because if you look at, let us say, somebody is in ISO, who has just been recruited getting UShs 225,000 as opposed to a Medical person who has taken five years to train and he gets hardly UShs100,000.  What explanation can be given to the Country especially considering the Minister himself and some of those administrators at the Headquarters who get very good salaries.  But in the countryside, our Doctors really the reason why they run away to greener pastures is because we have never tackled their problem adequately.  So, what steps other than saying that on July the 1st, can salary reviews be known to the general Ugandan public.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OKWERA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, yesterday I raised on point of clarification and I wanted the Minister of Health to clarify to the nation on what machinery he has on the ground to make sure that his technical staff who are Doctors, nurses and so on, working in various units in the country are being supervised to make sure that they are doing their work properly.  He has just told us now that the District Administration should supervise.  But District Administration can only see that these people are there.  But what about technical aspect of their work, who supervises it and make sure that they do it properly?

Secondly, Mr Chairman, the Minister was saying that the girl should when they should get pregnant.  Well, Mr Chairman, this one arose from hon. Elyau complaining that a lot of children or mothers are dying at the time of birth.  Then the Minister said, these people should know when they should get pregnant or married.  But he has not told this House at what age should these people get married or pregnant.  I would like his to clarify to us so that we know.  Thank you.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, my fear is to change this debate into a lecture of medical practice.  Some of these basic facts can be obtained from my Ministry if hon. Members do have the time to come and collect them.  They are very documented in pamphlets and I feel I should not take up too much of the precious time of this House to go into these details.

Mr Chairman, the issue of deciding salaries how much one should get is again not a duty of one Minister for that matter.  I am quite sure hon. Wanendeya is very aware of that.  
Hon. Wasugirya, I wish to dispel the belief that Private Practice is bad.  Private Practice is quite good as long as it is done professionally and ethically and by the right people.  In fact in our new approach to Health Care Delivery, we have a saying that Health Care in Partnership should be the best strategy and by that we mean, Health Care being rendered by Government, Non-Governmental Organisations, and the Private Sector.  These are the Private Practitioners.  This is the new concept.  The old concept of Government shouldering all Health Care Delivery has been proven not to work even in the developed world where they are much richer.  So, let me hope that with the passing of this very Bill, we will have the deliverage to be able to control Health Care Delivery in the Private Sector.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I often wonder, people are so mindful about paying charges for Health Care.  I have grown up in the village as well and I know that there is not a single traditional healer who does not charge.  I have never heard anybody in this House complain about the high charges of a traditional healer.  

To understand the seriousness of this problem, people should go to the fundamentals of economics and see what we contribute for our Health Care.  I have often mentioned it.  We all know what we contribute as a way of dollars per capita for Health Care for the whole year.  It does not go beyond five dollars.  In other words, your contribution is UShs 5,000 for the whole year, which private clinic charges UShs.5,000 or less per visit.  I think we have to be realistic and appreciate that we have to do everything possible to amass funds to make sure that Health Services run efficiently.

Mr Chairman, we all continue to lament the tragic death of Prof. Rhodin Belcher.  In fact, I wish to mention that the side of the community is so crucial because the assailants who came to kill the Doctor were seen by the Community and yet nobody was suspicious enough to know that they were going to do something so tragic.  This is why I am appealing to us the Community leaders and the Community at large to make sure that issues like security, health care are our responsibility.  We cannot assign them to just one area.  We all have a roll to play.  

I am glad to inform the House, Mr Chairman, that the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery is continuing and the programme will continue although Prof. Belcher has left us tragically.   I have had assurance from all our friends to ensure that we are going to continue getting support from them teach our Doctors to become Orthopaedic Surgeons.  

Another measure of ensuring security is being taken; let me hope that when people are stopped at the gate of Health Institutions, they do not complain too much because there are too many people moving around the compounds and health units, while even factories are guarded.  Let me hope that complaints will not arise because we are instituting tighter  security in the Health Units as well as the compounds with assistance from the security organs.  

With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I wish again to thank the hon. Members for the very useful contribution they have made.  Let me hope that the ideas which have been sounded here are actually carried physically and our Community is enlightened as to what good Health Care should be.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, ‘The Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996,’ be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995


MR WANENDEYA: Point of Clarification.  Mr Chairman, much as I would love to go to Committee Stage, it seems Mr Chairman, with all your due respect that we may not have a quorum to go ahead with this Bill.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I have been pleading with you that you realise the quorum.  This is actually what you have to do since you took the oath.  At times when we take administrative steps to ensure that you are here, you blame us that we are taking you like schoolboys.  We keep quiet and do not comment.  I am forced to do certain other things so that the 18 million Ugandans must be convinced that we are doing things here to their satisfaction.  Hon. Members, this is a serious matter.  If that is to be the case, I will always take roll-call and publish the names of those who do not want to come, and you will not blame me.  Hon. Members we have certain critical issues which you have to resolve here.  So, if the quorum is not there, we cannot proceed.  

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, if an important Bill is coming here, the Leader of Government Business at all times should make sure that we have enough quorum.  But often times, he is not here.  How are we going to be guided before we get this NRC to close down, and to be responsible to our people because they expect us to carry out this job?

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, having reached the stage where we are, I believe the normal procedure would be for the Bell to ring while you stay there. It is only when after you are satisfied that we still do not have a quorum that then the necessity for adjournment would arise, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are coming to that.

MR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee reports there to.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Mr James Makumbi): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House could not proceed to due to lack of quorum.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because of lack of quorum we cannot proceed.  We shall have to adjourn until next week Tuesday, starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 at 2.30 p.m.)

          




