Tuesday, 22 March 2011

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am very happy to welcome you to this sitting which marks the beginning of the last part of our mandate as the Eighth Parliament, and will end in May. 

I want to welcome you back from your respective constituencies where you were engaged in the campaigns for presidential, parliamentary and local government elections. I thank you for your positive contributions that made the elections peaceful. 

In a special way, I want to welcome one of our Members who was a presidential candidate -(Laughter)- and happens to be my representative in Kampala. I must say I was very much impressed with the way you conducted yourself. (Applause)

But I think that for every election we finish, we learn lessons, and every coming election will improve because of what we have learnt in the past. Let us try our best to continue like this so that Uganda is always quoted as an example where people hold peaceful elections and accept the results of the elections.

Today, the Business Committee sat and considered the business we shall handle during this remaining period up to, strictly speaking, 12th or 10th May when eventually the new Parliament will be ushered in.

Personally, I am very happy that this unique multi-party Parliament in the last five years will end peacefully and we shall be able to hand over a multi-party Parliament to the Ninth Parliament. 

I have been in this country and I was in secondary school when we achieved our independence and we watched attempts that we had to have a multi-party parliament and government, but none of them ever succeeded beyond three years. This one has succeeded for the last five years, and you have contributed to it. (Applause)

So for this remaining period, especially as we have a lot of business, I call upon you to be diligent with your work and to attend the sessions so that we can complete as much as we can while waiting for another parliament to handle whatever we shall have left behind. I thank you very much and you are most welcome. 

In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have Members of Parliament and staff from the Republic of Zambia, namely, hon. Highvie Hamududu (MP), hon. Charles Milupi (MP), hon. Given Lubinda (MP), hon. Paul Sichamba (MP), and Simon Mtambo (Clerks Assistant). Please join me in welcoming them to the Parliament of Uganda. You are most welcome. (Applause)

HON. MEMBERS: Hon. Onzima is in the gallery. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know why honourable -(Laughter)- Hon. Onzima you are welcome. (Laughter) Well, that his situation is different; I think we shall consider it. But maybe before I read Her Majesty’s special message, the Prime Minister wants to say something?

2.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you. The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and hon. Members of Parliament, I also wish to welcome you back from your electoral and political trenches. (Laughter) Now that elections are over, it is our duty to focus our attention on the mandate that was given to us by our Constitution. I thank you very much.

2.49
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity, first of all, to receive us back from our trenches where we underwent a very gruesome exercise. Right now some of us are still licking our wounds as a result of the injury that was inflicted on us by the powers that be -(Interjections)- however, the only thing which consoles us, Mr Speaker, as you said earlier on, is the uniqueness of the multi-party dispensation that we are in as of now, in the sense that we Members of Parliament are so courteous to each other; we are able to sit here even facing one another as if we are in a football match, but at the end of the day we are able to get out and chat and share a little together. That certainly is something for which we commend ourselves for. If this was the spirit with which we were in the field for the last 60 days, certainly we would not be licking our wounds the way we are doing now.

For those of us who were facing each other - brotherliness and courtesy was visibly seen and this can be exhibited by the fact that even when we sit here in this Chamber, none of us is carrying a scar or a wound as a result of violence. 

I have checked members like - Hon. Awori, yours was a unique situation just like that of hon. Nandala-Mafabi who suffered a bullet wound. Where the bullet came from, we all know. The only good thing is that none of us has died. At least they are injured, but they are all around. 

When we came back, I interfaced with some of our colleagues in Government and one of the problems they raised was the issue of inflation. I jokingly asked that, “Who is responsible for this inflation? Who injected all this insurmountable amounts of money into the electioneering exercise? Was it not from the Republic of Uganda? Who was the custodian of this money?” I think Government officials should complain to themselves for opening the flood gates of money to make it reach where people had never seen it. I have left Terego much richer than what it was for all these past days because a lot of money was taken there. 

When I compared notes with my colleagues, they said that they had suffered equally. We are now enjoying the fruits of having a lot of money in circulation.

We should be given some time to share our experiences before we close the Eighth Parliament. When we pour out our problems, it is a treatment. It is a therapy method that we should go through such that those who come after us can have a better Uganda than we have experienced. I want to welcome all of us back to the House.

2.55
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County Kitgum): I am not rising to talk about elections because what happened in Chwa cannot be described as an election. I would like to refer to the statement that you have made about multi-party Parliaments and their duration. When I was a student in the 60s, I used to sit in the public gallery of this parliament during my holidays. The multi-party Parliament that was elected in 1962 lasted until 1970, although by 1970 the Opposition on this side had dwindled to four members, but it was still a multi-party parliament, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I want to inform you that in 1962, I used to sit in the strangers’ gallery.

2.56
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): I want to welcome colleagues back from the hectic exercise that we have been through. On Sunday I read an article where the President said that some Opposition Members were colluding with Electoral Commission officials to cheat in their favour. I was taken aback because all along there have been voices calling for review of the membership of the Electoral Commission. Now that the President has also come to realise that they could not help him - even where you want to be assisted, you need to be assisted by people with integrity. A mediocre cannot help anybody, not even the one who has appointed him or her. You end up lamenting like any other person who has suffered because of their mediocrity.

I want to express a deep concern about the way the elections were handled. Why do we have to leave this mess behind us? Incidentally, I come from the Government side; I know a stolen election was the reason why people went to the bush; 25 years down the road, we are still lamenting about messed up elections. 

Can we have a substantive motion to look at the Electoral Commission and the way we are handling elections in this country? We have remained with only one way of changing Government and that is through elections. Other methods were abandoned by this country. Can we as a country sit down and look for solutions to this illness? Is it enough to clap that we were able to come back to Parliament? 

During the LC V elections in Ssembabule, for example, people had pre-ticked ballot papers in Lugusulu sub-county before the election. I informed the Inspector-General of Police. We still have boxes of disused ballot papers and they are dumped at police stations and we sit here to say that the elections were ok!

I would be cheating my conscience if I agreed that we sit here and the organisation that we give money ends up disappointing Ugandans. For how long must we, a sitting government that came as a result of vote-rigging, continue looking on? For how long must we subject Ugandans - we tell them, “Come, there is an exercise where we can change leadership.” And at the end of the day, we mess up that exercise in broad daylight.

It was so pathetic that the Chairman of Ssembabule District had to carry pre-ticked ballot papers to the Police station. If I am allowed, I am ready to even table some other ballot papers that are still in people’s houses in Ssembabule.

When I saw what appeared here in Kampala, it was nothing compared to a situation where candidates’ agents were locked up in classrooms while some others went on rigging, maiming and beating up others. It is very agonising and traumatising. I request that we table this motion; we look at the way elections –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you do not have to beg. Our rules of procedure are there to facilitate you; if you want to bring a substantive motion on the subject, do so.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. And where legislators representing people jibe at Ssembabule on a matter of national importance, I am very disappointed. (Laughter) I think at an appropriate time, we will bring a motion to look into the conduct of elections in this  country. Thank you. [HON. MEMBER: “I will  second  you.”]
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to – 

THE SPEAKER: I am prolonging  this kind  of interruption because of  the recess we  have had. Otherwise, I should have cut it short. You can continue.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me take this opportunity to congratulate you and other Members who made it through the elections. I also wish to thank those who participated and lost. 

On a special note, I want to thank the Prime Minister and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. The Prime Minister exhibited impartiality and parenthood when I talked to him immediately after elections. For hon. Kasaija, after I called him when some of his officers misbehaved, he acted professionally. I only wish that we had many of those two people.

Mr Speaker, I also thank God that the three people from Ssembabule have been able to make it back here: hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Kawooya and hon. Kutesa. I was worried in light of what happened during the party primary elections. I was all the time praying for them because I feared that some of them could have lost their lives.  But like the saying goes: “However sharp a razorblade is, you need an axe to cut a tree.”

I want to bring the plight of some Ugandans to the attention of Government. We all know what is happening in Libya. There are Ugandans who have been providing goods and services to the Libyan Embassy in Uganda. But given what is happening in Libya, they have not been paid. We also hear that the ambassador was under house arrest but has now found his way to South Africa. 
We also heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs together with hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Aggrey Awori were meant to have been in a delegation to Libya but hon. Awori did not leave. However, mid-air, hon. Kutesa  and hon. Amama Mbabazi were told to come back since they would not have found their way out of Libya. 

We have also got information that brother Gaddafi has lost two sons. We had expected a statement from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because we have had a statement from the President through the newspapers. 

What is Uganda’s position since we know the position that the UN Security Council took? I want to know from government – because we do not want to rely on rumours - we have got information that Government has guaranteed the Libyan Embassy in order to have the people who provided goods and services paid. But they are still uncomfortable because they do not know whether they will be paid or not. I would want to hear, from the Government, a formal statement either from the Prime Minister or Minister of Foreign Affairs or the two who attempted to fly to Libya. 

The other  issue, Mr Speaker, is the manner in which our colleagues who were affected by the Constitutional Court ruling are being treated when accessing Parliament. When we read what happened to hon. Mukisa and others, it is not humane. I may not be in Parliament  today  but I  may come back tomorrow. We have a number of colleagues who were  in the Sixth Parliament and  not in the Seventh Parliament but came back in the Eighth Parliament. We also have those who have won  elections but cannot access these chambers until May.  How will they look at the people who are mistreating them now? How can you  be  guarded to  access your office? We have only a computer and a table; what can a  Member of Parliament take?

I think these Members of Parliament have had psychological  torture in the  campaigns, through the Constitutional Court  ruling, but we  also want to add to it! It will be embarrassing  if  one of  our  colleagues passed away out of this kind of frustration. We are one and should treat others the way we want to be treated. So, I request you  to  help sort  out this  issue  because it is not a good precedence. 

 Finally, today is the World Water Day. I read  a statement – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, normally we do not – after the communication, I thought it was a limited contribution, but now you are covering very many areas.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Let me also join the previous speakers who have welcomed you back from that hectic exercise. I am sorry for those who did not succeed, but the competition is like that; you expect losers and winners.

My point is to congratulate all of you for the manner in which you conducted yourselves in terms of keeping law and order. I want to especially commend the presidential candidates. You encouraged us who are in charge of security when you conducted yourselves gentlemanly or gentlewomanly. 

I am sorry for the few ugly incidents that may have taken place. But generally speaking, we in the security sector were very impressed by your conduct and we pray that you continue with the same spirit, teaching it across the country.

I wish to take  this opportunity  to  congratulate our Police – I think they did a wonderful  job. (Applause) In life you cannot have 100 percent perfection – true, there were a few incidents where the Police may have not done a good job, but I think, generally, you all felt, to some extent, that actually the country was secure except in a few cases as I have said, especially in Kampala.

I don’t vote in Kampala, but after the election when I came here, I could feel the presence of the state everywhere and everybody was given a chance to go and exercise his or her democratic right.

Of course we would also like to congratulate the other security agencies for having cooperated with  us  as Police and we pray that this remains the  case. I  want to pledge  one thing;  in future we shall perform better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.12
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to congratulate all those  who  successfully went through the elections and welcome back the Members of Parliament who have been participating in the exercise, irrespective of the outcome.

Everybody has his or her own experience on how the elections have been conducted and what experiences each had at various levels of electioneering. The most important thing for the Parliament of Uganda is to learn from the current mistakes or experiences, if any, so that we can provide legislative measures, which can prevent the occurrence of similar situations, if we are able to do so through legislation.

Whereas I don’t wish to disagree with my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo when he talks about a motion, the only limitation with a motion is that we are going to meet Members of Parliament who are already angry about what has happened and we may not only be talking about our experiences; we may also leave out a lot of vital experiences by people who are not necessarily Members of Parliament, but who have had a lot to do with these elections. 

The biggest limitation with a  motion is that even the Electoral Commission  itself may be having issues with Members of Parliament like not providing enough funds and not passing laws in time, when it would want them to make an input.

May I, therefore, propose - I don’t know through which organ of Government - that we conduct a post-election conference where people can prepare papers on experiences; where election observers can come and present a paper on what has been established, and in future when the report is compiled and when the Parliament of Uganda is making future legislation, that can be a point of reference for us to plan through. The  LC Vs  had  their experiences,  but they will not come here. LC IIIs also had experiences on the way the elections were conducted and these are different from the way they were conducted at the presidential and parliamentary level. So, whereas the motion is good and we don’t prevent it, may I propose that for now –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. Dombo for giving me the space. The information I want to give hon. Dombo is that there was a report one time, which was produced by one committee in Parliament regarding election violence. A lot of money and hours, space and time were incurred in producing that report, but ever since the report was published, it has never been brought before Parliament. So even if this conference - I doubt whether it will ever see light again -

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the two are different. Regarding the election violence report, the Police should have taken up the report and begun pursuing the people who were involved and indulged in violence. I want to tell this House that because of the bi-party committee which was set up, there was a lot of improvement on our electoral laws that we passed here, which made the exercise better than what it has been in the past.

We must agree that if we have a post-election conference, I don’t know by whichever arm of Government, there can be varied experiences, which we can share and which can help future legislation.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank Members for the contributions and call on them that where we are called upon to do a little bit more; we should do our duty because that is what we have sworn to do. I thank you.

3.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank you for the communication.

I want to join my colleagues and express my gratitude that I am here at least to speak as a survivor. Most importantly, I want to invite the House not to reflect on themselves but to reflect on this nation and where it is going.

There are scenarios in the world where incumbents have won elections with 98 percent or more and yet there is a lot of disquiet and discomfort. So, while we are either licking our wounds or rejoicing that we have been re-elected, or traumatised or tormented, I want to invite this House to figure out - just try to imagine, even if you don’t want to, what the country could be feeling after this election.

This election has made the 1980 elections look like a kindergarten when you are in university. In 1980 I understand - Mr Speaker, if you could ask hon. Aggrey Awori to shut up and I proceed with my submission, I would be very happy. I want to draw your attention even to the aftermath; the ongoing incidents in the countryside. For those of you who come from the ruling party, maybe things are okay. But for our supporters in the country side, they are still having a nightmare. In Bukedea for instance, our supporters are having a tough time. One of our campaigners called Ikuniat, a lady in the Women’s League in the FDC, had her home torched just a few days ago. 

In Kolir, another chairman of our party had his house torched. In Ongino, during campaigns - the Minister of Internal Affairs will tell us who - we had another man called Abdullah whose home was torched. In Serere as I talk now, when you go to Kiere Health Centre, the nurses will ask you, “Who did you vote for? You voted for Alaso; let her bring you drugs.” These are things, which are happening in this country. So, while we are comfortable that we have been re-elected, our people are paying a price for expressing their will, whichever way they did it.

Mr Speaker, towards elections, we tried to propose reforms here. One of the key things we wanted was a constitutional amendment so that we re-constitute the Electoral Commission. Government came here and said there was no time to do it, but now we have the time to do it. Can Government come here and address concerns to do with the credibility of the Uganda Electoral Commission? After all, President Museveni, the single most beneficiary of the Electoral Commission, has also complained. So, why don’t you now come and we change the Electoral Commission? 

How do you explain that there are four million voters who go to a polling station without voter identity cards, and you still call that competence? All the newly registered voters, four million in total, were not given voter identity cards and you want to call that a competent Electoral Commission? You bring in a register; you give political parties registers which are different from registers that your presiding officers used on the polling day; and you call that a competent Electoral Commission? Electoral Commission! 

Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission proved its incompetence to the maximum; it exercised and implemented a grand scheme to derail and deny Ugandans their popular will with precision. No wonder that all the opinion polls that preceded the voting said that President Museveni was going to get 60 percent plus, and he got exactly that. That is the precision with which the EC worked. 

Finally, I would like to join my colleagues who have called for honesty on the part of this House. We are part of the problem. We delayed to enact the laws; we did not give opportunity for early preparation. We should be honest and accept our contribution towards the flawed elections that we had. 

I told hon. Daudi Migereko two months or so before these elections that if they continued with this systematic scheme, they could have a House with one party. And if you continue with these systematic grand schemes that deny Ugandans popular will, you will one day wake up with one party in Parliament. And, Mr Speaker, we will be handing over to a one-party Parliament without deliberately amending the Constitution. You will find this Parliament without an Opposition. 

I was in this House in 2001 when the Select Committee on Election Violence was set up and it brought here a report. But what did we do as Parliament? We swept the report under the carpet. We passed a supplementary budget; we passed the monies for this country; the obscene levels of spending during the last elections need to be investigated. This House should be able to tell Ugandans where the money came from. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The last contribution will be from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Normally I would have cut you short, but I have treated these like maiden speeches because you have just come out of the elections. (Laughter) Otherwise, this should have been short.  

3.23
MR NATHAN MANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Bugisu and to be specific, I come from Budadiri West constituency in Sironko District -(Interjections)- and I am circumcised as you will see. 

There are things we need to talk about and listen to one another. We need to appreciate them and find a lasting solution. In 2001, as a Member of Parliament, we came here and said that we needed to form a committee to look into election violence, and we invited people from all corners of this country. The committee produced a 500-page report, but when we were about to adopt the report, it went missing. Maybe if we had adopted it some of these occurrences would not have happened.

I am not an armed man, but I saw enough Army in Budadiri West. I had seen over ten tankers –(Interjections)- I don’t know what they are called since I don’t know the English that is applicable in the Army, but I call them Mambas. There were over 10 Mambas –

THE SPEAKER: Could you please bear with me? I should have introduced some of our guests here, but I did not have their details. In the public gallery, we have the Dean and Student Leaders of Gulu University, please welcome them; you are welcome. (Applause) 

In a particular way, I would like to welcome hon. Erias Lukwago, the Lord Mayor-elect of Kampala Capital City. You are most welcome. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to welcome the Lord Mayor-elect. Indeed it is a pleasure that you are here. 

As I was saying, there were over 10 Mambas – we villagers call them “tankers;” I don’t know what others call them because I am not an Army personnel – coming to fight a population, which is not armed. 

Civilians were dressed in Army uniforms and were carrying guns. We have reported these cases, but none of these guys in the Executive has taken any action. And that is why – you see some of us ask, “What was the rationale of this election?” We were told that the election was going to be Police led, but in Budadiri West, it became Army led and the people have been hurt. 

Mr Speaker, 27 people went to the bush in 1980 because of an election that was rigged. And we know that they are here and are most likely the happiest because after the bush, they are the chief beneficiaries. If you went to the bush because of rigging elections, what the Electoral Commission has done to the masses is likewise so painful. 

I will add another example so that you understand what I am saying. I know what most of our colleagues went through. In my constituency, there are 113 polling stations. But of those, ten presiding officers put inside the ballot boxes, tally forms for only one person, Nandala-Mafabi and the rest were available. The reason was that those polling stations are basically in my parish and the neighbouring one because they had thought – I think my opponent and the state machinery – that if they could win the other areas where I could have won, they would reject the results from these ten. 

Mr Speaker, that is the Electoral Commission; they trained people to go and do it, but they had deliberately done it that way. Unfortunately, out of 113 polling stations, I had won 110 with a margin of more than 300 at each polling station. (Applause) In fact if you add on the 10 polling stations, I should be over 90 percent. But if this Electoral Commission is trying to do an act of failing people to get their rightful person, it is very unfortunate. I am just lucky that I had won 110; what about that ones who had border cases? What happens? Those are the people we are talking about.

I think we should revisit the - I recall you have been the Speaker since the other time -(Interruptions)- he wants to be - but I also want to be a Speaker to deal with such things as election violence. (Laughter) Yes, I will be a Speaker who will never hide a report. I will make sure it is finished and action taken, but that is not the issue for now. I think we need to revisit the election violence report of 2001 and see if there are some things we could look into. 

We need to look at this election violence again. Nobody should lie that there is no election violence. If hon. Theodore Ssekikubo from NRM can cry; what about us in the Opposition? There are many untold stories that if you are thinking, “We want somebody to wait for an appropriate time”, I think we can start this process and if this Parliament ends, other people will continue the process. It will be one of the good things to move. This issue of saying, “We shall have a meeting of people coming to discuss and after that” - there have been many meetings -

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, we agreed that there will be a formal motion to deal with the issue of elections. Your contribution was supposed to be brief. Therefore, I would request you to wind up as we wait for the motion and then we shall go full blast. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I think we want those who are good at drafting motions to do it quickly and I was thinking that if Parliament comes up, we would tender a lot of evidence; but if it fails, since nowadays ICC is open, many of us will seek recourse in that direction because we thought this Government was pro-people, but what happened? I do not know.

Finally, I want to congratulate those who won genuinely, not those who stole -(Interjections)- Yes, those who won genuinely; I congratulate them. Those who stole know themselves and those who lost because of bad things, we are sorry for you; but we believe that Uganda is for all of us and we need all of us to - nobody told me to be born in Uganda; I found myself here. Uganda is for all of us and we need to have respect for each other, and if it is an election process, it must be an election process. If we believe it is not an election and we want to make it a game which it is not, then you should tell us.

I want to console my colleagues who lost “non- genuinely” that there is time for everything and I can only ask God to bless everybody. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. I think we shall have another occasion to make more contributions on the issue of elections, but today this was supposed to be a brief one.

I want to adjust the Order Paper to read a message from Her Majesty, the Queen and Head of the Commonwealth.

I wish to report that on the 14th of this month, I was privileged to attend a ceremony in Westminster Abbey to mark the Commonwealth day and subsequently, I was privileged to have a brief audience with Her Majesty, the Queen and I conveyed to her and Prince Philip, your greetings.

But this is the message which Her Majesty read at the occasion:

“Women as agents of change:

On the 8th of March, we marked the hundredth anniversary of the first International Women’s Day. The idea of having a Women’s Day was first proposed against the backdrop of the rapid industrialisation of the early twentieth century. From small beginnings, this idea has grown to become a widely recognised way of celebrating women around the world. While some people use this day to acknowledge the love, admiration and respect for women, others use it to remember the great social and political strides made both by and for women in the last hundred years. There is no right or wrong approach.

In the Commonwealth, every year, 26 million girls are born and this equates to one new baby girl arriving almost every second of every day. In the time it takes to hold the Commonwealth Observance Service at Westminster Abbey, nearly 4,000 girls will have been born in Commonwealth lands. And every one of these births marks the start of a new life, a journey which begins with the hopes of parents, families and communities and which is continued through the aspirations of those girls themselves.

This year, the Commonwealth celebrates the important role that women already play in every walk of life and in every Commonwealth country from the richest to the poorest areas, across continents and oceans, from villages to places of international debate, in every culture and faith recognising that women are ‘agents of change’ in so many ways; as mothers and sisters, teachers and doctors, artists and craftspeople, smallholders and entrepreneurs, and as leaders of our societies unleashing the potential of those around them.

And also this year, the Commonwealth reflects on what more could be achieved if women were able to play an even larger role. For example, I am encouraged that last year the Commonwealth launched a global effort to train and support half a million more midwives worldwide. In all this work, the commendable goal is to create a greater opportunity for women as children and adults to pursue their hopes and dreams, to attain their goals and to make the best use of their talents and knowledge.

This year and on Commonwealth Day especially, as governments continue to search for new ways to tackle these important challenges, let us all give a thought to the practical ways in which we as individuals or as groups can provide support to girls and women so that everyone can have a chance of a fuller and more rewarding life wherever they happen to be born.

Elizabeth R
14 March 2011
Commonwealth Secretariat, Marlborough House, London”

Thank you very much.

Before we come to item No.4, I also want to make an adjustment to the Order Paper to allow hon. Dr Epetait to lay a document on the Table.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I raised the issue of the people whom we supply with goods and services, and I expected a response.

THE SPEAKER: No, at least give them time so that maybe tomorrow we could start with that. 

3.41
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I rise to lay on the Table a report on the capacity of our national health institutions in Uganda. 

I note with concern that we have had a very challenging experience in the health sector. Today, all the health units in the country are in dire need of supplies. Last year, we hired a consultant through the Office of the Leader of the Opposition to undertake a study on the capacity of our national health institutions. The report which I have here details all the health units that we have; both government and private not-for-profit health institutions, district by district. 

I beg to report that we handled the eighty districts before we sub-divided them. The report also details the staffing levels in those health units. From the national referral hospitals up to health centres II.  I have even gone an extra step to send a copy of that report to all Members. I implore you to check your mail. 

Mr Speaker, the situation is so bad that our national average for personnel is about 50 percent of the health workers. Some of the districts are even operating at a very bad level. In this study, Isingiro District has the worst staffing level at 21 percent. 

I would also like to state that this report shows that the remuneration levels of all the cadres from senior consultants to the lowest - the report states their remuneration levels and the functionality of the various units. This report details the functionality of health centres II and health centres III by name, throughout the country. 

I also urge Members to take interest in visiting the health institutions in their various constituencies. I was dismayed in November 2009, during my routine oversight function as a Shadow Minister of Health; I visited Kaabong Hospital. It was sad to note that even the limited accommodation available for health workers had been taken over by other civil servants like the RDC, CAO and chief finance officer. They were sleeping in the staff houses while the medical superintendent and other clinical officers were renting outside the hospital. It was so absurd and I decided to hold an impromptu meeting at the chairman’s office. I told them that I could not allow that to continue. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Health; and indeed I communicated to the Prime Minister over this matter. Thank you for the prompt action that was taken to get those civil servants out and let the medical staff occupy their rightful place. 

In most of the health units in this country today, you find patients lying on the floor. Right from the National Referral Hospital, Mulago, up to the lowest; you find that the medical workers are so disturbed – 

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is to lay it on the Table and we shall debate it. 

DR EPETAIT: So, Mr Speaker, as I lay this report on the Table and since we are going into budgeting, I would like to urge Government to reconsider the plight of Ugandans. Medical workers are handcuffed and the supplies are inadequate. We also need to revisit our financing for drugs. Parliament recommended that we increase the budget for credit line to 70 percent and reduce primary health care from 70 to 30 percent. But Government unilaterally took all the finances for drugs to credit line. Now most health facilities are handcuffed, whenever there are inadequate supplies from National Medical Stores. We need to revisit this. This report is dated 07 July 2010 and it is the Report on the National Health Institutions Capacity Assessment, submitted to the Shadow Minister of Health by the consultant that was hired. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee undertake to study and subsequently make a report to us. But I want you also to realise that committees to which Bills and reports are submitted will in future be required to make periodical reports as to their position in respect of the matters committed to them. That is, if a Bill is committed to a committee, let us say, after three or four weeks, you should come here to tell us the position of the committee. 

For instance, if this one is going to the Social Services Committee, let that committee say, “We have studied or we are still studying it and we are remaining with this much”; because some of these Bills overstay with the committees without the House knowing why.

MR ROBERT SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is not about elections. While Mother Nature allowed us to have elections, Mother Nature in Japan did not allow them – 

THE SPEAKER: No, please – maybe tomorrow but not now.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2010

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I congratulate you for having been re-elected and to congratulate Members of Parliament for succeeding in returning. For those who failed, I congratulate them for having competed democratically. 

I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, the certificate was given and I am giving you a copy -(Interjections)- and also an extra copy of the Bill itself.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and making a subsequent report.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (REVISION OF MINIMUM CAPITAL
REQUIREMENTS) INSTRUMENT, 2010

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have persistently expressed concern about this practice where ministers come up with Bills of this nature; which ordinarily would require amendment of the Penal Code - like in this particular case, the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill. We have a whole chapter in the Penal Code dealing with counterfeits. Would it be procedurally correct, surely, even with good draftsmanship, to come up with a Bill on every crime in this country? Why wouldn’t the minister bring an amendment to the Penal Code as a whole? If it is a question of penalties, then we amend that. If it is about realigning the provision, we do that; but for every criminal practice in this country to have a Bill would be very unfortunate.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say is that although this Bill has been committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament; it is the right of any Member here, if he has an interest or if he has a contribution to make; to go to the appropriate committee and make the kind of submission you are making. You have merits in the submission and the committee is free, when it considers this Bill to say, “We do not think it is necessary.” So, this is a matter that will be considered when the committee starts considering this Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I am foreseeing these issues of saying Certificate of Financial Implication as something to hoodwink us. Today I was looking at the budget of the Ministry of Trade. I do not see any figure, which will deal with this issue of the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill. I am worried. Is it a matter of coming here and telling us, “Here is the Certificate of Financial Implications,” yet if this Bill had financial implications, it would be in the budget. I want the Minister of Trade to show me under what budget line that figure you are talking about in financial implications is found. I want help because this business of coming to tell us that the financial implications are catered for is worrying me. And the minister is here. He should tell us so that I go and read the budget line. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I will not ask him to do that now. What you can do – this has been the practice where Bills to which maybe committees will belong, have been receiving this certificate. When the committee is considering the document that has been submitted to it; it should also make those observations or call the minister concerned and then raise the issues with him. Proceed.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, paxo omnibus and Members, domino’s vobiscum. I beg to lay on the Table a statutory instrument, The Financial Institutions (Revision of Minimum Capital Requirements) Instrument 2010.

THE SPEAKER: On this? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister of Finance say something which I did not understand completely.

THE SPEAKER: He spoke some words, which I did not understand either -(Interjections)- and I wondered whether he was speaking in Madi, Alur -(Interjections)- or something like that and I thought that the official language -(Interjections)- of this House is English. At best we try Kiswahili; at worst we translate. I thought he could tell me what he said, so that I follow. I did not hear it. Maybe, can you help us on that?

MS ALASO: If he could say it, I would follow -(Laughter)

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I have been in the bush for 60 days where I have been speaking only vernacular. So, if hon. Alaso could not pick; I said paxo ominibus, “Peace be with you” and domino’s vobiscum, “May the Lord be with you all”. (Laughter)

I beg to lay on the Table the statutory instrument, “The Financial Institutions (Revision of Minimum Capital Requirements) Instrument, 2010.” 

THE SPEAKER: I think they need to know why.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the minister responsible for finance by Section 265 of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 and on the advice of the Central Bank; this instrument is made on the 3rd day of November, 2010 -(Interjections) The title of this instrument may be cited as, “The Financial Institutions (Revision of Minimum Capital Requirements) Instrument, 2010”.

The Minimum Capital Requirements 

(i)	A person who transacts financial institutions’ business in the capacity of a bank in Uganda shall have a minimum paid-up cash capital of not less than one million, two hundred and fifty thousand currency points invested initially in such liquid assets in Uganda as the Central Bank may approve -

THE SPEAKER: No, no, that is okay. But I think what he needed to do was to give the foundation as to why he is bringing it to Parliament. It is because not every instrument made by a minister is laid on the Table in Parliament. There must be a provision commanding you to bring it to the House. Anyway, the appropriate committee of Parliament will undertake a study and see the foundation for this report then tell us why.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, revision is not bad; but the intention must be well known. He is moving to one million, two hundred and fifty currency points. He is talking about Shs 25 billion from Shs 4 billion if I am not mistaken. You can see the jump; from Shs 4 billion – yes, you multiply by 20,000 – so, Mr Speaker, you are right to ask, “What is the rationale?” “What has changed?” It should be one of the justifications here that, “It is because of this that we have changed and the reason we are moving is this ….” How do you move from Shs 4 billion to Shs 25 billion? That is number one.

Number two, unless they want to curtail people and make it a monopoly maybe for a few people – you are increasing minimum capital. If you are doing the thing that change of life has come up, then the minister should also increase – that means life – the standard of living has gone up, the salary of civil servants must go up in the same proportion because the cost of living is high. You do not come and raise a figure seeking for one side. 

THE SPEAKER: But we are taking over the work of the committee. You have minutes but what you are raising should be done in the committee and the committee will come back to us either supporting the contents of the supplement or not and definitely, the minister will be summoned to go to the committee to explain the justification. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to: 
a)	Establish an independent authority to regulate the establishment, management and operation of retirement benefit schemes in Uganda, in both the public and private sector;
b)	Supervise institutions which provide retirement benefits products and services;
c)	Protect the interests of members and beneficiaries of retirement benefit schemes;
d)	Establish an operational fund into which shall be paid all monies for defraying expenses of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority; 
e)	Promote the development of the retirement benefits sector;
f)	Provide for licensing of retirements benefits service providers such as custodians, trustees, administrators and fund managers;
g)	Provide for the appointment of inspectors and interim administrators; and Mr Speaker, for other related matters. I thank you. 

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to add my voice to others, to congratulate everybody and welcome you back. Our report on the Bill is being circulated, make sure you get a copy so that we move together –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 2, they say that they met the NSSF and if you look at the report, it is dated November 2010, and some of the Members who signed it are not part of Parliament as we speak. So, which dates of this report are we going to discuss? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I cannot make a ruling because there is need for verification of the facts raised. I can only make a ruling after the facts have been verified. It is for the chairman to explain, and then I will make a ruling. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the NSSF appeared before the committee twice. We received submissions from the management of the NSSF and later on, we received the board members who came to reaffirm what the management had submitted to us. Unfortunately, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was not in that meeting. The submissions of the board were reaffirming what management had submitted to us. Before the end of last year or before we went for elections, we had concluded our business and we have been waiting for an opportunity to lay this report on the Table. Thank you. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I think we need to set a good precedent for this Parliament. I thought the chairman of the committee was going to give us succinct information as to when they last had a meeting with the NSSF? I thought that was the root cause –(Interjection)– yes, that is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is a member, is asking. He says they recently held a meeting with officials from the National Social Security Fund and if they did, was their view not part of this report? If it is so, then you cannot have the report dated the way it is now. You should update it. Please, clarify that. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I have made my statement that the management of the NSSF appeared before us last year and we concluded our report. The other week, the NSSF board felt it important to come and show solidarity and associate with the views of their own management – 

THE SPEAKER: I think my understanding of the chairman’s explanation is that the NSSF sent its management at an earlier time and they gave their views. Subsequently, I think the board also came and there was nothing new and so, there was nothing to alter or add to the report. This is what he is saying - whether it is true or not - what he can do is subsequently bring the minutes after he reads the report. That is how we should proceed. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think to the best of my recollection, minutes of committee meetings form vital documents of this report. If the NSSF came last week, I believe that their interaction was minuted. Will going ahead to refer to this report as a November 2010 report not imply that we discarded the interaction the committee had with the NSSF last week?

THE SPEAKER: I imagine that what will happen is that the committee will present its report by reading it or giving a summary. When they conclude, they can table the minutes of the committee. You do not start with minutes before you can table the report. You table the report and then submit the minutes.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, should it turn out that there is a contradiction – 

THE SPEAKER: “Should it turn out …” we have not started debating the report. As far as we are concerned, we are only listening and after listening and checking with the minutes, we shall be able to say whether there is variance in this one. So give him the opportunity to present his case and then later we shall interview him. Unfortunately, he says he is a member of the committee; I do not really understand why you bring your domestic matters here when you should have solved them domestically. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) hold on, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; you are a member of the committee and you must have seen this report earlier. Why didn’t you raise it with your committee? Anyway, I have directed that the chairman is free to present his reports and the minutes, and then we shall consider the authenticity of the report. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise guidance. I appeal to you hon. Members, to always attend meetings -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a separate note, challenging the competence of the report because many of those who signed the report – about four of them - are those who were affected by the Constitutional Court ruling and they were directed to vacate their seats and refund the money retrospectively. I can see hon. Julius B - I have a problem pronouncing the surname name; hon. Oleny Charles; hon. Ruth Tuma; they signed and these are the people that have been banned even from -[HON. MEMBERS: “Read on.”] Hon. William Oketcho did not sign, but he could have influenced the committee report by his views -(Laughter)- and hon. Guma. So, I want to be advised. We should not be in a hurry. Everyone wants the elders like my dad who has retired to benefit, but we should not hurry with illegalities. These people have been asked even to refund the money from the date they were nominated. So, I beg your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: My guidance is this. I think you have prematurely raised a valid issue. You wait for the chairman to conclude saying, “This is the report signed,” and then you can raise it. But as of now, when he has read only the first page you cannot raise that. You have merit; he has to wait. I direct that you just wait and then you shall raise it. You will raise it after the report has been read and you conclude it by showing us the signatures. 

In any case, according to our rules, how many signatures are required for a report to be valid? I direct you come in - let the report be presented then you raise your issues. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 03 May 2010 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has, in accordance with rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, scrutinised the Bill and now has the honour to present its findings to the House.

Methodology

The committee discussed with and received memoranda from the following: the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Public Service, the National Organisation of Trade Unions and the National Social Security Fund. The committee also reviewed all relevant legislation in other countries, which provided useful information for the consideration of the Bill.

The Objectives of the Bill are to:

a) 	Establish an independent authority to regulate the establishment, management and operation of retirement benefit schemes in Uganda in both the public and private sector.
b) 	Supervise institutions which provide retirement benefit products and services.
c) 	Protect the interest of members and beneficiaries of retirement benefit schemes.
d) 	Establish an operational fund into which shall be paid all monies for defraying the expenses of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority.
e) 	Promote the development of the retirement benefits sector.
f) 	Provide for licensing of retirement benefits services providers such as custodians, trustees administrators, fund managers et cetera.
g) 	Provide for the appointment of inspectors and interim administrators.
h) 	Cater for the other related matters.

Mr Speaker, part 4 narrates the salient features of the Bill up to the top of page 5 of the report. I will not read it. Allow me to go to part 5, observations and recommendations of the committee.

The committee makes the following general observations:
1.	There is need to sensitise the public about the importance of retirement benefits. Members need to understand that retirement benefits are premised on the fact that one will continue to receive income even after retirement from active service. 

2.	The retirement benefits sector needs to be liberalised to boost competition and better service delivery for the beneficiaries. In this regard the committee was informed by the minister that soon he or she would present a Bill to liberalise the sector. The committee recommends that the Bill be urgently presented to Parliament so as to effect the retirement benefits sector.

3.	There is need to harmonise all the relevant Acts to bring them in line with the provision of this law, once effected. 

Part 6, Specific Observations/Recommendations on the Bill

Commencement

The committee noted that this Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument and that different dates may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions. The committee was informed that a budgetary allocation has been reserved for this purpose and, therefore, we propose that clause 1 be deleted.

Powers of the Authority

The Bill does not give the authority specific powers, for example, of search and inspection. These are important intervention measures that would enable the authority effectively implement its mandate. The committee proposes to insert a new clause 7 to provide for powers of the authority to investigate, issue directions, search and impose conditions on a licence like suspension and revocation of licences in case of breach. 

Re-investment of Funds

Clause 23 makes a provision for re-investment of surplus funds. The committee notes that this is intended to make the Authority self-sustaining. However, the committee recommends that the minister should be consulted in the process of re-investing the retained funds since he/she is mandated to report to Parliament on the use of such funds.

Licensing Retirement Benefit Schemes

Clause 30(2) provides that on the grant of a licence to operate a retirement benefits scheme, the scheme shall become a body corporate, have perpetual succession, be able to sue and be sued and do anything which a body corporate may do. However, the committee observed that these are characteristics akin to a company not a trust and, therefore, proposes that sub-clause 2 be deleted.

Provision for Electronic Transactions

The committee noted that the law does not provide avenues for electronic transactions and yet this is an electronic age. The committee thereby proposes to amend clause 62 to accommodate this.

Inspection of a Register

The committee noted that the authority shall maintain a register that is open for inspection by any person upon payment of a prescribed fee. The committee, however, recommends that the requirement of a fee as proposed in clause 63 be deleted for being restrictive to some sections of the public.

Remittance of Member Contributions

The committee notes that some sponsors of schemes do not remit member contributions and, therefore, proposes in clause 71 to increase the penalty of non-remittance of member contributions from two percent to 10 percent of the total contributions that remains unpaid for each month provided for.

Auditing of Pension Schemes

Due to the complexity of retirement benefits, the committee recommends that an auditor for the retirement benefits schemes should be registered by the Institute of Chartered Public Accounts in Uganda and approved by the authority.

Tribunal

Given the lengthy court process, the committee recommends the establishment of a specialised tribunal to help resolve, expeditiously, disputes that will arise from the application of the Act. This will ensure efficiency in the dispute resolution process. The committee thus proposes a new part 9 to provide for retirement benefits tribunal.

Offences and Penalties

The offences and penalties provided for in the Bill focus on acts against the CEO or the persons authorised by the CEO which may prevent them from performing their functions as well as employees of the authority who contravene the law. Hereby, the committee proposes a new clause, the general penalty clause, after clause 85, to attract other actors like custodians, fund managers, trustees and administrators who contravene the provisions under the law.

Transitional Funds

The Members observed that the three months’ period in clause 94 is too short to enable the schemes and licensees to comply with provisions herein and, we therefore, propose an amendment to extend the transition period to 12 months.

Conclusion

The committee has scrutinised the Bill and has made its observations, which can guide the House to the proposed law.

The committee made a number of proposed amendments as attached to this report and beg the House to pass these amendments. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

4.22
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I just stand up to withdraw the preliminary objections I had earlier raised. Even when the three MPs who were discontinued from Parliament are removed; there still remain eight signatures, which are beyond the requirement of seven. However, the concerns that I have raised should serve as early warning signals to future committee reports.

THE SPEAKER: I think those of you who are talking about this should address themselves to Article 94. You will see that the presence of one who should not be there does not nullify what goes on.

4.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, the importance of raising this item was that we had had a meeting last week. I would have been happy if our report was dated after the meeting of last week. That was the issue that we were raising.

That is because there are some issues that we had wanted to add on to the presentation of NSSF. This business of creating so many authorities to deal with financial services is not the right thing. World over many governments have one regulatory, financial institution and they all fall under that. You find that capital markets, insurance and pensions are all there. This business of creating authorities all the time is a cost to the public because these organisations need money.

MR DAVID BAHATI: The point of procedure I am raising is about hon. Nandala-Mafabi. He seems to be debating the report that he has presented to us. I think it is unfair to debate a report, which you have given us. Why don’t you allow us to debate a report that you have written? Is it procedurally right for the member of the committee to debate a report that has presented to the House?

THE SPEAKER: I have already said that the domestic disharmony should be solved in the committee. Since the question has been asked, may be the minister will answer you for our benefit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not objecting to the ruling that you have made. I was just thinking through the costs that we were going to incur. The pensioners will lose some money that goes to maintain the authorities and that means that people who have saved will get less money than that saved.

THE SPEAKER: What Bahati was saying is that why didn’t you ask the minister when he appeared before you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am asking the minister to think through it because it is very important.

MR OKUPA: I want to get a clarification from the chairman of the committee. I am a bit taken aback by the presentation which you made especially where you were saying that you met the last stakeholders last week. If you met the last stakeholders last week how come that those who were affected by the court ruling have signed the report? This tells me that this report was signed long ago so there is nothing new.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thought that I had made myself clear. We concluded business on this Bill in November. Last week the NSSF board requested that they wanted to come and associate and reaffirm the views presented by their management. I do not think that it was out of order for me as chair to listen to them. They came and presented what had already been presented.

That did not necessarily need altering the report. The report remained as was and their issues were captured. Those which were not captured, it was in the wisdom of the committee to leave them.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe they should have put the date where they signed. I think in future committees should put a date when the report was signed.

4.28
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I just want to add my voice to hon. Nandala’s concern about the title of the Bill. What I believe is that the title of law normally depicts what it is supposed to act on. In this case if we call this a retirement benefits authority, it does not bring out the meaning of the Bill. 

When you read the Bill, it indicates that it is going to regulate the pension schemes of the country. So, if we call it an authority then it becomes something different. 

We would prefer to change the title to read: “Pension Schemes Regulatory Act” because it is intending to regulate the pension schemes in the country. It is too wide as it is.

THE SPEAKER: You can propose an amendment when we come to the Committee Stage. Give notice of the amendment and the minister will consider it.
MR KADDUNABBI: The concern of hon. Ssentongo is already catered for in the proposed amendments.

4.32
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Most workers find it very hard to access their benefits, both from NSSF and from the Public Service. And as if that is not enough, the age limit for accessing benefits from NSSF is also inhibitive. I think it is not fair for a worker, having saved his or her money, to be left to the vagaries of the difficult economy upon leaving a job. I would propose that when we are considering this law, we should reduce the age for access to benefits for NSSF because many workers are having a lot of problems.

As of now, the age limit is around 55. At a certain point when we come to the Committee Stage, I would like to introduce an amendment that we lower the age limit to 45 – let these people access their money.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, there is a problem about this age of retirement. At one time we had to raise it while yet at another they want to lower it. I have heard that in the United Kingdom, they want to raise it but it is being resisted, when I think people here would be happy to continue to be employed. They have been raising it from 60 to 65 but people are up in arms. Now when you suggest that we lower it, it means you are agreeing with the recent government statement that we lower it. Do you really want these people to retire at 45, when people actually want to continue in employment? It is a double-edged sword.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, what I am talking about is the age for accessing one’s benefits from NSSF. I was not talking about retirement but the age limit for one to access savings. Because putting it at 55 – 

THE SPEAKER: Because, you see, when you lower it, you will arm the employer to use it to dismiss people from jobs at an early age by saying: “After all, you have the benefits – go and enjoy them”, when actually people want to continue staying in offices. I do not know what you think.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, you have only given the argument on the side of the employer. But the employees – 

THE SPEAKER: I am actually giving the side of the employees because people want to stay longer at their jobs.

DR EPETAIT: But the employee, after getting out of the job for whatever reason, will need his or her benefits. But the age limit is very inhibitive making the poor man or woman to continue suffering while blaming the law for it. I think there is need for us to review the age limit for access to benefits.

MRS SSENTONGO: I would like to give the House information regarding the age limit. I think it is ideal for us to reduce this age limit because when you look at the epidemic among us, it leaves very many people dying without touching their benefits. At the end of the day, you find that the next of kin find it hard to access this money. So, reducing this age limit will enable people who are terminally sick to at least make some investments for their families with their savings. So, I would like to support the idea.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think Members need to familiarise themselves with the current law because there are exceptions. It is not rigid on the age because there are other issues that make one access their savings like sickness, injury and others. I can give you an example – hon. Odit and I were able to access our NSSF savings because those exceptions enabled me, when I left Uganda Revenue Authority, to access this money. So, I think it is just out of ignorance of those exceptions; otherwise they exist.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bill we are dealing with today is mainly for regulation – regulating all those service providers. But we are in the process of discussing with the stakeholders about the liberalisation of the retirement benefits’ sector and that is where we shall address the issues that hon. Epetait is raising. I just wanted to give that clarification.

4.37
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue we are discussing can only be discussed when somebody moves an amendment to the NSSF Act because that is where the age limit is mentioned. Even in the NSSF Act, if one has not been working for a year, he or she can apply for their money. I think we do not need to discuss that issue here because it is catered for in the NSSF Act.

I want to support the committee on issue 6.2 that deals with the powers of the authority. When the authority is not given the power to investigate, to issue directives and impose conditions, then it is useless. What will it be regulating? If it regulates and somebody does not follow the procedures of the sector, then the authority has to take action. 

On section 6.4, regarding the issue of the trustees, I do not support the committee’s suggestion that it be deleted. It is a body corporate, which should be sued and can sue. The trustee, for those of us who might not know, can be sued individually. This should be retained because it makes members of the board of trustees to behave responsibly since they can be singled out as individuals and sued. 

On section 6.7 that deals with the issue of penalty – hon. Members, we want people to invest. Moreover as a country, we have a problem of unemployment. So if we increase the penalty from two percent to 10 percent, employers might employ fewer people. For those who may not be employers, I want to tell you what usually happens. When it is time for you to pay salaries and you do not have enough money as an institution, you first pay salaries and the deductions, including contributions to employees’ retirement benefits, are considered later because they are not a priority.

So, if organisations have not been remitting these deductions when the penalty was two percent, it means there is a problem. So if we increase it to 10 percent, it means we are pushing the employers to cut on the number of employees. For example, if I have been employing ten people and I have not been able to remit yet there is the two percent penalty, you increase to 10 and that means I will reduce and employ five so that I am able to meet this because there is already a penalty of ten percent.

Let us not do something, which is going to reduce on the number of people who will be employed. This does not mean that we should remove the two percent. I am of the view that we leave it at two percent as ten percent is going to discourage employers to employ people yet as a country, we are faced with that problem -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Lumumba for giving way. I think if you are supposed to remit money on 15th of every month and you do not remit that money for the employee, the penalty we should be looking at is that at the time you remit for the employee, you must remit interest inclusive so that the employee does not lose out on his investment and interest. I think that is what we should look at.

You are right; you are justified but supposing I take ten years then I bring ten percent? It does not make sense. If I had invested the money, I would have earned more interest and that is why there must be a punishment with a fixed timing. Thank you.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the intention of creating a regulator is to safeguard the interests of employees. It is assumed that the employer collects retirement benefits for the employee, keeps it and does not pass it over to the scheme administrators. That is very bad for the employees and that is why this penalty must be prohibitive such that the employer, when he deducts the money, remits regularly. The issue of catering for the interest, which should have come as a result of this money coming in on time, is the reason why someone’s account should attract an interest of ten percent, which is good enough for the employee. I thank you.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you so much for the information but my question is: if there is a penalty of two percent and we are not doing well, when we increase to ten percent is it going to offer a solution to the problem? To all of us who are saying yes, the question is: how many of you remit for your employees and how many do you employ? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

4.44
MS BETI KAMYA (Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I congratulate all of you that made it back to the House. For those of you, like me, who did not make it back, there is a whole life outside Parliament and of course outside State House. There is a lot of work and opportunities out there and of course there is always the opportunity of coming back. 

Having said that; I want to thank the committee for the job that they have presented before us. I appreciate the spirit of the motion and the entire rationale of the Retirement Benefits Scheme.

I have two concerns and they are captured on page 5 of the report under section 5, observations and recommendations. Section 5.1 says, “There is need to sensitise the public about the importance of retirement benefits and members need to understand that retirement benefits are premised on the fact that one will continue to receive an income after active service”. That is where I want to draw my concern and the concern of the members here to.

I want to know why it is necessary to sensitise the whole public - because you say the public and then the members. The members are probably one percent of the population that have interest in this Bill and the public are the 99 percent. I wish to know why we need to sensitise the entire public or what benefit the public will get out of the sensitisation programme.

I am also concerned that this scheme provides for one percent or less of the entire public who are referred to as active service. I do not know what active service means but the other people out there - the 99 percent of the contributors to our coffers - are not catered for. I would like to ask the minister: after 48 years as an independent state, what plans are there to provide for retirement benefits of the larger public? They pay taxes from the day they are born, beginning with the razor blade which cuts their umbilical cord, until they die. Their dead body does not leave the mortuary until they pay taxes and they pay taxes on the coffin and everything used to construct the grave. 

What plans are there to provide for the general public? We cannot be providing and planning for the one percent of the population; mind you, which one percent are the ones who have been getting a salary, housing allowance, medical allowance, and medical schemes. They are the ones who have been getting some benefits and are exposed to all the financial benefits and can save, but the people out there grow old and there is just no plan for them.

In developed countries, there are benefits, homes for old people, senior citizens are recognised, given bus warrants, dole, welfare- Where are we in our plan to provide for the bigger public? I would like to know because we cannot continue providing for only one percent of the population with no plan for the 99 percent. I would like to know that; and of course, as my colleagues know here, in federal states all those are well provided for. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the ministry for finally pushing this very important Bill as well as the committee for finding time during campaigns and immediately after for such an important Bill.

As East Africa, we are integrating. Integration means that there is going to be free flow of our human resources in the region. If we do not move very fast to beat the level of our neighbours who have regulators, we will have a problem. This is because a lot of companies exist in the other partner states and therefore it is very important, even at the level of integration, to make sure we are moving in that direction.

I am also happy that the Bill is mindful both of the provident funds like the one of Public Service and the contributory ones like the NSSF where members contribute. That possibly answers my sister, the former presidential candidate’s, concern. However, we had raised it earlier here in Parliament that it would have made a lot of sense if the two Bills came together. We are now spending a lot of time on the Pension Regulator Benefits Bill in a non-liberalised environment and we are just anticipating a liberalisation. 

It would have been better if we had the two Bills together and then we would be making a regulator in a competitive world so that we take care of a person who wants to leave NSSF today and join another scheme. So, we have a problem because the two have not come together. I would, therefore, like to request that the Bill intended to liberalise be fast tracked. Otherwise, we are going to repeat our work. Even in our pensions’ amendment, we had problems of anticipating what is going to happen. We want to see a bank manager – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I fully identify myself with the concerns being raised by the MP for the oil rich area. I personally went up to the Ministry of Public Service and met the Minister, who is right here, in her office and informally raised the issue of liberalisation of the sector. The information I wanted to give is that if we are passing the law on the regulator today before even knowing the character of those to be regulated - which will only come after the liberalisation. I foresee a situation were we shall amend this law we are making the day we shall liberalise the service. 

So, I am of the opinion that either these laws of liberalising and regulating are brought concurrently or that the one of liberalising is brought before that of regulation so that the moment we liberalise the market, we can suspend their operations for six months pending the law on regulation. To come out today with the character of the regulator means that those who will be regulated will have to be adjusted accordingly on the Floor of this Parliament. 

The information I am giving is that the committee should probably advise us to either fast track both Bills concurrently or suspend this until we liberalise that particular industry. Thank you so much. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, hon. Member, for that information. In that case, Mr Speaker, it is important that the Minister of Finance informs this House and assures the country how that precaution is going to be taken. 

We needed liberalisation yesterday. Our people are getting fewer opportunities in the current legal regime. If you see what is happening in other countries - there is portability that you can even move from such a scheme to a related mortgage scheme. That is the kind of competition we would want. 
 
DR EPETAIT: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. It is over a year now since the Ministry of Finance talked about coming with a Bill to liberalise the sector. May we find out from the Minister of Finance here today: when do you think you will be through with that Bill? For over a year you have been treating Parliament to piecemeal legislation. We want to get a timeframe so that we can take a decision on the way forward on this other Bill. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The principles of the liberalisation Bill were passed by Cabinet and right now we are continuing with consultation with the stakeholders. 

We have been having problems, as you have been emphasising; what NSSF did was to submit their position on the authority Bill some time last year and again they came back a few weeks ago. So, we keep on having this problem with stakeholders wanting to be consulted time and again. Otherwise, the principles were passed and we right now have the draft. So, we believe that once we are through with the consultations, this Bill should be with Parliament within the next two months. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like from the Minister is whether he appreciates the dilemma that the House is confronted with. We are not going to pass the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010 just for the sake of it and then immediately after that, Cabinet comes up with the other Bill and consequently the need another amendment the following week. Wouldn’t it be good if you advised the House based on the fact that you have already seen the Cabinet position on this? You can tell the House to please stay over this, you will be here next week; we will wait and pass it, other than throwing us into a frenzy of activity and then we have another amendment the following week? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, there is some explanation I would like to give colleagues. Even in our committee reports, we made that strong observation that we need the Bill to reform the pension sector urgently. However, that said and done, it does not save the situation to stay this Bill. Why? There are already existing schemes that needed regulation yesterday. So, while we need to give timelines to the minister to bring the liberalisation law, this law is equally important and so is our parliamentary scheme. 

MOTION 

4.58
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): 
“AWARE THAT there are so many schemes existing in our country, which therefore demand that we need a regulator urgently; 

CONSIDERING THAT Cabinet has been fast tracking a Bill to liberalise the pensions sector;

COGNISANT THAT the two issues, that is, the liberalisation of the sector and the regulator will require both Bills to be considered by this House concurrently; 

GIVEN THAT our Cabinet is very interested in making sure that the pensions and retirement benefits in this country are harmoniously handled and regulated;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that the Bill on the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010 be stayed pending tabling of the Bill to liberalise the sector, which Cabinet is due to complete after further consultations with stakeholders.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are you referring to the report or the second reading because the motion we have is for the second reading but the report is only coming in to justify the second reading. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the motion is that we stay debate on the second reading of this Bill and then wait until the Ministry of Finance comes with the Bill to liberalise the sector.

THE SPEAKER: I am impressed with your drafting. It is quite impressive. You continue.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the justification that I give on this motion is as follows: 

The stakeholders who are key in that anticipated Bill on the liberalisation of the sector are the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Service, the National Organisation of Trade Unions and also the National Social Security Fund. Those stakeholders were also very key in this particular second reading that we are considering. In my opinion, Parliament would be treated to double work by considering this Bill separately from the other Bill for liberalisation of the sector. 

More to that; it would make our lives easier to follow the two Bills when we have all of them on the table. Parliament would then make judicious amendments if need be to the anticipated Bill that the Cabinet is now considering because they are really dealing with one and the same thing. 

We need to be aware that for the Bill to liberalise the sector, we should be fully abreast of who are being regulated. Is it the service providers; who are they? I think the best thing we could do is to save the time of Parliament and just give Cabinet a little bit more time; after all, they have already been consulting and they are about to conclude the consultations with stakeholders. Let us give Cabinet the benefit of doubt. Within a short time, they will be back to this House with the next Bill so that we consider the two rather than handling legislation piecemeal. I beg to move that members support this motion. It is in the interest of all of us including Cabinet. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

5.04
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise to second this motion only on two grounds. The delay to bring the law on liberalisation of the scheme to me is not an omission; it is deliberate. There are very many interested parties who want to know the character of the regulator that would in turn determine the character of those to be regulated. In fact, NSSF wants autonomy; they would be the last to be comfortable with another regulator now that they just have been appointed into office.

We have been seeing in the media, even after Jamwa has got 12 years in jail, there are still more scandals in NSSF. I saw this on the front page of the Observer last week. So to say that one of the stakeholders consulted is NSSF, which is an interested party and they do not want competition from other providers like Stanbic, DFCU, of course they would object.

Even Ministry of Finance is an interested party much as they are the political authority. I would say with comfort that there are those who want to do business with Government but well positioned in that ministry. 

Now why would it be important to have the Bill liberalising the sector? This regulator would have a schedule of those to be regulated and we can even make a proviso that the minister shall from time to time update Parliament on the schedule. So, we need to know those to be regulated. We need to know their names. As of now, we are talking of a regulator without knowing who to be regulated. It is very dangerous. It is like saying, “let the regulator be Mr Rat” and then tomorrow the regulated person who emerges in the field is the cat -(Laughter)– and then this Parliament will again be forced to amend.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this House that there are many schemes, which are called occupational schemes, which need to be regulated. You are aware Parliament has a Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, NSSF has a scheme and those two are established by law but they are in-house schemes like the one of Bank of Uganda. You have heard of the problems of the scheme operated by NIC of Makerere University. 

There are so many other schemes; National Water has a scheme even NARO has a scheme. So many companies have in-house schemes and they need a regulator. What Government is trying to do in this Bill is to say that the regulator should be like this and whoever will come on board to do the business of retirement schemes will have to abide.

It is not true that you need to know those to be regulated before you put in place a regulator. We would not have put in place Uganda Revenue Authority because we did not know how many taxpayers we had and who they were. We would not have put in place the Insurance Commission. This Parliament does not wait to know how many insurance companies or how many taxpayers are there in order to have a regulator. The regulator will be answerable to Government and it will be in the interest of the employees. 

If we delay having a regulator in place, the problems of Makerere University and NIC will continue. I would like to interest my colleagues to drop the idea of not moving forward and we have a regulator now. Even the problems of NSSF would be minimised if there was someone to regulate NSSF, but as we talk now no regulator is looking at what is happening in NSSF. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto, for the opportunity to give you some information. In addition to what hon. Kaddunabbi has said, we have a number of schemes already existing and they are there and want to be regulated. This is a question of what many of us in business studies say - should we start with a strategy or should we start with a policy? There are those people who start with a policy and then work out a strategy. The policy of liberalisation is a policy but having an authority is a strategy to achieve. 

I also want to inform you, hon. Odonga Otto, that we have been waiting for these two important legislations for the last 15 years and there is a proverb that says that one bird in the hand is better than a million out there. If we grab this one piece of legislation now, we will have enough ground to make sure that the other one also comes. Just consider that information as we move forward. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I do not think we are talking about the same things. If you looked at the report of the committee on page 2, the objects of the Bill are very clear:

a) 	To establish an independent authority to regulate the establishment, management and operation of retirement benefit schemes in Uganda; and then

b) To supervise institutions which provide retirement benefits’ products and services ….”

What my colleagues are talking about is completely different from this. I do not think provision of this will in any way affect the incoming Bill. That is No.1

No. 2, my colleague’s motion is bad under our rules because it offends rule 67 on anticipation and I wish my colleague could just withdraw it. Rule 67 (i) says: “It is out of order to anticipate a Bill by discussion of a motion dealing with the subject matter of the Bill on a day prior to that appointed for consideration of that Bill.”

If we are talking about a Bill, which is still before Cabinet, then we should not anticipate what is contained in that Bill. So my colleague, please –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the argument seems to be that we need a regulator even before the liberalisation. But the main point that the mover of the motion and myself stand by is not rejecting these good arguments you have raised. He is saying that there are people out there who are tired of the monopoly of NSSF.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kaddunabbi says that the liberalisation he is talking about is already in place because there are many organisations in operation. Is that what you said –(Interjections)– that there are other organisations besides NSSF like Bank of Uganda, Parliament and others that have been allowed to run their pension schemes and it is no longer restricted to one organisation. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I respect your guidance, but this is like bargaining. We are saying that you have a long list of people who are comfortable under NSSF waiting to be regulated but there are others who are crying because of the excesses of NSSF. So we are only using the motion as a negotiating tool -(Laughter)- and this is the point at which the minister should save our time and say, “Give us three months”, and the motion would collapse. Our argument still remains that there are some people who are sick of NSSF.

Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– this is very important. We suspended negotiations on the Prime Minister’s and Vice-President’s retirement Bill until that of the Speaker and Deputy was brought to this House. We should handle this Bill in the same way.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister recognises the need to have a Bill to liberalise the sector. In fact I would like to remind my colleague, hon. Ben Wacha that the Bill for the liberalisation of the pensions sector has been talked about for a longer time than this particular Bill we are now handling. So, since the Bill for liberalisation of the sector was even alluded to in the committee report, my motion wouldn’t have been that bad. 

The minister has told us that they are fast-tracking that Bill. So we did not go into the details of the Bill that is in the offing. I was aware of that rule but since the two Bills are talking about the pension and retirement benefits, this motion was moved in good faith. 

I also have fears that since Cabinet appears to have tactfully delayed the fast-tracking of the Bill for liberalising the sector, in the event that we pass this one, I beg that the other does not come. That is why we are using this one as a bargaining tool. We want to see the sector getting liberalised; we cannot allow monopolists to play around with people’s savings. We need a Bill to liberalise the sector so that workers can decide where they want to save from. I beg to move that this motion passes. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri.

5.16
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to oppose the motion on the Floor. I support the idea of having an authority in charge of all those bodies, which are handling our money. For example, if you are starting a school, you start with a headmaster, you put regulations in place and the structure and then the students come later. 

The same applies to the authority; we should have the authority first and later on the bodies to be regulated. And NSSF is an example which already exists but it is already giving us headache. So I would like us to pass this authority and ask the minister to tell us when he is going to liberate the sector so that this authority can help us regulate NSSF which has become a headache. Thank you, very much.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to confirm Government’s commitment to liberalise the social and pension sector; there is no question about it, the minister has confirmed that Cabinet has discussed it and this issue will be answered. But I want to emphasise that there is no contradiction in passing the Bill intended to establish an authority to regulate the establishment, management and operations of retirement benefit schemes in the country. By establishing this authority, it will help even in the liberalisation of the pension schemes sector. We do not have to wait for the liberalisation of the pensions sector before the authority is established because the authority will be very fundamental in establishing and guiding that liberalisation that we are demanding.

Therefore, in the interest of time, I would beg that hon. Epetait withdraws his motion and we proceed on the Bill. Hon. Otto is introducing something different and by so doing –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, the House has no time because we are winding up and the sooner we do this the better. 

May I add –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)– we have hon. Mafabi, who would criticise the systems which enabled him to be elected a Member of Parliament as if he were elected illegitimately -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Order!

PROF. KAMUNTU: You were elected legitimately and why should you be harsh – he boasts about circumcision; he is wasting the House’s time yet we want to proceed and pass this Bill. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.21
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, before hon. Epetait brought in the motion, I was proposing ways which would have avoided the hard line position of the motion and the demand possibly to withdraw the motion. 

What am I looking at? The safety net, the social security sector, the pension sector of our people is so critical at this time of integration and when we have a nascent pension scheme – Ugandan workers are getting a raw deal because currently, you cannot attract - under the monopoly of NSSF and even the other company-created schemes, even in the public service - Ugandans are not getting the best deal. It would be better for the Eighth Parliament to put in place a regulator in a liberalised, competitive and non-monopoly sector; not the legalese.

If we agree on that, the minister would just yield without any motion – already Cabinet has the principles; why can’t the Committee of Finance and those related be furnished with the principles of what has been agreed upon so that we do not make a law today and after two months, you find it hollow? Actually, the liberalisation Bill should have come before the regulator -(Interjections)- if the Eighth Parliament wants to be on record for having put in place the legal regime that will guide a liberalised competitive sector for the country. But for us to move through legalese and say, “It moves”, I do not want to be part of that. We are doing this for our children and for ourselves when we retire. 

Let me give you another example. These schemes were largely formed under the era of permanent and pensionable workers. Due to the changing times now, people are working on contracts for five years. If I were a bank manager like the minister was and tomorrow he wants to move to another scheme; where is portability? How do you – that is what we are saying. It is very important to look at the changing times. If he wants his money to be moved from NSSF to another scheme, how do we provide for that? So the regulator is important but the liberalised environment is even more critical. I would rather request -(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you my chairman of the National Economy Committee. The information I want to give is that currently, the provident funds which are working, the occupational ones, like the one of Makerere – some of us are sons of people who retired from Makerere. Those people are dying but their funds are not being paid. Why? There is nobody to police that provident fund. They are juggling their money from one party to another party because there is no one to regulate those funds. Even before we anticipate or legislate in anticipation, let us think of the people who are currently being pressed. Even NARO has a fund but who knows what they are doing to former employees who are dead and those who have lost work? Are they being paid? That is the work of the regulator.

Secondly, we cannot liberalise something when we do not know how it works. The liberalisation policy should feed into the already regulated industry. So, I beg please -(Interjections)- much as you may give reasons and Parliament is adjourning in two or three months - the new group shall take another year to understand what we have been doing all along. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, mine was a consensus approach. I expect the minister and possibly the Leader of Government Business and the chairman of the committee if it is possible to agree that it is important for the two to move together. I know from experience in this Parliament that the channel of motions, at times, does not give us reason. So I want the minister to give us a position before we move. 

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, hon. Member. Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the House and actually agree with the Member here that there is a general consensus in the House. I imagine the concern or the plight of employees in this country is a concern of all of us. It is a bi-partisan position. We all want a better retirement policy for Ugandans and we want to deal with it in a comprehensive manner. We cannot deal with it in a piecemeal way. This Bill looks like we are giving Panadol but not treating the sickness -(Interjections)- so we just want to have a major surgery of the entire pension scheme in this country. Let us just request government to fast-track the process and bring all the laws such that we handle the issue comprehensively. Otherwise, we can have the authority now and then bring a regulator and we are supposed to again amend the Bill, which we have just passed. So I would passionately beg -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Namayanja. The information I want to give you is that we had a similar case when we were establishing the National Information Technology Authority and then the Misuse of Computers Bill. We were able to agree with hon. Aggrey Awori to bring the things together so that we do them concurrently. We did it. So it is not something new. We have done it before.

Two, the liberalisation we are talking about should have come first because there are people already operating without the law. The ones hon. Kaddunabbi was naming. Where is that liberalisation because that is what these people should have been using? They are operating without what the minister is talking about that they are preparing. That is why we are asking that we wait a minute and bring these things together. It could even be as one Bill. I agree with the Members and the motion. Thank you, hon. Namayanja. 

MS  NAMAYANJA: In a nutshell, Mr Speaker, the House would urge the minister and the chairperson of the committee, in the interest of our employees and the time we are spending – because the liberalisation policy he wants to bring here will inform – I look at this Bill as a sub-component of the entire policy. Let us put this aside, request the ministry to fast-track and then look at both Bills at the same time and bring a piece of legislation that will be good for all Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The passing of the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill by the Eighth Parliament will be one of the best things that this Parliament would have done -(Interjections)- whether the sector is liberalised or not, there is need to regulate it and as hon. Kaddunabbi told us very clearly, there are already a number of existing benefit schemes in this country. They are not regulated and you have already seen what is happening in that industry. I pray that we pass -(Interjections)- this Bill and I have already told you that the draft of the liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector Bill has been made by the parliamentary drafts section and before we bring it here to Parliament, we have to discuss it with the various stakeholders. 

I have already told you that within two months, we should be in position to bring this Liberalisation of the Retirement Benefits Sector Bill to this House. This is my appeal to you, Mr Speaker, and also in light of what hon. Ben Wacha said in regard to hon. Epetait’s motion, I beg that hon. Epetait withdraws his motion to enable us continue with the debate on the Uganda Retirement Regulatory Authority Bill. I thank you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I really have something to plead with hon. Epetait. It is not about winning an argument that we pass or not pass it but I want to invite you to understand this point. We are trying to make government make a commitment to bring a law liberalising the sector. I want to convince you that passing this law is commitment number one that has been secured from government. Why? The NSSF appeared before the committee and one of their strong points was urging that we stay this Bill because of fear to license and recognise other players and introduce them to the market in a legitimate manner. So, my appeal to Members is that when we pass this law, even the NSSF itself will be regulated under this Act and to me, that is a step in reducing the monopoly that hon. Okupa and I so much fear. 

So, I do not see a reason why we should not pass a regulatory Bill and –(Mr Odonga Otto rose_)- hon. Odonga Otto, whoever is licensed under this law including the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, URA, and others will be regulated. In fact, this law will create a de-facto liberalised environment thus the need to formalise it. I want you to look at it as something substantial.

THE SPEAKER: Do we conclude this debate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not want people to assume that there is nobody authorising pension schemes. I think hon. Omach should be fair to us. In Uganda under the Income Tax Act, there is what we call approved pension or provident schemes, which were approved by your ministry and that means that you should be able to regulate them. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, all the schemes which are here have been approved by the Ministry of Finance and, therefore, you must regulate them. In fact, they are telling us of their incompetence. You are now bringing a regulatory authority which is going to be in the Ministry of Finance and the very people in Finance – I have seen one writing me a note here, I think he is one of the board members - who want it to collapse. 

I want to beg –(Interjections)- yes, of course hon. Kamuntu has finished; he is here and he wants a job to be the Chairman –(Laughter)– people have said that the NSSF is a monopoly because it is one of those organisations already mandated to do some collection and the way in which they are managing the people’s money is one of the reasons that has made us unhappy. And so, if you liberalise the sector, I am free to move my money from the NSSF to Stanbic and the current person that should supervise it is Omach from the Ministry of Finance. But as we move the money from here to Stanbic, we need a law that allows us to move our money without a problem. This is an authority which already exists and the Ministry of Finance should be able to handle this transition. 

I am happy that hon. Kiyonga is here. I want to put a question to him: during the amendment of the Income Tax Decree, what did we put as far as the pension scheme was concerned? We wrote that the Ministry of Finance will be the one in charge of supervision. You were here and you helped, and that is what we carried in the Income Tax Act. Did you change it on the way? Please, we must help people and we must use institutional memory to move on. 

THE SPEAKER: Shouldn’t we end this debate? I should put the question -

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I appeal to Members to look at this regulator. We needed this regulator yesterday; this particular Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority, as you will see, was printed in April last year and we have been trying our level best to make sure that the sector is regulated. Right now we have a number of schemes that are operating under internal regulations and the coming into force of this regulatory authority –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the minister is right to say that they wrote it in April but he has been in the habit of withholding one particular law – the Anti-Money Laundering Bill was written in 2007 and he knows very well that from 2001, we have been fighting. Is he in order to come and blame us yet he is blocking some good laws? What is your interest in this one? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: But The Anti- Money Laundering Bill is with the Committee on Finance. What have you done? According to the records I have, that Bill has been with you since 2008.

5.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I suggest that we rest over this matter to consult and handle it tomorrow. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Prime Minister says that we should stay this matter until tomorrow. But we have Cabinet meeting tomorrow; when will you consult? [HON. MEMBERS: “Next week on Wednesday.”] Okay, I think by consensus we agree that we hold on deciding on this Bill until next week. 

MR MIGEREKO: It should be tomorrow but one.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, so you need one day? This motion shall come back for consideration on Thursday.

MR MIGEREKO: We will deal with this on Thursday –(Interjections)- this week.

THE SPEAKER: What is convenient to you, Thursday or next week?

MR MIGEREKO: The concern that it should have been the Prime Minister to advise and guide the House on the day should not be an issue because I have been delegated by the Prime Minister to come and inform the House that we shall be ready on Thursday this week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hold on up to Thursday next week. And this, therefore, brings us to the end of today’s business. We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 March 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 



