Wednesday, 20 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 1996.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995

MR ADONIA TIBERONDWA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The point of clarification, I do not know whether we have a new system where about a half of the Members of Parliament are in the corridor here and here, what has happened Mr Chairman?  Because they are there; we all saw you come in, why is that there are so many people outside and we have less than a quorum in the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  There were two things; the first one that we had power failure which could not even allow us to here; this room was too dark for any of the hon. Member to see even a Colleague.  Microphones were not working.  But those are being rectified.  But what is more important is that, by about 1.00 O’clock this afternoon, some hon. Members came in and signed and started going away.  So, administratively, the hon. Member is seeking clarification.  So, the books were being handled administratively so that you are here; but most of you are outside and they are coming.  You have raised a very good point.  So, it was the administrators you know who were concerned that we have to be here and indeed you are here now.  

Order hon. Members, listen to the clarification.  But there was fear by 1.00 O’clock when hon. Members started signing by 1.00 O’clock and trying to go away.  In fact they signed and went away.  But I will not give you the names.  It is not in order for me.  That because of that, then this caused a delay of signing the books which are being signed now.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it appears as though the Chair has been misinformed.  Because I came to the House at about 1.20 p.m. and I quote witness; hon. Omadi and other hon. Members, for the purpose of collecting the Order Paper and taking it.  And at that time there was no book, the register was not on the table.  So, I do not see how people could have signed it at 1.00 O’clock.  I think, Mr Chairman, somebody should have informed you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much. I think there must be some misinformation.  Because I have just signed and I was number seven and hon. Rwakakooko was number four on the book.  And number one signed when we were standing there.  So, if there was any book signed before that, then there is no number.  And that, means Mr Chairman, therefore, -(Laughter)- that whoever reported that we signed at 1.00 p.m. actually is not saying the truth.  Because number one signed this afternoon after the books had been brought at 2.30 p.m.  So, I think in future maybe we shall not accept that kind of not telling the truth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you very much, for the information and the concern raised by hon. Members.  I have taken note of that and I argue you to take note also of what has been happening.  Let us proceed, hon. Minister.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996; be read for the Second Time.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the human resource component in the delivery of Health Services is a critical determinant of a quality of care and satisfaction and safety of the population. Apart from training and continuing education­ for additional skills -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Would it be in order for the hon. Minister to make his speech with the aid of the microphone as we cannot hear him?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He is out of order, if he is not using the microphone.  Hon. Minister please use a microphone.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, apart from training and continuing education for additional skills, laws and regulations have to be continually enacted to promote ethical practice, direct policies and control the recent activities which can erode the good name of the country and seriously endanger public life.  As part of government effort to restructure and reorganise the health sector, a Health Policy Review Commission was set up in 1987.  This Commission reviewed the health delivery system and recommended appropriate measures to guide the necessary reforms in the Health Sector.  

The findings of the Commission reveal several shortcomings in the health delivery system.  These shortcomings ranged from dilapidated infrastructure to the rampant manner in which private practice in medicine had multiplied.  And the observation that even unqualified person had started operating clinics and laboratories for purely pecuniary purposes since then.  And within the context of a general national policy framework, various corrective measures have been implemented.  The repair of physical structures has recorded success to the extent possible within the limits of available resources.  

New equipment has been installed in many health units and efforts have also been made to increase the supply of drugs in this country.  The challenge before us now is to address the issue of ethical practical, professional conduct and the improvement of the provider client relationship among the health workers whether in the public or the private sector.  The delivery of health care is highly labour intensive and dependent upon the effectiveness of teamwork among various key health and other professionals.

Professional occupation generally have four main characteristics and the work which is done is skilled and specialised and is mainly mental rather than manual.  And practitioners have to undergo a period of theoretical and practical training before they can competently assume their work.  The professional practitioners are also expected to be committed to a body of moral principles beyond the general duty of honesty, and care; and or a wider duty to the community which may occasionally to assent a duty to a particular client.  For example, an individual patient. 

Professionals usually belong to an association which regulates their activities and it also regulates admission to rank and seeks to uphold the standard of professionals to a high level and the professionals have enjoyed a high social status reflecting the seriousness of the work they are meant to put in place.  Professionals develop moving a long period and their homework is independent existence of the individual professionals in conformity for a body of professional ethics and to a large measure self regulation through the professional association.  In the delivery of health care, there is a great need for team work and very close and intense interaction between different professionals.  At this time, it gives right to better professional rivalry and conflict; unless it is properly conducted.  

There is, therefore, need to ensure that the practice and conduct of the various professionals is co-ordinated and is in consonant.  As we all know, the key professionals involved in the delivery of health care are the doctors and dental surgeons, nurses and midwives, pharmacists and the Allied professionals we referred to as Paramedicals.  The present laws and regulations governing the training and professional practice and conduct of the various health professionals, were developed during the colonial period on the basic laws and regulations governing similar professions in the United Kingdom or as modified through application on the Indian sub continent.  

These laws and regulations have not undergone the rapid changes that have characterised similar laws in the United Kingdom or elsewhere in the world to reflect development in the social, economic and political environment of health care in the scientific and health field.  And the emergency of new health and related profession as well as other categories of health workers with whom such profession would interact.  

For example, the traditional birth attendants and the community based health workers.  A review in the present law and regulation has taken into account development in the planning, organisation and management of health services including the provisions of the new Constitution particularly the establishment of the Health Services Commission, the Civil Service Reform Programme, leading to the reconstruction of government services, decentralisation, the need to increase the role of the Non-governmental Organisations and the private sector including traditional practitioners in the delivery of health care, increase demand for efficiency and accountability in the delivery of health care, enhancement of public awareness of their right viz-a-vis health care providers and community participation.  

According to the White Paper of the update of the Health Policy of the Ministry of Health of 1994; the key policy issue in the practice and conduct of health professionals, is how to ensure good professional practice and quality of service.  While accepting the need for the professionals to be independent and self regulating in conformity with professional ethics and the code of practice enforced by their professional association; it has to be recognised that, there is need for a strong government regulation or professional practice and conduct particularly in the light of liberalisation and the need to encourage the private provision of health care.  Government thus, has an important role to play in ensuring the policy of private sector health care through accreditation of hospitals and laboratories, licensing of medical schools and physicians and regulations of drugs and review of medical practices.  

Therefore, there are presently three basic laws governing the practice or anti conduct of the health professionals in Uganda and this one which is being read for the second time is the first one, then there is Nurses and Midwives and Nursing Assistant Act; for Nurses, Midwives and Nursing Assistants.  And the third one is the Pharmacy and Drugs Act No.39 of 1974.  The Act was first enacted in 1913 as the Medical Registration Ordinance and under went amendments in 1917, in 1921 and 1931.  It was repealed in 1949 and replaced by the Medical Practitioners and Dentist Act, which was amended in 1958 and subsequently repealed in 1968, and replaced by the present Act which we are in the process of amending.  Since then, there has been various attempts to amend and repeal the Act and several drafts have been made.  These improve the Medical Practitioners and Dentist Bill, of 1985; the Uganda Medical and Allied Professional Bill, 1987; and the Medical Practitioners and Dental Surgeon’s Bill, of 1990.  The Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996 before you seeks to repeal and replace the Medical Practitioners and Dental Surgeons Act of 1968; to consolidate the law relating to Medical and Dental Practice and for the connected purposes.  

The Bill seeks to establish the Medical and Dental Practitioners’s Council as a body corporate whose function shall be to exercise general supervision and control and maintenance for Professional, Medical, and Dental educational standards.  To promote the maintenance and enforcement of Professional Medical and Dental ethics, to exercise general provision of medical and dental practice at all levels, to exercise disciplinary control over medical and dental practitioners, to protect society from abuse of medical and dental care and research, to advise and make recommendations to government on the matters relating to Medical and Dental Profession, to exercise any power or perform any duty authorised or required by this Statute or any other law, for purposes of discharging its functions under this Statute, to perform any other function relating to medical and dental practice as the Minister may direct.  

It also seeks to provide for private practice and registration and licensing of health units and it also avails provision for the making of regulations by the Council with the approval of the Minister for amongst other things.  The review of prescribed fees.  Prescribing the form of licences to be issued, prescribing any other form to be issued under this Statute and lastly setting out offences and penalties.  

Mr Chairman, hon. Members, amendments in the Medical and Dental Surgeon’s Act of 1968 are as follows:  These have been very well reflected in the new Bill which has been circulated.  The Medical Council Makerere University, Senior Members of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Justice and Professional Association, have reviewed the current Act of 1968 and adopted a number of amendments to strengthen the functions of the Council and protect the community from abuse of medical care and research.

Title.  The Title has been amended to read ‘the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Statute of 1996’. To reflect the emphasis on practice. 

Council as a body corporate.  To promote the neutrality of the Council, it has been deemed appropriate to designate the Council as a body corporate that can sue and can be sued.  

Functions of the Council.  The focus on instilling professional discipline, protection of society and ensuring that Medical and Dental Practitioners in actual practice under go regular continuing education.  To keep heads with a dynamic of knowledge and technology, the Council has been charged with the function of arranging continuing education.

Membership for the Council.  The revised Act provides for a Chairman appointed by the Minister and not necessarily the Director General of Medical Services as it has previously been.  The Director General however, remains a Member of the Council.  This change is in view of the fact that, the Director General of the Health Services has too many responsibilities that will make it difficult for him to commit full time leadership to the Council.  Of the other members, two will represent the Medical School in Uganda and not only Makerere University.  Two are for the Medical Association and one for the Dental Association.  These associations play a complementary role in upholding ethics.  The provisions for an appointment of prominent persons was meant to cater for beneficiaries participation in the work of the Council.

Meetings of the Council.  The First Schedule of the revised Act provides for the Council meetings for at least every - this has been amended to be reflected I think every three months; and not nearly as and when the Council calls for the meeting which has tended to make the Council not as strict as it should be.

Secretariat of the Council.  These Clauses of the revised Act distinguish the functions of the Council from those of the Secretariat to be headed by the Registrar.  The revised Bill, also provides for the appointment of the Registrar by the Health Service Commission, in consultation with the Council and not by the chairman of the Council.  An Assistant Registrar has also been provided for.
Financial provision.  The revised Bill, specifies the process of funds, their management and required accountability and procedure.

Registers and Registration of practitioners.  The proposed Bill, provides for recognition of Medical and Dental qualifications awarded by the national universities and not only Makerere University.  Assessment of other qualifications is also catered for, as well as procedures related to registration. 

Licensing and registration of private practice.  The whole practice failed on the issue of private practice.  The proposed Bill provides for procedures of setting up private practice and provisions for registration of private clinics.

Inquiry by Council.  This part has been updated to ensure justice.
Miscellaneous provision.  This part provides for Committees of the Council, charges of registered practitioners may demand, powers by the Director General of Health Services to authorise a person to give medical and dental treatment; powers of the Council to amend the Schedules of the Statute, offences and penalties, and repeal the 1968 Act.  Clause 45.  This clause  specifically requires a registered practitioner to be a member of the Professional Association.  However, we have come out with guides of the Sectoral Committee to emphasize that, it is more important for the registered practitioner to be under surveillance with continuing education, rather than being bound to be a member of the Professional Association.  

A lot of debate has been generated in this area.  The concept behind this provision was to strengthen the complementary role of the Association in the work of the Council, particularly in regard to promotion of ethical practice and professional conduct as well as in continuing education.  Indeed, in some countries the associations are all entrusted with the role of the Council prescribed in this Bill.  This issue has been analyzed further and the proposed amendment was included in the current Bill which has been circulated.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members in conclusion, the proposed Bill is meant to enable government to instil and promote discipline among the health care providers in this country.  The provision really avails government with an additional tool of complementing other measures directed at improving the performance of the health sector to the satisfaction expected of the population.  On the other hand, the provisions are also meant to uphold the image of the medical and dental practitioners.  I therefore, beg to move that the House considers approving this Bill for the good of our people and profession.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the hon. chairman of the Committee on Social Service present his report about the Bill.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE (Katikamu North, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand here before you and before this House to support this Bill on behalf of the Committee.  I will like to report that the Committee on Social Services, looked at the Bill which was presented before it by the Minister of Health.  I wish to report that the Committee on Social Services looked at the Bill which had been presented before the Committee and we really did a lot of changes when we see the major surgery on the Bill which resulted into the reprinting of the new Bill which was circulated to the Members some two weeks back.  The difference between the First Bill and the Second Bill is that, the first Bill contains 50 clauses whereas the new one contains only 49 clauses.  So that is the immediate difference which the Members can really clue.  So, we reduced by one clause, but the dates remain the same.  

Mr Chairman, the Committee came out with a number of amendments as I said earlier on and the new Bill was printed.  In Clause 1, the definition of Active Practice had not been catered for in the Bill and this one has now been defined in the new Bill, which is before us.  The second new definition is the gazette which was left silent in the old Bill and we have defined it in the new Bill.  So, it does not mean the Uganda gazette and this include gazette extra ordinary.  Also another new definition was incorporated which was left out.  Another also new definition was included defining the minimum continuing education which was not defined in the old Bill; and also the definition of the Minister which was not there was also defined; and also the definition of the professional registration is also catered for in this one, and the public health units, these are in the second clause.  

Also, temporary registration which was mentioned in the old Bill was not defined but is now catered for under this Bill.  Now, when we go to clause 5, Membership of the Council, we looked at it and we dropped the two prominent Members whom we thought they are unnecessary.  But in the Committee we had a problem whereby nurses also wanted to be represented on this Council and the majority of the Members were not in favour of having these nurses because these doctors are supposed to supervisor the nurses; and therefore, they will not be very useful on the Council, so the Council was also responsible to discipline their professionals, the doctors.  So, the Committee imagined a situation whereby a nurse would come and also discipline the doctor.  But one Member said, he will still push it here and I hope during the contribution he will give his ideas why a nurse should be on the Council.  

Mr Chairman, we gave the powers to the Minister now to appoint the Council unlike in the first Bill which was giving the Minister only powers to appoint only chairman.  But in the new Bill, the Minister is going to appoint all the members to this Council.  And also we removed some of the clauses from the old Bill to be part of the main Bill and this covers 5(3); 5(4); 5(5); 5(6); which were originally in the Schedule.  So, because of the changes we introduced giving the Minister powers, then we felt that this provision should come in the main body of the Bill.  

When we came to Clause 8 of the old Bill, we also amended it to say that, the Registrar shall be a public officer appointed by the Health Service Commission from among its members.  And the old Bill was saying that, Health Service Commission was going to appoint this registrar in consultation.  But this was in conflict with the new Constitution.  Because the new Constitution according to Article 166(2)’the Health Service Commission does not get any directive from any other person.’  So, we disagree with the original proposal of saying that the Health Service Commission would appoint this person in consultation.  So the Health Service will appoint this Registrar directly.  But this Registrar must be a public officer.  We deleted old 8(3); which was saying’ the registrar shall hold office as long as he is capable and fit to perform the duties of a registrar.’  This one we deleted; and only left a provision whereby the office of the registrar would become vacant and we enumerated the conditions as they appear in the Bill before you.  

We introduced a new clause under 9, which deals with the functions of the registrar.  And the new clause which is 9(4); which was not in the original Bill, says ‘the registrar shall within three months before the end of each financial year, submit to the Council a general report on the affairs and activities of the Council.’ This was not covered in the original Bill.  And then in the old Clause 10, ‘the Council shall have an Assistant Registrar’.  It was proposing an assistant registrar; and the Members said that the title of Assistant does not really convey the seniority and the capacity of that Assistant registrar.  So, we propose that, instead of having an assistant registrar, we have the post of a deputy.  We replace the assistant with a deputy and we shall have a Deputy Registrar.  And on Clause 11 of the old Bill, ‘the Council may have’; ‘we said the Council may employ other officers’ not have other officers.  So, we changed there.  And then 11(2) in the old Bill, it was reading ‘the Council may regulate the manner of appointment terms and conditions of service and reducing of its employees.’  In the new Bill we say, ‘the Council may with approval of the Minister regulate the manner.’  So, we introduce the involvement of the Minister in this Clause.  

Also sub clause 11(3) of the old Bill, was amended.  Because it was saying ‘the public officers or servant maybe seconded in this.’  For us we said the public officers and we deleted the word servant.  Because the word servant according to the members appears to be a directory word.  

Then we moved to Clause 12(2) of the old Bill, and we also changed it.   We deleted the old one which was saying that all monies of the Council shall be managed through a fund to be established by the Council for a purpose.  This fund appears as if it was going to be created a special fund and the Members felt that we delete it and replace with a clause which reads like this.  ‘The Council shall operate a Bank Account in a Bank it may determine and the account shall be operated in the manner decided by the Council.’  

In clause 14, we made a few changes and in Clause 15, we also made a few changes.  And because it was talking about the Minister and then referring to the Minister of Finance.  It was reading like this’ the Council shall within a period of three months before the end of each financial year cause to be prepared and submit to the Minister or submit to the Minister responsible.’  So, we thought a Minister is a Cabinet Minister and that we do not need to repeat the Minister of Finance to handle the affairs of the Council.  So, we left the Minister of Health to be entirely responsible for the funds of the Council and if need arises for him to consult his counter part in the Ministry of Finance he would do it without necessary stating it in this Bill.  

Clause 16 of the old Bill, we only deleted 16(5), which was irrelevant to that one we deleted in the old Bill, and we retained the other.  And then when we came to Clause 17, the old one was saying the Minister shall submit to the legislature as soon as possible after receiving them.  This is a report to the legislature.  It was saying that, the Minister was going to submit to the legislature as soon as possible and the Committee felt that, we should give a time limit to the Minister.  And the new clause reads like;’ the minister shall within three months after receiving a report submit to the Legislature.’  So we made some changes here.  Now, in 18 there are not substantial changes, except that we kept quiet about Makerere -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We regret this have been better since the Minister has already presented a substantive new bill, will it not be better if the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee, gave us an outline of the report of their Committee and then give Members a chance to discuss this new Bill as the original?  Instead of the chairman going clause by clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see, hon. Members this is actually to minimize time.  We are trying to optimise time such that the amendments which were presented to the Committee should not wait until we open the debate.  That is why the Committee decided to put all those amendments into the new Bill so that, only other matters which are important would be allowed to be discussed by you when we open the debate.  It is to optimise the time.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, with great respect I disagree.  This is intended really to use up too much time.  Because it is really to tell us that the Committee did some work.  Because after what they did has been incorporated in this; then this is the Bill.  And it is both necessary for us to know whether Clause 5 was written after consulting with hon. Bwanika Bbale or with the Minister of Justice or with Makerere College or whatever.  And this thing is really becoming very monotonous, very boring, we are discussing at this stage the principles of the Bill.  We expected the Chairman of the Committee to tell us about the principles; not the commas, the fullstop, removing this and that and so forth.  

So, Mr Chairman, I really take that where the report of the Chairman of the Committee has been incorporated into the draft.  So that those of us who were very smart - me I was smart today, I did not bring the first Bill, I brought the amended Bill.  So I do not even know what the Bill had originally said.  So, Mr Chairman, I think we should have mercy on the House. (Laughter) And if there are things which he thinks we should particularly note, he should draw our attention to those matters or if you want to explain the principles why he started amendment we have made he should tell us.  But to go to every Clause which was amended and really has been incorporated here is time wasting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I agree with the sentiment raised.  But I hope the hon. chairman of the Committee has taken note of that.  But the whole idea was for the Committee to incorporate all the amendments so that we do not waste time.  Because previously, we have been you know discussing this Bill and if there are two Bills, the old one and the new one.  Members have been challenging why this thing?  So, I think the chairman is trying to point out the changes, but he should not take too much time so that the whole thing is not monotonous.  

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, let me be a bit fast and highlight those areas of the Bill which the Committee - actually what I was trying to point to the House that really we made changes.  Because these Bills the dates are the same so  - as it appeared yesterday some people carried the old Bill and when they were contributing they were only referring to the old Bill.  So, we deleted Makerere University which has been mentioned here because we said all the universities in Uganda.  

As the Minister mentioned, this Bill is really revising the old Bill which was established in 1968, which has been out of date, and the Bill is giving opportunity to doctors to do private practice; and for public doctors who are working in public health units, these ones also have been allowed under this Bill to under private practice which has not been the case before.  Furthermore, if any doctor is practising privately, he is also allowed to engage in stockpiling of drugs and sell them.  But this new Bill now unlikely the old one, is allowing this particular person to stockpile with approval of the relevant authority with special permission.  They cannot stockpile medicine without getting special permission.  

Mr Chairman, when we came to the disciplining of the medical officers over there and that if any doctor has misbehaved and there is an inquiry; this new Bill now says, this person must be informed within 30 days the decision of the Commission of Inquiry into his conduct.  The Medical Associations which had been proposed to be recognised that any medical officer had to be a member of the Medical Association, this one has been deleted and it has been replaced by a new Clause which now allows this Medical Association to organise training courses which the Council will recognise and which will count on the credit of the doctor or of the dental practitioner who is practising.  

When we come to 48, talking about punishment.  The old Bill was talking about if anybody contravenes any section of this Bill, the fine in the old Bill was 30,000/- shillings, but the Committee has recommended 300,000/- shillings or imprisonment of not less than one year or both. 

Mr Chairman, briefly those are the highlights of this Bill, and the Committee looked at it and would like to recommend it to you because it is going to improve the professional practice of the medical, to reduce the powers of the Council to discipline, and it gives a very clear avenue for anybody aggravated by the seal of the Council, to appeal to any court and if somebody appeals to high court, the high court makes a decision and that seal of the high court will be the final one.  

With these remarks I will like to appeal to the Members to bow this House so that the Medical Profession in Uganda is given a very good credibility and they serve us Ugandans very well.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, you will allow me to comment a little on the other Bill we passed since I did not have time, because it was carrying some important matter regarding my area.  When we talk about birth attendants; in my area some of us have been having little care from Government Hospitals but rather than Mission Hospitals.  Last year, there has been a problem in my area, with this other hospital known as Lwala.  Now, because a nurse who had been there for years, who knew midwifery was forced to leave the hospital because the ones who are trained say that, they are now the new characters.  But what is happening; every time any woman fails to deliver, the doctor comes in to do an operation.  Now once operation is done, most of the 90 women who were operated upon, if any survived it could be two.  I am telling you.  So, the public raised this complaint with me and say what can we do?  

So, when I see this Bill, I think this Bill will have a upper hand by government to make sure that these private practitioners whether Mission or what, should be really to make sure that people are safe.  I do not know whether the Minister will tell me how much shall the Committee or Council which shall be appointed go deeper to ensure that our people are protected.  Because currently, people are fearing now to take their wives to the hospital.  Because they know, they will end up by surgery and then you loose a woman and get a child back.  This is a very serious matter Mr Chairman. (Laughter)   You get a child, but loose the wife.  You are laughing, but it is a very serious matter, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.

MR ELYAU: So, we are getting very much scared Mr Chairman, especially in our hospital in Lwala, that is in Kalaki.  That was the most famous hospital where people came the whole way from Lango Amulata, Lango Baata, Lango where.  It has been there for years and we were enjoying the hospital activities.  Because every child born there with the mother all came home safely.  But today, things have changed.  I do not know whether the Minister will tell me?  What kind of training do we give these doctors?  Because of recent there is a young doctor there who has just qualified from the University and this is a man who is causing these deaths.  Are these doctors really well trained, I am wondering!  Because if they are properly trained, are they responsible for these deaths?  Because if somebody dies and people just remain there hanging talking about who did this, you cannot even arrest the doctor. It is from my private hospital.  So this is a very serious matter and we shall note that unless something is done, we the people who are not having privileges of hospitals ­-(Interruption)

MR MUKISA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  What the hon. Member is raising is very, very important and serious.  I do not think what is happening in his hospital is unique.  There is something going on very wrong in Bugiri Hospital.  In Bugiri Hospital, there is a doctor who has opened up a private unit which is also almost a hospital.  When surgery is done in his place, the patient survives; when he carries out an operation in hospital, the patient does not survive.  This is a very serious issue.  Actually one time, relatives of some patient beat up this doctor because of negligence.  So, I think whereas I support giving doctors permission to do private practice, I think we should also be very serious about their conduct.  I think relevant the Minister should find out.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Member do not turn it into a discussion.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this question of negligence on the part of some of our doctors has also been experienced in one of the hospitals in Mpigi District.  Cases have been reported where a doctor has been collected from a beer party to come and operate upon a person and he was brought drunk to operate on this person and the results were not all that good.  We have also had cases where emergency cases were brought in, but the doctor demanded bribe and that doctor insisted that before the bribe was brought he could not work on this patient.  This was a woman who was about to deliver.  In fact there are two cases.  Now the relatives went back to collect the money and by the time they brought the bribe or the money, the patient was already dead.  These cases have taken place in this hospital.  We also had another case somewhere in my county, in Madu; where someone had the audacity to pose as a doctor.  I understand this was a boy who had at one time worked with a doctor somewhere, he opened up a clinic, started operating on the women; there is a time when he operated on one woman and he called all the people around to come and see what a woman looks like when she is operated upon.  Now this poor woman ended up dying.  Some other three cases which were treated by the same so called doctor also died.  

So, Mr Chairman, there is a lot of negligence going on, people are loosing lives.  This case was even reported in the papers of this man who was in Madu, I understand the man disappeared.  But up to now it seems no efforts have been made to arrest this man.  So this is the situation, Mr Chairman.

MR ELYAU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I think the two hon. Members were supporting my cause.  Really I will not have raised my head to talk about this if it was not happening.  I am telling you this is happening, Mr Chairman, mostly with young girls who have never delivered.  But for old women, it is a bit fair.  But young girls who get pregnancy and they do not have much care, really we are loosing a lot of motherhood.

MISS ALIU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that we are loosing a lot of young girls today especially in delivery because they are not ready to have babies.  I think before we complain that doctors are negligent, we should actually go at the root cause of these girls’ dying.  Because it has been proven that these are children and children are producing children today and that is why they are dying. (Applause)

MR MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the entire House that it is not likely that it is the doctors who are negligent; I think it is the entire government.  Because if we are to point at the doctors only, a case like what is happening in my area, we would bow for everybody.  Where there is neither a doctor nor even any facilities on these islands where people are and such deliveries as the Members have been describing are taking place daily and there are no facilities, not even a means of transport to shift an expecting mother in labour to where the hospital might be.  I think it is general negligent of the entire government, not just the doctors.

MR ELYAU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. But I would have wanted to inform hon. Ruth Aliu that, these people who are dying are women who are married, they are not girls.  So, I do not know how to teach somebody’s wife to be producing children.  I am saying that these are women who are married to the boys and they are wives.  So, you cannot teach a wife now not to have a man. (Laughter)

MISS ALIU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I want to inform my brother that, these 14 year old once they are married, they are women.  Two, there are too many things happening as hon. Mayengo says in our environment that even a woman who is already married and having six children, in fact by the sixth child, they run the danger of dying.  Because these children are being produced yearly, these women are not feeding very well.  Therefore, these numerous pregnancies actually, the more they have them, the more the danger is on their lives.  So, you cannot just say they are wives.  You must know why they are dying, is it the doctor or because the woman who is anaemic has already gone, has bled and the doctor cannot do much to rescue her life.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, this matter is a very serious matter.  Because for long since colonial times in 1960s, 70s; even all other reigns we were enjoying the hospital because there was not such an alarming situation.  But today, that is why I am asking the Minister to find out from these doctors who are being trained, are these people getting proper lessons?  If they are not well trained, they should not be allowed to operate on somebody and then just leave her die like that, it is really disappointing.

MR OKWERA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the Member holding the Floor and the Colleagues who gave him information raised that very important point that, there are a lot of people dying in our hospitals due to negligence on the part of medical staff.  I will therefore, like the Minister to clarify to this House that, we really have departments which carry out provision to make sure that the doctors are performing their duties properly or he has no provision department.  May be he has not got provision department? How does he tell that the various units of practical dispensaries in the country are performing their duty properly?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the hon. Minister will take note and answer all those queries during the contribution.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, my second point is on medicine. Currently, I do not know whether the Minister can assure this House.   Last year but one, we registered cost sharing.  In the village today, Mr Chairman, this poor man and woman go to the hospital and they ask UShs 250; for example in my area.  Now, if they pay 250 shillings, they end up by getting two aspirins; and then they are deceived that the money is being collected so that medicine is brought.  I am wondering!  Can they allow a sub dispensary also to buy medicine?  From where?  So, I think this kind of medicine also should be clarified so that we know the source of medicine, from where does it go to reach the village?  Otherwise, they are deceiving people that this UShs 250 is for buying medicine.  Are we still selling medicine?  Because I am sure the government is sending down medicine to the district.  I want the Minister to clarify this question seriously so that these people are not given to pay for what they do not get.  Mr Chairman, these are the matters that will be really clarified.  With that small comment, I beg to stop here.

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende):  Thank you, very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to start my observation by stressing my condolences to the Medical profession and the government and people of United States upon the death of late Prof. Rodney Deltur who was gunned down in Mulago Hospital.  The incidence is very regrettable but it is also instructive.  Because according to the report, none was shot at his office and the people who killed him were able to throw him out.  They had time, they pulled the body out of the care, turned round the car and drove away.  Now these hospitals are supposed to have gates, there are supposed to be people at the gates.  So, we would like to know how are these protected?  Should we have armed Policemen at the gates?  Because you know, it is a little disturbing that those robbers were able to get a way with their crime.  

Second point, Mr Chairman. I would like to say what I could not elaborate upon on a matter of procedure.  I think this procedure of moving by Committees started the Bill being committed after they had been read a second time.  Consequently, it was necessary for the Chairman of the Committee to explain all the matters that the Committee has done to the Bill.  But if the Committee ceases hold of the Bill before it is read a second time and the surgery of the Committee is incorporated in the Bill and a new Bill is re-written and printed and published and handed over to the Member, then that becomes the Bill.  Because all that is done before the Minister makes the second reading.  So, when the Minister makes his second reading, it is based on the revised Bill.  So there, there is no point it going back to the original, to say what it had said and what has been done to it. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Would you like to take information from hon. Wanendeya?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  No, I do not like to take information from hon. Wanendeya because -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Will you like to take information?

MR ABU MAYANJA: No! I would not take information because otherwise it would appear imperious. (Laughter)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I think that when we debated and finally passed the resolution setting up the Committee, part of that resolution included the provision that the Bills once read for the first time, automatically go to the Committees.  Now, when they are discussed in the Committees, in the presence of the Minister and the Minister accepts the amendment which change the character of the Bill or make substantial changes and the new Bill is printed.  Now that Bill automatically becomes a Bill of government.  Therefore, the role of the Committee through the Chairman ceases.  When the presentation is made in the House, it is made as if the first Bill never existed and therefore, that Bill saves time of many amendments on the Floor in the Committee Stage.  It is only very few areas which probably were not agreed between the Minister and the Committee that would attract easy discussion here.  So I concur with hon. Abu Mayanja’s submission that probably there was no need for re-reading the first bill which culminated into the revised bill.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the problem which we now have is that the work of the committees is no longer an ad hoc activity.  It is now built in the constitution itself.  I think it is Article 90 clause 3.  It says these standing committees must - that is shall - examine and make recommendations on all bills laid before Parliament.  Now the disturbing and confusing aspect is the word recommendations; because whenever you make a recommendation, the implication is that you make it to some other party.  So to which other party must these committees make a recommendation?  It must be the House.  Now if it must be the House, then it must be the House to make the final decision.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I thank my Colleague and I apologise to hon. Wanendeya.  

I would secondly like to congratulate the Minister for Health and the government as a whole upon the really major improvements which have taken place in the physical plant of many of our health establishments particularly Mulago Hospital.  It is pleasing to hear the Minister say, although I heard him with considerable pain in my ears since he was talking so low but it was pleasing to hear him say that now that this other work has been done, he can now turn over to questions of professional standards and had brought this bill.  

Now, having congratulated him there, and I mean it, I would like to know, why did those people who advised him - I did not hear everything - why did we change from the medical and dental practitioners to the Uganda?  This question of putting the adjective Uganda upon things which are being done here is not right; because if you are making a law to control the medical profession here, it must be a Ugandan medical profession and it will only be people in Britain and America who would put suffix Uganda or the etiquette Uganda to differentiate it from their own medical council or their own medical profession.  But for us here, now that we are independent, it should not be necessary for us to be using Uganda nurses, Uganda doctors, Uganda this, Uganda that.

DR OTENG:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I just want to inform the hon. Member that during colonial days when they wanted to belittle a profession, they put the word Uganda because others have superior performance than Uganda.  That is why that word Uganda is very objectionable.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the word chairperson in section two, clause 2 page five.  First of all, I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly and I regret really that we are pushed so far by the women to go to this thing you know, chairperson and so on and it has made the work of draughtsmen extremely difficult.  

MRS SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman and thank you very much hon. Member holding the Floor.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the male members of our society to accept the constitutional provision that we all agreed on calling a chairperson, chairperson, whether it was a male or female and that was carried forward to the Beijing Conference and it was accepted.  So I would like to request the hon. Members to accept our Beijing in this august House, to accept the word chairperson being used on everybody without regret.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, there is no or should I say Mr Chairperson?  (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, the view so eloquently advocated by the hon. Member for Mukono District is of course very interesting but there is also a view which is advocated for by a highly respected lady who is a member of a society which I have the honour to lead; that is to say, the Oxford and Cambridge Society of Uganda.  This lady, when we are trying to say whether it should be i n our constitution, that society, whether we should use chairman or chairperson and we asked her whether she would object if we said chairman.  She said, no, I cannot object because as a woman, there is always man in me and there is no way I can take man out of me.  (Laughter)  

Mr Chairman, however, if we go to this problem, chairperson means the chairperson of the council appointed under sub-section one of section five.  But the draughtsman perhaps being a man later on in the bill forgot.  So, we find that in section or clause 9(3), does he say chairperson?  No.  He said, the chairman may from time to time in writing  require - but he really meant the chairperson and then as though that is not bad enough, we go to clause 40 on page 26 and there you will find that in clause 40 sub-clause 3, we are talking there of the chairperson of a committee.  The chairperson means the person who heads the whole council according to two.  But now we are saying that a person who chairs a committee, who is a different person.  Now, in law, we must be consistent and I know these matters will be corrected but it shows you the problems we are landing into by using this slightly exotic -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, right now, the committee which is handling national resources and wildlife is going through a bill and such a thing has just occurred there and to avoid this ambiguity, we are saying in a masculine gender issue, we can use he to mean either feminine gender or masculine gender so that from time to time, we are not getting into conflict.  After all, I was hear when hon. Miria Matembe was introducing to us this new vocabulary of chairperson and she defended that it is getting international recognition.  I challenged her here by saying, can we now begin talking about mankind as womankind because it is already something which is used to mean both?

MRS LAGADA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor and the House that this question of addressing everyone as a chairperson does not do any harm to male gender but it does harm to the female gender.  Why?  Because when it comes to the female gender competing for positions in society, especially elective positions, the psychological belief in the female gender is that because that chair is referred to as chairman, the female gender tend to shy away from it and opt for vice as if it is only male who can sit properly and do well in that chair.  That is the very reason why women are saying it is high time we fought this war because it is a psychological war brought all by years and years of men domination, cultural belief which favours men and that sort of thing.  So Mr chairperson Sir -(Laughter)- I would appeal-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, there is no provision in our rules of calling the Chairman a chairperson.  (Laughter)

MRS LAGADA:  Okay Sir.  Sir, for purposes of this House and your Chair, I think you want to be Chairman, I would appeal to my Colleagues here who are enlightened Members of society to help the female gender fight this war because you have accepted that the female contribute a lot to the welfare of this country and unless you do not want this country to go ahead, I think you want to encourage the female gender by calling everybody chairperson. I does you no harm, it does not detract on your maleness but it does harm to the female gender.  I thank you.

PROF. WANGUSA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman it is just a small contribution by way of information on this gender word.  When hon. Abu Mayanja said that woman contains man, I took it for real in the English language because as you realise Mr Chairman, the word wo-man actually includes man at the end.  So, I am surprised that the women are not even going further enough since the fact in English a woman has man in it they should -(Interjection)- yes.  So apart from the other senses in which woman is always containing man -(Laughter)- I am surprised Mr Chairman that the women should go further enough to say that in fact in all cases where man and woman are used sometimes together or interchangeably, they should now campaign for the use of woman only so that woman will include man; even call them pronouns like he and his they should say she is instead of hers we should say she is and that will include absolutely everybody.  (Laughter)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  By way of further information, I would like really to give this piece really to support the Ladies on their insistence of chairperson.  Now it has become very difficult in some circles, in some scientific conferences to differentiate man from woman.  In fact we have had cases in international sports competitions where there have been doubts about the sexes of the competitors and they have had to be subjected to chromosome tests.  So in order to exclude this kind of grey area, you can just use the word chairperson when you have conferences or meetings of this nature.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this is becoming very interesting.  By way of information Mr Chairman, I would like to quote from one of the beautiful British philosophers Batrand Raso writing about women.  He said, before the First World War, one of the reasons put forward against giving the vote to the women was that they would tend to be pacifists.  But during the war, they put in a large-scale reputation of this accusation and they were subsequently awarded the vote as a result of their contribution to the bloody work.  Mr Chairman, that is a curious thing and I think the Ladies ought to think about that.  Let me conclude by saying that I am looking forward to a day when I will find a large sign on the road saying, Stop, women at work.  (Laughter)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank everybody for the information and I would like to say for the sake of the record that I really support the women.  I am gender sensitive but I was talking from the point of view of drafting a law.  If you looked at the law there were certain clauses where you really come to see that you have lost clarity.  There was something where he said his office where we should have said that somebody shall resign his office and then it was said that a person shall resign from that person’s - now they do not use his or her.  Me, I am prepared to go so far to authorise the use in the law of the feminine gender that we shall use she and we shall use her and we shall use hers provided we put in the definition in the section that she includes he and that hers includes him.  During this time of the Movement, I would like to appeal to my sisters that do not be taken too much.  We have already made a distinction in mchaka mchaka between form and content.  What matters is the content.  If you say these people of those crimsonness are not there to do the work, but anyway, Mr Chairman, I think we should proceed and I want now to talk about the composition of the councils because that is important.  

Mr Chairman, I want to make two observations.  First of all, I think that the two representatives of the faculties of medicine of all the universities established by law in Uganda and we did it in the other law, it is bad provision.  Why?  Because there is no provision for these faculties of medicine to meet together and agree; and they are already admitting people in Mbarara they are teaching medicine, Mbale they will soon if not - be teaching medicine, Makerere and so on and what can they have in common?  But would it not be more reasonable to provide that each faculty of medicine shall nominate one person to be appointed by the Minister to the council or let one, if that will make the council too big, let there be one.  If during this first appointment they can appoint somebody from Makerere, then after three years, they can appoint somebody from Mbarara and so on and so forth.  But this question of providing of these faculties - we have done it in the other law and as a lawyer, I was able to see the anomaly but I had no opportunity to talk in Second Reading and I was smuggling all these things through committee.  I could not bring out every point.  

So, I propose that there should be either one representative from each faculty of medicine of a university established in Uganda as the case may be.  Now secondly on Roman 4, same page 10, it says one private practitioner representing the Uganda private medical and dental practitioners.  Are we talking about a practical thing?   Are these people organised in one society?  If they are not and as they are all over the country, to think that somehow all these private practitioners medical general practitioners, specialist practitioners, dental practitioners, in Soroti, Gulu, Mityana will all get together and agree on a name is really to legislate for something which we know is unrealistic.  

I, therefore, with that explanation would like to propose that these people should be split into three.  There should be one person representing the general practitioners usually referred to as GP; then there should be one person representing the specialist practitioners and one person representing the dental practitioners.  That would be more manageable.  On that thing, I find that we have provided following sub-section 2, that the registrar shall be the secretary to the council and as such, shall participate in the deliberations of the council but shall have no right to vote.  Mr Chairman, why not?  When you come to look at the registrar, he is not takataka.  The registrar is a person - in section 8, there shall be a registrar who shall be appointed by the health service commission from among the registered practitioners.  So, he is a fully qualified doctor or medical practitioner or dental practitioner appointed by the highest body that appoints these people for the country and when you look at some of his functions, it becomes absurd because you find that for instance in 9(1)(e), the functions of the registrar shall be; on behalf of the council to inspect and have full access to all medical and dental health units in accordance with the provision of this and then come and report.  This is the right hand person of this council and he is man or woman on whom the fate of the council will rival for, he is the person who keeps the register, he is the person who advises how these practitioners are acting and behaving throughout the country, he is a fully respected professional and when you say he can deliberate but cannot vote, it sort of carries a stigma that there is somehow something belittling about being a registrar and it may even preclude some people from accepting the job if they are so appointed.  So, I can see nothing to recommend why a full member, a professional, a man who is running this thing, a man who is the accounting officer of the funds, I recommend very humbly to the hon. Minister and the chairman of the sectoral committee that they accept the proposal that he be a voting member of the council.  I will take the information from the chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the problem we had with this proposal is that while the other people are appointed by the Minister, this person comes in by virtue of being a registrar.  He is not among the people who are appointed.  Therefore the committee really thought it fit to allow this man to vote when he is not a member according to the law.  But as we said here, he can deliberate, he can give advice but when it comes to voting, the committee never thought it wise to really allow him to vote.  That is the only reason.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Well, I am trying to suggest very humbly but from my also very considerable experience that the committee might consider changing their mind.  Because in my profession, we have people who are appointed by the Minister - other people are appointed by the Public Service Commission - on the law council, on the body that disciplines lawyers.  There are some people from the Attorney General’s chambers who are not elected by lawyers.  So long as a person is professional, it cannot be a serious objection how he is appointed.  It cannot affect his capacity to vote or not to vote merely because he is either appointed by the health service commission or by the Minister or directly from the university and so on.  I mean when they come there, they are all doctors and they are dealing with these matters.  Mr Chairman, I am still of the view that the registrar should be allowed to vote.  Mr Chairman, I will next like to draw attention to clause 32 (1) on page 23.  It says;” no person shall operate a private health unit or consulting room registered under this Statute unless there is in attendance a registered medical or dental practitioner as the case may be to exercise personal supervision over its operation.”  

Mr Chairman, - somebody is saying, hear, hear - and I would like to applaud but I want to know, is this intended to mean that this professionally qualified person must be in attendance all the time full time?  Because we used to have in the past thing where a practitioner in private practice he has a clinic at Nakulabye, then he has a clinic at Mukono, and the people know they say, on Monday, the doctor comes otherwise during the other days, it is the nurses or the other person who attend to the patients and you know the day the doctor comes.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman or Chairperson- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, there is no provision in our -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  I submit.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Mayanja that he should read 32(1) in conjunction with 2.  A health unit is different from a practitioner.  Any businessman can open up a medical health unit as a business but for its operations, the clause is saying that there should be a registered practitioner in attendance.  But clause 2 clarifies that other times, the unit is not closed.  There are certain activities which can go on without the presence of a practitioner.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, again I thank hon. Dr Luyombya for that very good information.  But again there is a problem with what we passed yesterday.  Because yesterday, we created sub-professionals and we elevated them to professionals and we called them under that Statute registered practitioners and we are not talking about registered practitioners.  Now you are going to have a problem when a businessman opens a clinic to do this kind of thing but he employs a person registered under the Statute we passed  yesterday.  So how do we know?  He is going to - there is a lot of confusion because that person will be a registered dental practitioner and this person here is a registered dental practitioner, it is very confusing.  Mr Chairman, that confusion is brought up even more if you look at the previous page 22 clause 33 which says that at the discretion of the council and subject to conditions that the council may determine, the registrar may register private dispensary or a maternity home operated by a medical assistant, nurse or mid-wife as the case may be exclusive for the use of a body corporate or an institution but under the supervision of a registered medical practitioner.  

I would like to know when the Minister replies and now that he is here, because yesterday, my learned Friend was piloting that bill.  Now we have this bill being piloted by one of the most highly qualified professionals in this field.  How are these things going to run?  Have you not opened up the door for a thing which should have been run under the supervision of a doctor?  But now you say it should be under the supervision under an allied doctor.  I leave the question for the kind attention of the hon. Minister.  I had omitted here Mr Chairman, in 28, I am really concerned about the punishment.  Clause 28 says that, a person shall not engage in private practice without holding a practising licence issued under this Statute.  Now that is a very serious and very, very important provision which -(Inaudible). Now it says in 2, “A person contravening the provision of this section commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine of not less than UShs 200,000 or to a term of imprisonment of not less than one year or both.”  

Now, incidentally, this method of writing penalties to me is offensive because we are prescribing a minimum punishment and we are leaving it to the judge or magistrate to send you to life because it says not less.  So it can be more, it can be longer, not less than UShs 200,00, it can be 200,000 million shillings.

AN HON. MEMBER:  It can be life imprisonment.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  And it can be life imprisonment indeed, that is what I said and again when you look at the last one on page 30, it speaks of a fine of not less UShs 300,000 or imprisonment of not less than one year or both.  So here in 30, one year is equivalent to UShs 300,000, in the other one, it is equivalent to UShs 200,000.  But the point which really - still the Attorney General is not here - this cannot go.  If you say not less than one year, it means that if a magistrate who can impose up to five years, if he gives five years, he or she - to show my gender sensitivity - he or she will be in his or her legal rights.  Again if he or she gives a sentence of 200 million shillings, he or she will be within his or her rights.  So what does it mean Mr Chairman.  Maybe I can be enlightened.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Members that actually the sectoral committee has reduced the penalty to UShs 200 or a term of imprisonment of not less than one year.  It is UShs 200 not 200,000.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Actually we have had a similar problem when we were discussing other bills in other sectoral committees and we think that this is a problem in the department of draughtsmanship in the Attorney General’s chambers; because in most statutes or bills, they have been providing for the lower levels of punishments but not providing for the upper limits and leaving that to the discretion of the judge.  So I think the problem must be looked at more comprehensively and it appears to be in the Attorney General’s chambers.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank God I am no longer responsible for the chambers but if it is, it should be corrected.  Of course what was there very briefly Mr Chairman, was that after the currency reform, the pecuniary fines became so ridiculously unrelated to reality; 200/- became two shillings and so on and so forth, UShs 2,000 became UShs 20.  There is a bill which should be coming; we had done it but it never came during my time; which would enable the Minister concerned to be reviving the punishments.  But again in a period of inflation, it would be necessary to make a kind of a situation which could provide for flexible penalties.  

But anyway Mr Chairman, my last comment - this, I would like the Minister to confirm to me whether he agrees, section 39(1).  It says - we are talking now about disciplining, punishing first these people for professional misconduct.  So they have talked about enquiry; that part of the bill provides for enquiry for the benefit of Members who did not read their bills; that if somebody is suspect of professional misconduct or accused of professional misconduct, an inquiry is instituted and a committee is set up, even a lawyer is appointed and they inquiry into these things and so on and various safeguards are being set up.  Now when we come to 39, it says that a person aggrieved by the decision of the council in any inquiry - that is to say, the council may decide that the man or woman’s name be struck off the register.  It says that a person aggrieved by the decision of the council in any inquiry may within 90 days from the date of notification of the decision of the council appeal to the High Court against the decision and the High Court may confirm, annul or vary the decision as it thinks fit.  Now do I understand that a person aggrieved means what it says?  Any person, not necessarily the person who has been inquired into.  Supposing you have a case, supposing my child has been treated by a doctor and treat in really the monstrous manner and then I complain, they make inquiry and they decide not to take an action against him, can I as father appeal to the High Court or can I as an enlightened member of the public, representative of Busujju, senior counsel and all that, can I appeal or is it only the doctor concerned who can appeal against the decision of the council in these circumstances?  

Mr Chairman, I would like to know.  With those observations, I would like to say that I support the bill.  But one point I forget, the one point which I forgot is that and it is not within the bill.  But I am saying that it has been brought to my attention that Kampala City Council is in the habit of dumping waste, rubbish, everything anywhere.  These things include faeces, it includes dead dogs, and they pile up, then water percolates from there, it goes into other things and it is drunk and so on and this is a very major health hazard at the present time.  The Minister could please look into it otherwise I support the bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  With that, we come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 March 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

