                                                  Wednesday, 23 March 2011

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you. I also ask you to come for parliamentary work so that we can clear some of the work we have on our table.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg that we adjust the Order Paper so that we deal with the Insurance (Amendment) Bill first which is agenda item No. 4. We can deal with capital markets after.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know the position of the committee.

MR TUMWEBAZE: We have no objection to that.

THE SPEAKER: I remember there was an issue raised by hon. Okupa yesterday about Libya and employees of the Libyan Embassy and we had said that Government would make a response today. I do not know whether they are ready?

3.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Minister had to brief Cabinet today and of course, had to make a well researched position so he will be able to present tomorrow. I thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay it is seconded. Please, proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: The Bill was given to the committee after the first reading. The committee worked on it and it is ready with the report. The major objective of the Bill is to amend the Insurance Act, Cap 213 to close the loopholes, correct the errors; ensure clarity of the law and to enhance corporate governance in the insurance sector.

3.04
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): I expected the report to have been circulated some minutes back. I have the pleasure to present the report on the Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 

The Insurance (Amendment) Bill 2010 was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure for Parliament’s consideration and subsequent reporting to the House. The committee has considered the Bill and now has the pleasure of presenting the report to the House. 

We held consultations with relevant stakeholders who included the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Insurance Commission, the Association of Insurance Brokers and health maintenance service providers. Their respective submissions greatly enriched the report of the committee.

The committee also met the relevant laws of Kenya and Tanzania which informed its decisions in regard to particular provisions.

The Object of the Bill -

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the chairperson of the committee to circulate a report which is not signed by members?

THE SPEAKER: It may be that you do not have one signed because mine is signed.

MR TUMWEBAZE: The report is signed only that the signatures are in the middle – at the end of the report, before the amendments - and not at the end. I think that is the right procedure.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Insurance Act Cap 213, to close the loopholes in the law, to ensure clarity of the law, to enhance corporate governance in the insurance sector, to enhance insurance and provide for other connected purposes.

It is also to delink the Insurance Commission from supervision by the Bank of Uganda and bring it under the supervision of the Minister of Finance. This amendment affects sections 24(3), 25(a), 25(b), 26(2), 48(3) and 64(3).

To remove any ambiguities and to ensure clarity by defining the following technical terms that are used in the Act but are not defined: “actuary”, “admitted assets”, “admitted liabilities”, “claim settling agent”, “director”, “document”, “insurance surveyor”, “license”, “life insurance fund”, “loss assessor”, “micro insurance”, “non-life insurance fund”, “person”, “premium”, “principal officer” and “risk manager”.

To provide for health insurance as one of the classes of non-life insurance business to be regulated under the Insurance Act and prohibits the transaction of the business of life insurance and non-life insurance under a composite company.

To enhance corporate governance in the insurance sector by providing the circumstances under which certain officers are prohibited from holding office in an insurance company; by prohibiting members of the board of an insurer from serving as members of the board of another insurer, brokerage company, financial institution or any other investment concern; by giving the Insurance Commission power to receive complaints from the public on the conduct of an insurer and to arbitrate or grant restitution in respect of the complaint; by amending the composition of the board of the insurance commission to include representation of the Certified Public Accountants of Uganda and the Uganda Law Society, among others; by amending the terms and conditions of service of the commissioner for insurance and by bringing the Insurance Commission under the ambit of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

To enhance corporate governance by restricting the loans that might be given by an insurance officer and directors of the insurer; by allowing the Insurance Commission to specify methods of resolving outstanding claims and by providing for annual auditing of the accounts of the insurer, insurance brokers, risk managers, loss adjustors, insurance surveyors and claim settling agents and the qualifications required of the auditor.

To enhance the development of the insurance sector in Uganda by increasing the amount available to an insurer from ten percent to 50 percent of the security deposit, where the insurer suffers substantial loss from liability to claimants, which cannot be met from the resources of the insurer; by requiring insurers to furnish quarterly financial statements with the Insurance Commission and to furnish for each year in the prescribed form information on capitalisation, reserves and the classes of insurance business carried on by the insurer in Uganda; by providing for investigations on an annual basis instead of every three years; by providing for mandatory offer to place re-insurance with a re-insurance company that may be incorporated under the laws of Uganda and by providing for the possibility of rehabilitation of an insurer before winding up of the insurer.

To enhance the development of the sector by providing for the policy holders’ compensation fund to be used to compensate the policy holders of an insolvent insurer; the Bill regulates operations of health maintenance organisations including the licensing requirements, the scope of operations and the contents of the contracts between health maintenance organisations and policyholders; and provides for the charge of a levy on the policyholders by the insurers and which is to be remitted to the Insurance Institute of Uganda for training and certification of training programmes.

To provide for more prohibitive penalties under the Act for particular offences and provides for regulation of other several aspects under the laws.

Observations of the Committee

Conflict of Interest on the Board:

There have been concerns from the stakeholders that having industry players on the board as the case is currently, poses a conflict of interest. Board members who also serve as industry players are in position to make decisions about their competitors as well as set fees and penalties that are levied upon their own companies. Besides, these board members are in position to make decisions against their competitors.

The committee proposes an amendment to clause 10(c) prohibiting insurance players from serving on the insurance commission board.

Insurance Policy Holders’ Compensation Fund

The establishment of an insurance policy holders’ compensation fund, the funds of which are to be used to compensate the policy holders of an insolvent insurer may protect policy holders.

The committee, however, observes that the fund should not be managed by the commission, which should concentrate on regulatory work, and makes provision for a policy holders’ compensation fund board to manage the fund.

The Insurance Appeals Tribunal

The Bill gives a lot of powers to the commission that are synonymous with the administration of justice even in complaints against itself or its staff. There is a high possibility of compromise and abuse of such powers by the commission to the disadvantage of insurers, brokers, the public and other actors in the sector.

There is need to establish an insurance appeals tribunal to receive, hear and determine disputes in the insurance sector without prejudice to the rights of parties to appeal to the high court and other superior courts in the administration of justice.

The committee recommends that the 	Bill be passed with relevant amendments. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of the committee for the report. Hon. Members, the debate is open.

3.16
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having looked at the insurance sector of this country. But I have much regret that it has not actually touched one vital area which concerns the day-to-day lives of Ugandans, and that is the third party motor insurance aspect.

Third party is supposed to help people who get problems with motor vehicles but apparently the enforcement of this aspect of the law is not anywhere. People get accidents but they do not know how to go about getting compensation from the insurance companies.

Money is paid as third party by motor vehicle owners but the victims do not know where to go to get help. Consequently, people get very serious injuries but nothing happens after that. And so money is spent on Third Party Motor Insurance for no benefit whatsoever.

In worst case scenarios, people who have got buildings along the roads get them damaged by vehicles that run off the road. Buildings are destroyed and people lose lives but nothing happens. And it appears the enforcement section for this aspect does not care at all. One would have been very pleased to see this matter being handled.

Another aspect is of motor vehicles not licensed in Uganda but ply Ugandan routes. There are those which come from Rwanda to and from Kenya but cause accidents here. The police may handle the matter but apparently people do not know how to go about being compensated. I find this a very big omission which should have been handled by the committee and even the amendment itself. I do not know if it is possible to look at it.

Finally, the regulator of the insurance business in this country should be well known. It should be handled as a profession so that people know where to go when something happens to them. Who are the real regulators? I see the amendments that have been made but one of the problems with our laws is that we pass them here but people do not get sufficient information. There is no sufficient sensitisation of the public, for example by saying: “The situation has changed; if you get a problem, please go to such and such a place.” It remains on the law books and therefore becomes of no use to the public. Otherwise, I would be very pleased to see any improvement within the insurance business. Thank you.

MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification from the committee chairperson. First, you were talking about the creation of an insurance policy holders’ compensation fund. How is this fund going to be managed without the interest of the board members who are at the same time clients in the industry? Thank you.

3.19
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether I am able to use this platform to seek some redress. When I got employed immediately after school – that is in the 1970s, I took an insurance policy with a company called Uganda American Insurance Company. My contribution at that time was handsome according to the times. After a number of years, our good Government from the bush slashed off two zeros and that took me back to square one. Now that we are reviewing this Bill or the law regarding insurance, how can I get restitution? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the business before us is the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.21
Clause 1

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I thought before we proceeded with the amendments, the chairperson or the minister would respond to the issues raised such that we know where we can caution in case what hon. Kawanga brought needs to be inserted in. I thought the minister should give some light -

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Kawanga raised the issue of motor vehicle third party. It is true the committee did not address that specific matter but there is a provision for making of regulations to manage the detailed operations and the administration of the entire sector. That matter can be handled rightly under these regulations and those regulations can be made by the minister. The commissioner can then adopt them and it can guide on how people can claim their third party benefits.

Concerning board competition, we are trying to make sure that there is no conflict of interest in the board and this board can be appointed by the minister such that the commission is purely on regulation work and then the board manages the fund. The fund itself can turn out to be a big institution and therefore interfere with the other work of the commission. That is what I can say for now.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to add that I know that the Police are trained on the procedure regarding third party and that the regulations, which are in place, require that the commission is always involved in advertisement. What we have to do is more awareness but the Police are aware of the regulations which are there and the commission normally works with them.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose that we delete clause 1 and our justification is that the Bill should commence upon publication. As soon as it is published, it begins. We do not have to bother the minister to appoint a date.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I propose that instead of a deletion, we replace the phrase, “On the date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument”, with the words, “On the date assented to by the President”. I do not know whether it is the same thing but -

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not every Bill that will have a provision saying, “… date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument”, but I suppose there is a law governing the commencement of a Bill where the Bill is silent. I think the Attorney-General can help us to do that. Hon. Kawanga can tell us what happens.

MR KAWANGA: Well, unfortunately I do not have the Bill but normally when you state the date signed, that is very good but the issue of publication of a law is extremely important. It should commence when the public knows. The publication aspect means that the public has been notified that it has actually commenced. So rather than talking about the date of signing, perhaps you could talk about the date when it is actually published in the Gazette.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, when I keep silent it means that the date of publication in the Gazette takes effect but in some provisions, they want to give powers to the minister to decide when it starts. Where those provisions exist, yes we do that but where they do not, there is a general law governing that provision.

MR KAWANGA: I would like the minister to be sure. If you want this law to commence on the date of publication, will you have put in place the mechanism for enforcing it? It is no point saying it commences when actually the machinery of putting it is not ready. If you are not then we shouldn’t be consenting to that.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, this Bill is an amendment Bill, amending a structure which is in existence so I do not think we shall have problems. We are not handling an entirely new law.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, there is a proposal for deletion. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, in paragraph  (a) insert the definition of “authority” immediately  before the definition of “actuary” as follows: “’Authority’ means the Uganda Insurance Regulatory Authority established under part two of this Act”. The justification is for harmonisation with the East African neighbours; the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Kenya and the Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority.

In addition to that, substitute for the definition of “health maintenance organisation” the following; “Health insurance or membership organisation means a person engaged in the business of undertaking liability by way of insurance or membership in respect of funding health care” and thereafter consequently replace the words “health maintenance organisation” with the words “health insurance or membership organisation” wherever it appears in the Bill.

The justification is to cater for the regulation of all organisations engaged in provision of health care by insurance or membership.

Furthermore, insert the definition of the word “tribunal” immediately after the definition of “risk manager” as follows: “Tribunal means the Insurance Appeals Tribunal established under part 8(b) of this Act”.

The justification is to clarify that wherever the word “tribunal” appears in the Act, it means the “Insurance Appeals Tribunal”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question on the proposed amendment by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TUMWEBAZE:  Under paragraph (d) of clause 4, insert at the end of the proposed new paragraph XIII(a), the words, “or membership.” The justification is to include healthcare offered through membership as a class of insurance business.

(II) Inserting new paragraphs, XIII(b) and XIII(c) immediately after the proposed paragraph XIII(a) as follows: 
“XIII(b) micro-insurance; 
XIII(c) bank assurance.” 

The justification is to introduce other specific classes of insurance business. 

Insert a new clause immediately after clause 4 as follows: “Amendment of Section 6 of the principal Act;” Section 6 of the principal Act is amended by: 

(a) 	Inserting in sub-section (1) the words, “maintained at all times” between the words “has” and “a” appearing on the second line.

(b) 	In sub-section (2) the words, “maintained at all times” between the words “has” and “a” appearing on the second line.

The justification is that capital should be maintained at all times for the protection of all policy holders.   

(c) Inserting immediately after Section (3) the following: 3(a) “Notwithstanding  sections (1) and (2), a health insurance or membership organisation, a micro-insurance organisation and an insurance organisation set up for the furtherance of regional cooperation shall have a paid-up capital as may be prescribed by the regulation.”

The justification is that micro-insurance and health insurance/ membership organisations are new and delicate areas of insurance business in Uganda, which need to be promoted by providing appropriate capital requirements.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, clause 5 is amended by one, in paragraph (a) substituting the words, “by the commission” with the words, “by the insurer” and deleting the words, “prescribed paid-up” appearing on the third line. 

The justification is to remove control of the account from the commission since this is the insurance company capital, and to ensure that companies writing bigger risks maintain corresponding higher levels of security deposits. 

Two, substituting paragraph (b) with the following: “The deposits made under sub-section (1) shall be invested by the insurer in Government securities or any other investment as may be approved by the commission.”

The justification is to relieve the commission of the duty to invest together with the attendant conflict of interest problems and enable it as a regulator to vet the kind of investments insurers may undertake. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question that clause 6 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 7 by replacing the words “financial institution, financial brokerage, security brokerage company or any other investment concerned or a subsidiary of any of these” appearing under the proposed sub-section (3) with the words, “in Uganda.” 

The justification is to narrow the scope of restriction against cross-directorship in any insurance company and financial institutions, security brokerage companies, to enable the insurance sector benefit from the scarce human resource capital with relevant knowledge, expertise and skills in insurance and actuarial matters, who prefer to remain in financial institutions under securities markets which are more profitable ventures. 

We propose thereafter insertion of a new clause immediately before clause 9 to read as follows: 

Amendment of Section 14 of the principal Act; Section 14 of the principal Act is amended by replacing the words, “Uganda Insurance Commission” with the words, “Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda.”

The justification is for harmonisation with our East African neighbours; the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Kenya and the Tanzanian Insurance Regulatory Authority. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 8 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 10, one in paragraph (a) by replacing the words, “commissioner for insurance” with the words, “chief executive officer.”

The justification is to bring the provision in line with the proposed amendment to the name of the insurance governing body, that is, the Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda. 

Two, substituting paragraph (c) with the following: “(f) a person nominated by the Ministry of Health, not being a player in the industry.”

The justification is that board members who also serve as industry players are in position to make decisions about their competitors, as well as set fees and penalties that are levied against their own companies; and three, by deleting paragraph (d).

Four, by inserting a new paragraph as follows; by inserting immediately after paragraph (g) the following new paragraphs:

(h) a representative of the Governor of Bank of Uganda; and
(i) a representative of the Ministry of Finance not below the level of a director. 

The justification is that the representation of the sector ministry will allow closer supervision and monitoring.

Secondly, to enrich the commission by introducing specialised knowledge, expertise and skills of the Central Bank in the financial sector. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 11 by one, redrafting the provision to provide for another amendment of Section 21 of the principal Act as follows: “Section 21(1) is amended by substitution for the words, ‘commissioner for insurance’ and ‘chief executive officer’ and thereafter wherever they appear.” 

The justification is for best practice in the modern management regulation of insurance. 

Two, in the proposed sub-section (2)(a), by deleting the word, “four” and replacing it with, “five” and deleting the words, “for one further term” appearing at the end.  

The justification is to allow for continuity in case one has exhibited good performance. 

We propose a new clause thereafter inserted immediately after clause 11 as follows: “Amendment of Section 22 of the principal Act; Section 22 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the word, “secretary to the commission” with the words, “secretary to the board.” 

The justification is due to the proposed change to assume the new name. 

Another new clause we propose is to insert a new clause immediately after clause 14 to read as follows - 

THE CHAIRMAN: But I am wondering because you are talking about introducing another clause after clause 14, when you are dealing with 11.

I would have imagined that we finish what is relevant to 11; we move to 12, we move to 13 and when we come to 14, you say, “insert this” rather than doing it when it is a mile away from the clause we meant.

So, I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we proposed to insert a new clause immediately after clause 14 to read as follows;

“Amendment of Section 29 of the principal Act:

Section 29 of the principal Act is amended as follows; by inserting at the end of sub-section 2(h) the words “certified by an auditor, approved by the Commission”. The justification is to ensure that plans and forecasts meet appropriate standards. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, do you mean this is a new clause which is not there?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that a new clause be inserted after 14 as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.
  
Clause 16

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 16 by inserting in paragraph (a) between the words “minimum” and “capital” appearing on the first line, the words “prescribed paid-up”.

Inserting in paragraph (a) between the words “minimum” and “paid” appearing on the last line, the word “prescribed”. The justification is to clarify that the minimum capital requirement is the prescribed paid-up capital.

In paragraph (c), proposed (k), substituting the word “of” appearing in the first line with the word “or”. The justification is to correct a typographical error. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 17 by re-drafting the provision to provide for another amendment to Section 34 of the principal Act inserting immediately after sub-section (2) a new sub-section (3) as follows:

“(3) Where an insurer allows credit on premium under an agreed arrangement, the insurer shall be liable to pay any claims that may arise from the policy”. The justification is to bind the insurers to their policy obligations without unfairly opting out to the detriment of their clients while safeguarding them against exploitation. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 18 to read as follows: 

“Amendment of Section 40 of the principal Act: Section 40 of the principal Act is amended by substituting the word “intermediary” with the word “person” appearing in the second last line. The justification is to prohibit and protect the public from misleading advertisement and statements relating to insurance businesses made by the insurers, intermediaries or any other person. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 23 by substituting the entire clause with the following:

“Amendment of Section 47 of the principal Act; Section 47 of the principal Act is amended by:

(a)substituting for the words “unexpired risks” wherever they appear in sub-sections (1) and (2), the words “unearned premiums”.
(b) substituting for paragraph (b) of sub-section (2) the following: “Reserves for outstanding claims, a sum equal to the total estimated amount of all outstanding reported claims together with an additional amount of not less than 15 percent of the total amount of outstanding reported claims in respect of claims incurred but not reports at the end of the last preceding year or as such amount as the Commission may determine.”

(c) inserting the phrase “or such other amount as the Commission may decide” at the end of paragraph (c) of sub-section (2). The justification is to use the correct technical term and to allow flexibility in the reserves to be maintained by the players. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr  Chairman, we propose to amend clause 24 by substituting for the entire clause the following:

“Section 48 of the principal Act is amended by:
(a) inserting immediately after the words “balance sheet” appearing at the end of the sub-section (1) the words “in which the Commission shall have a lien”.

(b) substituting for the word “central bank” appearing in sub-section (3) the word “minister” and thereafter wherever it appears. The justification is to empower the commission to have control over the investments, to protect policy holders’ interests and one of the objects of the Bill is to delink the Insurance Commission from supervision by Bank of Uganda and to bring it under the supervision of the minister responsible for Finance. I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wanted the committee to persuade some of us who are not knowledgeable in this area as to why we should remove the supervision of insurance companies from an established body like the Central Bank to an appointed individual like a minister. What value are we adding?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, honourable colleague. First, there are precedents. In the region, you have separate autonomous regulatory bodies set by Acts of Parliament to do that sole job.
Two, to lessen the burden on the Bank of Uganda to allow it concentrate on its core mandate and really allow the sector to grow. When you allow the insurance sector to grow, you also put in place an authority with professionals in that specific sector. That is the rationale of delinking the two.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I want to persuade my chairman to accept and retain the Central Bank because we are specifically talking about investment and it is the Central Bank which is responsible. I beg that the chair agrees that we retain the Central Bank’s role in this specific clause. 

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of the committee and Bank of Uganda said that this would be an extra burden to them; they want to concentrate on their core functions. Those were their words.

THE CHAIRMAN: So then, I think what we should say is that, Bank of Uganda is authorised to employ more employees to cater for the new responsibilities -(Interjections)– are you withdrawing the amendment? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, amendment withdrawn. I put the question that clause 24 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 25 by substituting for the entire clause the following: “Section 49 of the Principal Act is amended by:
i)substituting for sub-section (1) the following; an insurer shall within 90 days after the end of the financial year except for the certificate of solvency in paragraph (a) which shall be submitted within 120 days after the end of the financial year, prepare and furnish the commission in the prescribed form.

a)	substituting for Section (2) the following:
i) an insurer shall each year furnish the commission, as may be required by the commission, with all essential  information regarding its capitalisation, its reserves, the classes of insurance business it carries on and such other information as the commission may require.” 

The justification is to clarify to the effect that the certificate of insolvency is to be submitted 120 days after the end of the financial year and like the rest of the financial statements which are to be submitted after 90 days, the provisions in 1(a) and 1(b) are not necessarily after the amendment in 1(a) above – the amendment in (1) already provides for the situations in (a), (b) and (c).

We also want to introduce flexibility in annual submission of returns by the insurers so as to facilitate closer monitoring and supervision. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 26

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 26 in paragraph (b) by substituting for the entire proposed sub-section 3(a) the following:

“An auditor shall not audit the accounts of an insurer for a continuous period of more than four years and shall not be reappointed within the proceeding four years. The justification is to correct a typographical error. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, on this question of auditors, normally they do not change them unless there is a serious matter; it is a slight on their reputation. But anyway that is what you have proposed.

Clause 27

MR TUMWEBAZE: We proposed to amend clause 27 by substituting for the entire clause the following: “Section 55 of the Principal Act is amended by:

a)	substituting in section (1) for the words, ‘Three years’, appearing in the section the words, “Ninety days”;

b)	substituting for sub-sections (2) the following: “The insurer shall within 120 days after the end of a financial year tender a copy of the report submitted to him or her under Section (1) to the Commission.”

The justification is for clarity on the period to submit a copy of the actual investigation report and to be in tandem with the proposed amendment in Section 49(1). I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I propose to substitute for paragraph (b) under clause 29 the following:

“By inserting immediately under sub-section 1(b) the following:
(c) A re-insurance company incorporated under the laws of Uganda, fifteen percent of its insurance session.” The justification is to build capacity and avoid premium being ceded outside Uganda. 

Two, insert a new paragraph (e) immediately after paragraph (d) as follows: 

“(e) By inserting a new sub-section 5 as follows: 
a) A re-insurance company incorporated in accordance with sub-section 1(c) shall have, as its shareholders, all the companies licenced under this Act except a company it does not wish to be a shareholder of the re-insurance company.” The justification is to ensure that the incorporated re-insurance company has a national character representative of all insurance players.

“b) The re-insurance company holding or any change thereof shall be approved by the Commission. Justification is to ensure that the re-insurance company shareholding is representative of the insurance company.” I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Excuse me, the chairman had gone to amending (e) whereas I had wanted from the principal Act, Section 64, after (b); since he brought in a (b), I want to bring in a (c) that, “The insurance companies will first exhaust local capacity for both treaty and calculative insurance before seeking to place business in foreign markets.” The justification is to help minimise capital freight by retaining insurance premium in the market. It will also create jobs for the many unemployed youths leaving universities as well as create local insurance and re-insurance technical skills. I beg to move.
 
MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, it re-enforces my spirit, I concede and accept it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, subject to the proposed amendment, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 30

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose that we delete the entire clause 30 because we feel that those details can best be handled under the regulations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, deleted.

Clause 31

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we proposed to amend clause 31 by re-numbering the existing provisions as (a) and inserting a new paragraph (b) as follows: “(b) Section 71 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (2) paragraph (b) by substituting for the word “and” the word “or”. The justification is to allow winding up to take place for each ground not complied with individually and not simultaneously. One ground is sufficient to justify winding up. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 32 as follows:
 
(i)	Substituting in sub-section (2) for the word “Commission”, at the end, for the words “...a board of trustees who shall be appointed by the Minister.” 

(ii) Inserting a new sub-clause (3) immediately after sub-clause (2) as follows:

“(3) The composition, terms and conditions of service of the board of trustees shall be prescribed by regulations made by the Minister.”

Justification: to relieve the commission of the responsibility of managing and administering the fund so as to allow it focus on its regulatory mandate. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 33 by substituting for the word, “High Court,” with the word “Tribunal.” Justification, the committee proposes establishment of an Insurance Appeals Tribunal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute paragraph (b) with “(1b) The deposits made under sub-section (1) shall be invested by the Broker in Government securities or any other investments as may be approved by the Authority on which the commission shall have a lien.”

The justification is to relieve the commission of the duty to invest together with attendant conflict of interest problems and enable it as a regulator to vet the kind of investments brokers may undertake.

(ii) Deleting paragraph (b)(1e). Justification: the provision is inconsistent with the Companies Act.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, my concern is just the drafting because it says “the deposit” under sub-section (1) “shall,” which is mandatory, “be invested by the broker in Government securities or any other investment”. The moment you make it mandatory, then you have to be definite where the broker is going to invest it. Here you are saying, “shall be invested by the broker in Government securities or any other investments”. 

I suggest the word “shall” is dealt away with since it is discretionary for him to either invest it with Government or any other body. Any other investment means there can be no investment. So “shall” is tying someone to something you are not definite about. Probably, we change it to the word “may”? 

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason why the committee feels it should be “shall,” is to make it mandatory for each broker to have a security deposit. What has been happening is that this security deposit has been manned by the Insurance Commission. But after visiting other countries, the committee is recommending that this security deposit must continue to be there. But when it is there, it should be in Government securities or any other investments approved by the commission and after approving them, there must be a mortgage clause for this investment. When a company is going down, this is the first call to make sure it pays its customers. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: My understanding of this drafting is that the insurance broker must invest in Government securities as a priority and then any other investments -(Interjections)- yes, because any other can even include Government securities. So why are we so definite on Government securities?

THE CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think that the idea is to provide security to people who have interest in insurance? I think they are more secure with Government securities or other ones which are approved. The aim is to take care of the interests of people who are insured. Otherwise, if you allow them to invest in such bogus investments, the people to suffer will be members of the public. The idea is good, to protect, but I think you are trying to give freedom. There will be freedom but it may be ruinous to those interested. I am just suggesting; maybe that’s the reason they are saying so.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, it goes on to say investment may be approved by the authority. So, the moment there is an authority to approve the investment, the broker can go for it. It becomes even more redundant to list. It is now eating powers of the authority which should approve the investment of the brokers; so it even becomes more redundant -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think that is not what is meant. What is meant is that where you invest should have been approved. The idea is security; we need it.

MS AKELLO: Since we are already saying that other investments may be approved; that means they may or may not be approved. So, in case where they are not approved, what happens? 

THE CHAIRMAN: You do not invest.

MS AKELLO: Then it renders the other word “shall” –

THE CHAIRMAN: It is really to protect. You are fighting for the freedom of the broker but here we are protecting the public. The idea is to protect interests of the public. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 35 by inserting a new paragraph (a) just before the existing (a) as follows: 

“(a) by replacing the words “municipal employee” with the words “employee of a local government”. The justification is to prohibit employees of local government units from being insurance agents.

We also propose in paragraph (c) to insert a new sub-section (4) as follows:
“(4) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply to bancassurance.”

Justification: this is in the spirit behind paragraph (a) of the clause, which removes the restriction of a financial institution acting as an insurance agent. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 36 by inserting between the words, “…of…” and “…four…” appearing in the second line of the proposed sub-section (2), the words, “more than.” 

Justification: to restrict the timeframe within which an auditor can audit the accounts of an insurer to only four years. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Does it mean that the entire Bill was lacking because every clause is being amended? Is that what you are suggesting? I do not know but this is your suggestion. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 36 as follows: “Amendment of Section 83 of the Principal Act: Section 83 of the Principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section (2) a new sub-section as follows: 
“A risk manager, loss assessor, loss adjuster, insurance surveyor and claim setting agent shall keep proper books of accounts for all income and expenditure of the risk manager, loss assessor, loss adjuster, insurance surveyor or claim settling agent in accordance with the financial reporting standards adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants.”

The justification is to make the above players comply with international financial reporting standards when preparing their financial statements. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 37

THE CHAIRMAN: Apparently, there will be a renumbering of clause 37 because of the new clauses that we put in. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 37 sub-section (1) by substituting for the word “year” appearing at the end with the words “three years.” The justification is that an inspection done at least once every three years is sufficient and less burdensome. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.
           
Clause 38

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 38(1)(c) by:
(a) Substituting the word “may” with the word “shall.” The justification is to make it a mandatory requirement. 
(b) Inserting the words “premium” between the words “pay a” and the word “penalty” and inserting the word “and” between the words “penalty” and “interest”. 

ii. By inserting a new paragraph (1d) as follows: “Any insurance broker who fails to remit any premiums collected on the insurer’s behalf to the insurer commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points.” The justification is to prohibit non remittance of premiums by insurance brokers by making it an offence punishable under the law. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the submissions of the chairman of the committee. So, if in your earlier statement you stated that this is intended to regulate the broker, I do not know why we are treating them with gloves here. We are tying the hands of court not to levy a fine of more than 500 currency points, which is Shs 1 million. So you are saying any insurance broker who fails to remit any collections - I do not know the amount - should not pay a fine of more than Shs 1 million? There is nothing like imprisonment and if the amount is Shs 20 million, it will be a very viable business for me not to remit and then pay Shs 1 million. 

So, maybe we should make it a little deterrent because the mischief we are trying to cure is that they should not fail to remit. So, I propose an amendment that, “… shall be liable on conviction to a fine of at least 500,000 currency points or imprisonment or both.” I beg to move. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the submission by hon. Odonga Otto, of really having a deterring measure but on the issue of imprisonment, here we are looking at a broker which is a company. Who is to be imprisoned? Maybe we can increase the currency points from 500 to 1,000 or any other figure as may be agreed by Parliament. I think it is deterrent enough. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to be advised by insurance specialists; how much money can an insurance broker fail to remit? What is the maximum? If there is no ceiling, I suggest we leave court some powers to exercise discretion other than to increase it beyond this or to make it less than this but not to tie the hands of court. So, in that circumstance, I would say, “… shall on conviction be liable to a fine of at least…” then we bring it down to 200 currency points so that court can exercise jurisdiction from Shs 5 million onwards. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: On top of the fine, Mr Chairman, I propose that we put an addition and say we can equally suspend the licence of the insurance broker such that it is punitive enough, not to trend that part. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I can see we are now going into the details and yet we have provisions which the commission follows. So, I wanted to beg that we leave out the details of prescribing how the penalty is going to be given and we take the minimum – at least 500 currency points. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Agreeable, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 39 by substituting for the words “two million shillings” with the words “one hundred currency points.” The justification is to bring the provision in line with Law Revision, (Fines and Other Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act ,2008, which converts fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters into currency points. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose that we substitute for the entire clause the following: “40: Licensing of  health  insurance or membership organisations: A health insurance or membership organisation shall be regulated by the commission in consultation with the minister responsible for health and other stakeholders.” The justification is to create a framework for regulation of the organisations and allow further consultation for details to be included in the regulations. I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I suggest that the health insurance or membership organisation be licensed by the commission. But the regulation, which is the technical work, be done by the minister. So, instead of it reading that a health insurance organisation shall be regulated, it shall read, “the health insurance organisation shall be licensed by the commission and regulated…” because the minister can bring a regulation here by the minister responsible for health. So, the licensing goes to the commission and the regulation remains to the minister in charge of health. 

MR TINKASIMIRE: Previously, you asked us to replace the word “commission” with “authority” and constantly you are referring to the commission; which commission are you referring to? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you so much. Wherever it appears, you should replace it with authority. Thank you for the corrections. Our amendment from the input of colleagues can read as follows: “A health insurance or membership organisation shall be licensed by the authority and be regulated by the authority and be regulated in consultation with the minister responsible for health and other stakeholders”. This is intended to allow the Ministry of Health to have an input in the formation of the regulations.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and thank you Chair for raising this. But I think the Chair is not clear because if you say that the licence will be from the commission and authority and then regulated; by whom? It has to be the authority to regulate these health insurance schemes in consultation with the ministry because if you leave these health insurance schemes to be regulated by the Ministry of Health then we shall have the so many problems that we have already had with those that have been operating as health insurances and yet they are not supposed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Really we are all agreeing. He is trying to say, “… in consultation with the Ministry of Health,” it is to bring in the professional authority of giving advice on that regulation because the commissioner for insurance may not know the right regulation to apply to a doctor. That is the whole rationale.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: New clause, Mr Chairman. We propose the insertion of new parts VIIIB immediately after part VIIIA. The principal Act is amended by inserting a new part VIIIB as follows: 

“Part VIIIB - Insurance Tribunal
“92A Establishment of Insurance Appeals Tribunal
1.	There is established a tribunal which shall be known as the Insurance Appeals Tribunal. 
2.	The tribunal shall be an ad choc forum consisting of three persons appointed by the minister, one of whom shall be a lawyer with adequate experience.
3.	The minister shall appoint one of the members to be chairperson of the tribunal.
4.	A person aggrieved by a decision of the commission under this Act may, within one month from the date on which the decision is communicated to him in writing, appeal by a petition in writing to the tribunal which may uphold, reverse, revoke or vary that decision. 
5.	The Tribunal shall not proceed to decide any matter brought before it without first giving the appellant an opportunity to appear and be heard.
6.	Except as provided for in this section, the decision of the Tribunal on an appeal made under sub-section (4) shall be transmitted in writing within two months of receipt of the petition of appeal and shall, except on a question of law, be final and conclusive.
7.	The person aggrieved by a decision of the Tribunal made under sub-section (1) may, if it involves a question of law, within one month from the date on which the decision is communicated to him, appeal to the High Court.
8.	The expenses incidental to the administration of the Tribunal shall be born by the commission.
9.	The Minister shall make regulations to provide for the operation of the tribunal which shall be laid before Parliament. 

I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I want to make an amendment to this especially on part 2, the ad hoc forum. It consists of three persons. I would like to suggest that one of the three persons should be a woman -(Interruptions)- let me put it better that, “…at least one of whom shall be a woman.”

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, for fear of certain circumstances, I agree to the proposal. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I propose that we amend clause 41, substituting for the entire clause, the following, “Amendment of section 94 of the principal Act: Section 94 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the entire section the following: All insurance players shall be members of the Insurance Institute of Uganda.” The justification is to enhance professionalism in the industry. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 42 by inserting after the proposed sub-section (4), new sub-sections (5) and (6) as follows: 

(5) “The Insurance Institute of Uganda shall, within 90 days from end of the financial year, file with the commission, the audited accounts of the Institute of the preceding year.

(6) The accounts of the Insurance Institute of Uganda shall be audited by an auditor approved by the commission”

The justification is to allow for transparency and accountability. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 43 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 45
(i)	In paragraph (b) by substituting for paragraph (3)(c) the following: “… is privy to furnishing of any false information under this Act is liable to pay a fine of not less than 150 currency points.”

The justification is to enable the commission levy fines without the recourse to courts of law.

(ii)	In paragraph (d) by substituting for the words, “five hundred thousand Shillings,” the words, “twenty five currency points.”

The justification is that it is easier to amend currency points. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 46, inserting after the proposed new paragraphs (ge) the following new paragraphs: 
(gf)  relating to the policy holder compensation fund.
(gg) relating to the use of fines levied against the players.

The justification: 

1.	Making regulations for the Policy Holders Compensation Fund will allow flexibility and will cater for any omissions within the provisions in the principal Act.

2.	To cater for the use of fines collected by the commission.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub-clauses 7(a), 7(b) and 7(c) and rephrase the entire clause to read as follows: “The Schedule to this principal Act is amended -
(a)	In paragraph 1, by substituting for the words “each month” appearing in the third line the words, “every three months.”

The justification is that: 

1.	Sub-clauses 7(a) and 7(b) and 7(c) should not be applicable since industry representatives are being removed on the grounds of conflict of interest.
2.	To allow the board members to concentrate on policy matters.

We then propose to amend (b) by renumbering the current Schedule as Schedule 1 and inserting a new Schedule 2 immediately after schedule 1 as follows: “Schedule 2: Sections 38 and 39; a currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just wondering whether the currency point equivalent is not defined in other legislations.

MR TUMWEBAZE: We propose to amend Clause 48 by inserting the following new sub-clauses: “(2) The amendment by Section 5 of this Act shall come into effect after the expiry of three years after the commencement of this Act.” This is to enable companies to comply.

“(3) The amendment by Section 10 of this Act shall come into effect beginning October 2013.” This is because current contracts of the board members expire on 20 September 2013.

By deleting sub-clause 2, the provision negates the spirit of the proposed amendment to Section 11. I beg to move. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I wonder what the commencement date for this piece of legislation will be, because the amendment of the chairman of the committee is that companies are given three years to comply with this Act. What will be happening to the mischief we are trying to cure by bringing all these many provisions? Secondly, if the board’s term expires in 2013, what was the hurry for us to have this piece of legislation?

It seems we know who is on the board already and we are trying to avoid them. I think the Act needs to come into force immediately so that the commencement date is very clear. 

MR KADDUNABBI: These are transitional clauses. The one which talks of Section 5 handles composite companies in the current law. Companies were allowed to underwrite life insurance and general business. We are now saying that within three years these can either underwrite life insurance or general business but not both. 

There is a board already existing, but this amendment was handling so many important issues in the insurance industry, but we have now changed the composition of the board by removing insurance players. This is why we need this board to expire for us to have a new board.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Matsiko has just put some amendment to the composition of the board. I do not know whether this board will consider having at least one woman. We can disband it and reappoint them such that we take care of those interests.

MR TUMWEBAZE: On the question of giving the transitional period of three years to companies, we decided to give them that time to choose where to belong. They can give either life insurance or general business. I concede on the point of board members.

MS ALASO: I think the three years apply across. If you think about the policies they underwrite, there are commitments already, so you need a transitional period. The same applies to a board because they also have a contract with the board members. We get people suing us for breach of contract.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the title.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The title agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE RESUME

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Insurance (Amendment) Bill 2010” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the third time.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  I think we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 24 March 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

