Wednesday, 25 March 2009

Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you, and I want to thank you for what you were able to accomplish yesterday – that complicated Bill. 

In the gallery this afternoon, we have students from Child Parliamentary Forum from Northern Uganda. They have come to observe how business is done in the national Parliament. Please join me in welcoming these young parliamentarians. You are welcome. (Applause)

On this other side, I see other guests. When I get their particulars, I will also introduce them to you. You are welcome.

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we stood over clauses 2, 5, 6 and 34 of the Mortgage Bill. We are still consulting particularly on clause 34. So I beg your indulgence and that of the House to allow us a few minutes to wrap up our consultations so that we can be able to move on. 

THE SPEAKER: Today, or we start on it another day?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Even today, before we close. 

THE SPEAKER: I think to be safe, I grant you up to tomorrow. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Sir. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA BILL, 2008

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All the ministers are on their way from Entebbe and they will be here any minute –(Interjections)– yes, hon. Atubo and I are ministers also.

THE SPEAKER: What I can do is to suspend the proceedings for an hour.

MR MIGEREKO: Let it be 30 minutes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: What if we come again and they are not here? I think it is safe for you.

MR MIGEREKO: Much obliged, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceedings suspended. Sorry our young people who came to witness business; we shall resume in an hour’s time.

(The House was suspended at 2.49 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.09 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: This afternoon, we had given the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and his team some time to make a few consultations on the issues we stood over yesterday concerning the Mortgage Bill. I understand that the consultations have been completed and they need to do the needful. Therefore, we continue with the Mortgage Bill.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2008

THE CHAIRMAN: As I remember, on the Floor yesterday we had clause 34 and hon. Ben Wacha begged for more time to go over it. Therefore, we should recall clause 34.

Clause 34

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have held consultations with two ministers in charge of the Bill - the hon. Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the honourable Minister of State for Lands - and the chairperson of the committee, and we have agreed. I think it is only proper that the minister reads out our agreement. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, we consulted on clause 34 of the Bill with hon. Ben Wacha; hon. Okello-Okello; the chairperson of the committee, hon. Byandala; Minister of State, hon. Mike Werikhe and also the bankers’ representatives and the Mortgagers Association representatives. 

We have agreed that the land amendment which should have come in the Land Act some years ago and somehow disappeared somewhere – anyway, we agreed that we can safely delete clause 34 because that clause is taken care of by clauses 35 and 40. If we had to retain clause 34, it would also involve actually defining it and giving more details on the conditions under which court could grant relief and so on. So we have conceded to the proposal. 

I want to thank hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Okello-Okello. I hope they will continue with this spirit. Of course, there was my former professor in law at Makerere, hon. Sam Njuba; sorry I was forgetting you. He was also involved. We put our heads together and I want to thank them for this spirit. I hope it will continue from now onwards. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, there is a proposal to delete clause 34.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, deleted.

Clause 5 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to add something to clause 5. As I said the other time, you can have more than one matrimonial home. It does not have to be one. You might have a home in Kampala and also have another country home in another place. This other one is also your home and you should have consent if it is going to be mortgaged. You can have one in Kampala, another in Rwakitura and in Kisozi -(Laughter)- I am just giving examples. A matrimonial place can be more than one home. So I just want it to read as “homes”.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Well, I do appreciate the views of hon. Najjemba on this matter but I would urge her not to insist on that amendment for two reasons: One, fundamentally the provision is dealing with mortgage of a matrimonial home. It does not say that you should not have more than one matrimonial home. What you are mortgaging at a given time is a matrimonial home on one specific occasion. So you do not have to put it in plural.  

Secondly, in the interpretation clause, singular and plural are properly interpreted as meaning the same. So, actually, if I have a matrimonial home in Kampala, Lira or Otuke, which I have, and I want to mortgage the one in Kampala, I do it at one occasion. If I am to mortgage the one in Kampala, I have to consult the spouse inside it. If I mortgage the one in Lira, I will consult the spouses or the same spouse. If you are a Muslim like my friend hon. Kyanjo, then you would have to go to Otuke again. So, it is the same. That is the answer I give to her.

MS NAJJEMBA: Mr Chairman, is it harmful for us to be specific and make it very clear? We are amending this law to make it easy for the implementers. Why should we have a difficult law? You can have more than two matrimonial homes and you can even mortgage all of them at once. It happens!

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought the intention was to have the principal matrimonial home and not the 10 homes; otherwise, you will never do business. There must be a principal matrimonial home. Maybe we say, “Principal matrimonial home”. Otherwise, somebody could be naughty and hinder your progress in the home; every home you try to use to raise funds, he may say it is a matrimonial home. So, it must be the principal matrimonial home.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I think it is not possible to have more than one matrimonial home. It is not possible to have two, unless there are several wives. In which case, you cannot go and mortgage five of them at a go. We are talking of one at a time. So, it is only one matrimonial home.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then we qualify it by saying, “principal matrimonial home”. If you have more than one home, that is different. You still will have one principal matrimonial home for each one of them. I think we have disposed of this.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I have another amendment on clause 5. I want to amend clause 5(1)(a) and (b). In (a), I want to delete from the third line the word “any” and substitute it with the word “spouses”. So it would read: “A mortgager of a matrimonial home, including a mortgage on customary land or a matrimonial home, is valid if - (a) Any document or form used in applying for the mortgage is signed by or there is evidence from the document that it has been assented to by the mortgager and the spouse or spouses of the mortgager living in that matrimonial home.” That is the amendment I am introducing also in (b).

THE CHAIRMAN: So what are you deleting in (1)(a)?

MS AMONGI: I am deleting the word, “any” in the third line and replacing it with the phrase, “the spouse or spouses”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Does it really offend you the way it is?

MS AMONGI: Yes, it does. I can give an example. If I am living in my matrimonial home and other wives are living in their matrimonial homes and there is a temporary separation, if you get another wife to live there, because it says “any” the other woman living there can sign. It says, “…mortgager and any spouse of the mortgager….”

THE CHAIRMAN: But if that one living there signs and you are not living there?

MS AMONGI: No, it would be my matrimonial home if I am wedded or married. I may have been living there and I get separated temporarily from my husband but it still remains my matrimonial home.  

THE CHAIRMAN: What happens if you leave and you go to live with some other person?

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, it can even be fraud, especially for a man with many wives. Another wife can consent when I am absent from my house. Like in the case of a traditional household in Lango –(Interruption) 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I thought hon. Amongi’s amendment was to emphasise the fact that there could be more than one wife –(Interjection)-  I do not know this concept of many husbands, so let me deal with the concept that I know best, that is of wives. There could be more than one wife under one matrimonial roof. So if you are going to get consent, if there is only one wife living under that roof, you get the consent of that wife and there is no problem. However, if there is more than one wife, then you must get the consent of both of them. Am I right, hon. Amongi?

MS AMONGI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Does the committee have an amendment?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, it is a question of clarity - whether what you are putting on request is what I read.

THE CHAIRMAN: What we are putting forward is to clear doubt on the third line of paragraph (1)(a). The original formulation refers to the mortgager and any spouse. So it has been amended to say, “…any spouse or spouses….” That is what we have amended. Did you have any other amendment?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I just want to remind you and colleagues that we proposed to replace sub-clause (2) with the following: 

“For the purpose of sub-clause (1)(a), an intending mortgagee shall take reasonable steps to ascertain whether an intending mortgager is married and whether or not the property to be mortgaged is a matrimonial home.

(b) An intending mortgager shall make full disclosure to the intending mortgagee as to his or her marital status and whether or not the property to be mortgaged comprises the matrimonial home.”

The justification was to create an obligation on the intending mortgager to disclose marital status and whether or not the property is a matrimonial home.  

I want to insert after that a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows:
“The mortgager shall be deemed to have discharged the duty under sub-section (2) if the mortgagee obtains a marriage certificate issued in accordance with the laws of Uganda, and in the absence of which a customary declaration from the spouse or spouses of the mortgager as proof of marriage.”  

The justification is to enumerate the steps the mortgagee is to use to establish the right spouse of a mortgager.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, if I get the chairman correct, I think it will be too much on the mortgagee to go and establish whether the mortgager has more than one wife.  How can I come all the way from Kitgum to apply for a loan here in Stanbic and you expect Stanbic to travel to Kitgum, to my village, to investigate? Who will pay the costs? I think it is not necessary that the lending institution should first of all investigate whether I have more than one wife. Should that be the role of the lender?

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Normally, there are conditions on the forms which are produced by the bank and you have no hand in it. So, what this clause is trying to put forward is that you must be able to show proof that the proper spouse is declared before you mortgage that property. The banks will have to produce some sort of document on which the signature of certification will be able to take care of your wife.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you put this burden of proof on the mortgager rather than the bank? Why don’t you establish conditions that the mortgager should produce in the bank? Why did you encumber the bank to do this kind of thing? It is not fair.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman that is exactly what we have done. We have made it a dual responsibility. We have even made it easy for the mortgagee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you say that the person who wants to get a mortgage gets a letter from the ordinary authority in the village or in the parish and takes it to the bank? This letter could say, “We know this person and this is or this is not his or her matrimonial home. The wife is so and so or the husband is so and so.” Why should you encumber the bank? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, all that we are saying is that the bank should obtain these documents. Banks are not going to move to the villages. We want to make it tight so that the bank also takes trouble to find out if that person is saying the truth.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, this arrangement is being made between the mortgager and the mortgagee. We should also put some responsibility on the mortgager to make the necessary disclosures. Why should the bank go into the investigation process? The relationship of marriage is between the mortgager and his wife. Why do you want to introduce the bank into whatever wrangles these people may be having? 

The bank could just ask a question in a form from a mortgager; for example, “Are you married? If so, who is he/she?” The disclosure will then be made in that form. That should be good enough. Why should the bank go further to ask for the certificate of marriage and all this. Surely, this is going to put a lot of burden on the banking institution and on whoever is benefiting for no good reason whatsoever.

THE CHAIRMAN: Suppose the bank comes and tells you, “We have investigated and found out that this man is not married”, are you going to say he is not?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, if you are not married, the work of the bank is very easy. There are a lot of people who go to the bank who are not married. Therefore, in filling the form, you simply say, “I am unmarried” and you make that declaration. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable, you said that the bank should take this and the other. The bank comes, makes an oath and says, “We carried out our investigations and we found that there was no marriage.”

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, if you can just give me one or two minutes. First of all, let us go back to clause 4. To appreciate this amendment, you have to go a little bit back. First of all, there is a duty of disclosure – “the mortgagee and a mortgager shall…” A mortgagee who refuses neglects this duty and commits an offence. 

If you are unmarried, you do not have a matrimonial home because a matrimonial home is for married people. However, where you are married, you now move to another level of responsibility. Experience has taught us that married men and spouses can be disadvantaged in the process of mortgaging, and that is why this law is being made. We are therefore moving from a situation of full disclosure. If you disclose that you are married and you have a matrimonial home, then you move to the next step where the bank is saying, “If you are married, do you have consent of your spouse?” If you have consent, then there are the things that follow. If you do not have consent, the bank will not be able lend you anything. 

In this amendment, we have made it easy for the bank. If you disclose that you are married, the bank shall be deemed - it is even easier - to have discharged the duty of sub-section (2) if the mortgagee obtains a marriage certificate issued in accordance with the laws of Uganda, and in the absence of which, a stated declaration from the spouse or spouses of the mortgager as proof of marriage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, by the time a person goes to the bank, he wants resources at the cheapest cost. Now, we are saying that for an unmarried person it is easy but who confirms that you are unmarried? You are saying that they must be certified, but I can lie that I am unmarried for ease. So, the easiest way to do this is for the mortgager to confirm that he is married. 

Two, he should present the confirmation from say the LC I that this is his matrimonial home and this is his marriage certificate, and that is perfect. You cannot ask the bank to go and confirm in my village that it is true that it is my matrimonial home. I do not think that it is right. I think the obligation should be on the person who is borrowing and not the person who is lending so long as he is demystified by the borrower by signing forms of indemnity.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the minister. When we make these laws, they must be for posterity. I will give you an example. For us Christians, say Catholics, you may get married to your wife in church but somehow you separate. When you separate, she is still the matrimonial wife because the church does not allow divorce; there is no talaq. For our friends the Muslims, once you give talaq to your wife it is done, but for us, the Catholic Church will say “no” and yet you are not living with her. We may have even been separated for years and she is living in her own place and yet I want to mortgage my house to develop myself. Now, what happens? (Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like this clause to remain as it is. To me this clause protects the mortgagee. When you are mortgaging, the mortgagee goes to see whether the house you have got is really a good house. They take the effort so that they know whether the house is permanent or semi-permanent. If they can take the trouble to see the house, why can’t they go to establish whether that marriage is really a proper marriage? 

At times the man can bring a fake certificate saying that he is married yet actually he is not married. I think it does not do any harm for the mortgagee to find out from the clan, the relatives or the church whether this is a proper wife or husband. I think it is supporting to both. Let us leave that clause. Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, the purpose of this sub-clause (2) and amendment is really a development from clauses 4 and 5. If there is full disclosure in 5, and also ascertainment that any document or form used in applying for the mortgage is signed, and evidence of the document that has been assented to by the mortgager and so on, I think we go by your view, Mr Chairman, that there is enough protection in 4, 5(a) and (b) and we can safely leave the amendments. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in clause 6, insert a new provision immediately after sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “Where a person holds out to be providing independent advice as provided for under section 6 (1)(a) and (2), such a person shall be liable on conviction to a fine of 120 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding 60 months or both”. The justification is to provide for a penalty clause.

In (b), replace the definition of “independent person” in sub-clause (2) with the definition that is along the lines of section 147 of the Registration of Titles Act, Cap 230. In this clause, the independent person is any officer of government, a justice of the peace, an advocate, a notary, bank manager, a minister of any religion authorised to celebrate marriages, a medical practitioner and any other person authorised in that behalf by the minister by statutory instrument. 

The justification is to permit the retrospective obtaining of spousal consent where previously required under the Land Act Cap 227 and not obtained on account of error or in advance. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, under clause 2 I want us to define a mediator because it has been used commonly in clause 7 and other clauses. What does “mediator” mean?

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you want to say?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would say the mediator is the court of law.

THE CHAIRMAN: The mediator is the court of law? Normally, courts appoint a mediator rather than the courts themselves being mediators. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: “Mediator” has the same meaning as is in the Land Act. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What is it?

MR OMARA ATUBO: To assist persons not qualified to benefit; where a person has occupied unutilised land or developed any land and is challenged by a registered owner of the land, that person shall take reasonable steps and can appoint a mediator under section 2 after satisfying himself or herself that there are reasonable purposes for reaching a satisfactory agreement between the parties. So, we are using “mediator” as is known under section 30 of the Land Act. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case then we should import, just as we have imported the leasehold tenure as the meaning given to it by the Land Act. So, we should also bring it in this. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Accepted. Numerically in the drafting, I think they can take care of that. There are even functions of the mediator. So, we can place it somewhere on page 5 immediately after “matrimonial home”. We can say that “mediator” under this has the same meaning as in the Land Act. We can put it there. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think in your clause 2 you are following the alphabet.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes, the alphabet.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, if you are following the alphabet, does the “mediator” come after “mortgage”?

MR OMARA ATUBO: No, after “matrimonial”. So we shall define it.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the minister has defined “mediator” as - 

THE CHAIRMAN: It has the same meaning as in the Land Act.

MS AMONGI: Yes, but the one in the Land Act talks of the mediator being appointed by the land tribunal. However, if you look at clause 7, on customary land it says: “Where the mortgagee under a mortgage on customary land seeks to exercise any customary remedy, which involves or may involve the mortgager being dispossessed or permanently deprived of the services of the mediator….” One is subjecting it to the customary law applicable to the land, and in that circumstance the mediators in that context will be according to the customary mediation in that area. So, I do not know whether you will want this same application of being appointed by the land tribunal also to be applicable in this, and whether it will not contradict in respect of Section 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: The interpretation is not about how the mediator is appointed but what he stands for? 

MS AMONGI: But in the definition of the Land Act, it is saying the mediator has the meaning assigned to it in Section 89. Unless I am reading a different Land Act, and 89 subjects it to the appointment by the tribunal. 

MR ATUBO: Yes, but you see, as they say “meaning” then you modify it in the interpretation to suit the conditions under which you want it to be used under the Mortgage Act. So it will actually be interpreted – it is like fitting yourself in somebody’s clothes, you might have to tie it a little bit tighter. You will help us with the drafting. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so I put the question that clause 2, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please bear with me, there are some guests who are here and have not been introduced; it can be quite embarrassing. In the gallery this afternoon, we have the social policy class from Uganda Christian University Mukono. You are welcome. (Applause)

Also in the gallery we have students of political education class from Lowell Girls’ Secondary School. You are welcome. (Applause)

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title do stand title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want the record to capture her amendment because that is how we lost the Matembe amendment when we were discussing the Land Bill originally. The amendment has not been captured and the minister has not said, “With that amendment”. So the record will not reflect that amendment. We shall lose it.

THE CHAIRMAN: She had no amendment; she was just making an inquiry. She was saying that there is a difference between a customary mediator and so forth and we said that the meaning does not depend on appointment. She did not have an amendment. The amendment we had was from hon. Mafabi, to include the term, “mediator” in Section 2.

MS MUKWAYA: But the minister accepted and said, “Give us your draft”. So what was he accepting? 

MR ATUBO: What I was accepting was that in defining the mediator we shall take care of her concern about the customary aspect of the mediator and we agreed that we will take care of that in the drafting and she should help us. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is what is agreed, how shall we know that that is the position which is agreeable? I thought that -

THE CHAIRMAN: In as far as I am concerned the hon. Member did not have an amendment. She was just seeking clarification basing it on the appointment under customary law. We said that we are not concerned with the appointment but we are concerned with the role. 

But if she has an amendment, I can accommodate it. If you are serious about it give us the amendment you want. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I was convinced by the honourable minister’s response that because that would be a subsequent amendment, the drafting people would just know that when they are putting the Bill together before it is assented to, they would make sure that this particular point, the drafting of the word, “mediator” would encompass that particular provision. That is why I got convinced with the Minister and felt that would be the position.

THE CHAIRMAN: So the position is that you do not have an amendment. Yes -

MS AMONGI: Okay in case the amendment the way it should be indicated is not - then we can work on it –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- Okay, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi seems to have -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are trying to correct the record. The record is that you did not have an amendment. So, can we move on?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what she is saying is that we have agreed with the one in the Land Act but she is saying that in as far as the customary land tribunals are concerned; I think there must be some other mechanism in those customary areas which can act as mediators. So, the amendment is that it should take care of the one in the Land Act and the one in respect of customary group of persons; maybe a customary tribunal.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, we are about to pass this law. Is it really fair for us to pass the law and then the Minister goes to the draftsman to add what we have already passed? Who will pass that addition?

MR ATUBO: I want to assure you that the definition of the mediator as far as this Bill is concerned has the same meaning as in the Land Act. That is it. That is what we are saying. So, we are only going to put that. However, there can be a problem when somebody looks at the Mortgage Act and has not bought a copy of the Land Act. So we shall try to bring out what is in the Land Act so that you do not have to buy a copy of the Land Act to find out what the Land Act says that may not be in the Mortgage Act. So that is what we are doing. Otherwise the basic definition of “mediator” has the same meaning as in the Land Act. That is all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to seek clarification from you. When you came to define leasehold land tenure, you said, as given in the Land Act. So why did you not define it here other than moving again to the Land Act? 

MR OMARA ATUBO: We have made many laws in this House especially those which bring provisions of the Constitution. Sometimes you are empowered to operationalise a provision of the Constitution while in some cases you simply say, “This is what the provision in the Constitution says.” Other times you do not want to have two separate volumes which you may not afford. 

So, the draft people bring the whole thing -(Interjection)- that is right. It is actually Article 89. As such, if you want, for ease of reference, we can bring all those we are having cross references to although it will be a very bulky provision. 

And then again you are supporting me now by just saying that let us say, “…mediator has the same meaning as in the Land Act,” and we stop there. Because if you are saying let us define the lease, the lease is defined in the Land Act and so is mailo land, customary land and freehold. Do we bring all these?

With that very wise advice from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we shall not have to bring all those. We shall just stop at the provision that the mediator has the same meaning as in the Land Act. And I think that is even much better for us. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.59
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

4.00
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.01
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

4.01
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE MORTGAGE ACT, 2009.”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. The Bill is passed. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, before I move the motion for the second reading, permit me your indulgence that I acknowledge your kind words of accepting me in this House last week. (Applause)

I also take this opportunity to thank my former colleagues on the other side of the House. (Laughter) I can assure you that I will work with you like the rest of us in this august House, diligently, for the good welfare of the people of this republic.

THE SPEAKER: Save, honourable minister, you never sat on that side because that side was created in the Eighth Parliament. (Laughter) In the Seventh Parliament we did not have the Opposition side. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That notwithstanding -(Laughter)- I will go straight away to the Bill.

I beg to move that the Bill be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Now, can you tell us what this Bill is about? 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to make a few comments without necessarily repeating some of the monumental mistakes I made procedurally a few minutes ago. This Bill is brought to the House for the second time, for the purpose of consolidating ICT and IT in this House. 

There are some comments which have been made by the committee and at an appropriate time, I shall respond to them. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, chairman of the committee.

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Edward Baliddawa): Mr Speaker, the National Information Technology Authority Bill, 2008 was brought to the House by the Minister of Information Communication Technology and read for the first time. Consequently, it was referred to the sessional Committee of ICT for consideration and subsequently report to this House pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee received and considered the Bill pursuant to Article 90 of the 1995 Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I am now pleased to present to you the report of the committee on the Bill. 

Methodology

The committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings with stakeholders, including the following: 

•	The Ministry of Information Communication Technology;
•	Uganda Communication  Commission;
•	Telecommunication operators who included MTN Uganda, the Zain group, Orange Uganda, Bukasa Telecom, I-Telecom, Anupam Uganda, Data Fundi, Uganda Women Caucus on ICT, Uganda National Bureau Of Standards and Uganda Bankers’ Association. 

We also received views from individuals with an interest in the ICT sector.

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill generally seeks to establish an authority named the National Information Technology Authority Uganda (NITA-(U)) to provide for its objectives, functions, composition, management, finances and mechanism for accountability within the authority.  

Specifically, the Bill envisages that the new NITA (U) would play the following roles in the information and communication technology sector:

a)	Provide high quality information technology services to government;
b)	Promote the standardisation in planning, acquisition, implementation, delivery, support and maintenance of information technology equipment and services to ensure uniformity in quality, adequacy and reliability; 
c)	Provide guidance and other assistance, as may be required, to other users and providers of IT;
d)	Promote cooperation, coordination and rationalisation among users and providers of information technology at national and local levels, to avoid duplication of efforts and ensure optimal utilisation of the scarce resources; 
e)	 Promote and be the focal point of cooperation for information technology users and providers at regional and international levels.  

General observations

Mr Speaker, several stakeholders raised concerns about the Bill. The main areas of concern were:

•	That the Bill would promote duplication of roles with other statutory bodies like UCC, Uganda Broadcasting Council and others.
	  
•	That clause 4(a) within the Bill that empowers the authority to provide quality information services to government would hurt the private sector and conflict with government policy of liberalisation.

•	That the Bill is silent on the information technology needs of special interest groups like women, children, underserved areas and persons with disability.

•	That the role of supervision and monitoring of information technology services, including those in the private sector, threatens the security of private investment, undermines copyrights, privacy and promotes leakage of trade secrets.

•	That the Bill seeks to give powers to NITA to arbitrate disputes arising between suppliers of IT solutions and consumers and that this beats the practice of independent arbitration since NITA shall be a state body and a consumer of the information technology services.

•	That the creation of a 12-member board as suggested in the Bill is such a big composition that it could be a huge burden to the taxpayers and the national treasury.

•	That the requirement of all organisations wishing to conduct IT survey having to apply first to the authority would create academic research restrictions that could highly undermine works of research and academia.

General recommendations

Mr Speaker, the committee raised stakeholders’ concerns with the Ministry of Information Communication Technology and we received their response thereon. In view of the various concerns of the stakeholders and the position of the ministry, the committee reached a compromise and would wish to make the following recommendations:

•	That the Bill should have a provision for the enhancement of access to information and communication technologies by the special interest groups like women, children and persons with disabilities.
	  
•	That the ministry should expedite the presentation to Parliament, the three-long awaited cyber laws. I must point out that the three cyber laws were already presented to Parliament and they are in the committee.

•	That the Bill should take special care of the interests of the consumers who are the primary users of the ICT products.  If this is not done the interests of the consumers could be compromised by the ICT dealers.

•	That for a sector like ICT, there is need to have a small, lean and efficient size of the board of directors to avoid inefficiency, abuse of office and a huge financial burden. This view is also held by the majority of the stakeholders in the sector. Such a board should also have people with different professional background.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the committee would like to thank the Ministry of ICT and all the stakeholders in the sector for the effort that they put in providing valuable views without which this report would not have been done.  

This report is unquestionably a product of the comprehensiveness of stakeholders’ presentations to the committee and wide consultation with the ICT fraternity through online interactions.  

The position of Information Communication Technology Committee is that this Bill is necessary for the development of the ICT sector and should be considered by the committee of the whole House with a view of having it passed into law.  

For purposes of addressing the various concerns of the stakeholders and having a broadly acceptable law, the committee has proposed some amendments for consideration by this House which are attached in Annex (a) that it intends to move at an appropriate time. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. Yes, hon. Opange.

4.12
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for their report. I have some comments and recommendations I could make on our side as far as this Bill is concerned.  

When you look at this Bill, there is likely to be a clash of laws with other regulators since NITA is mandated, among others, to monitor, regulate and supervise information technology. The role of NITA should be defined to avoid clashes with those of Uganda Communication Commission. Is it a policy body, a regulator or implementer of IT programmes? 

The ideal situation would have been to have UCC, NITA (U) and the Broadcasting Council transformed into a regulatory body with directories of communication, information technology, and broadcasting. If these are put together, the clashing of roles will definitely be avoided as far as the regulating and planning of this secretariat is concerned.  

When you look at the formation of the board as recommended in the Bill, it should be noted that membership of the board is mostly comprised of members of the line ministry and this poses a big challenge to the independence of the authority whose board reports directly to the ministry. This means that this board is just an extension of the ministry to the secretariat, which is meant to address the problem of that ministry. You may not be able to avoid influence peddling and therefore, this should be challenged. 

To ensure that performance of the board of directors is done in a transparent manner, it is imperative that this board is outsourced with people with competent qualifications so that they can work independently as the board of directors of this organisation.

The executive director should also be a member of the board and a secretary to the board in order to have a lean organisation, which reduces expenditure of public funds. This board should consist of part timers rather than giving them full time opportunities, which will increase public expenditure yet this is what we are trying to reduce as far as the development of this country is concerned.

I, therefore, recommend that when we get to the Committee Stage, the minister concerned should be requested or given powers to out source from the relevant competent people outside the line ministries. Also, civil servants should not be considered as board members to avoid influence peddling. These qualified Ugandans with relevant fields can be identified to cater for the interests of other organisations. 

We also feel that as regards the composition, 12 is on the higher side. There should be seven board members; a chairperson, board members from the general public and here we recommend three, line ministries that is Finance and ICT and an executive director who is a secretary for the board. This makes the number seven. The Bill recommends that the secretary to the board will be different from the executive director and yet in all the laws that we have made in this House, the executive director is always a secretary to the board. This applies to all the statutory bodies that we have made and actually reduces the cost.

The Bill also gives the minister powers to direct the affairs of the secretariat, which I feel is irregular. The minister should work directly with the board for purposes of directing but not with the executive director because in Uganda, we have had the minister influencing the executive director to do things contrary to the regulations. This will also stop the minister from usurping powers from the board of directors. 

As regards the role of organisations in arbitration, it is more appropriate to address such disputes before competent bodies such as courts of law or proposed tribunals as is the case with the UCC Act. The Government of Uganda is a major consumer of IT services and therefore not competent enough to carry out this role as proposed in the Bill. 

That is our position and we feel that when we reach the committee stage, we shall address the changes as far as this NITA Bill is concerned, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.19
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I wish to thank, congratulate and welcome our elder hon. Aggrey Awori who is the new ICT Minister. Karibu sana! I wish to thank the committee for the report that they brought to this House this  afternoon and straight away call the attention of the House to the objectives of this Bill that are contained on page 2 of the report. 

When you read from (a) to (e), which seems to be the justification for the formation of a National Information Technology Authority Uganda, you clearly see a duplication of roles. From (a) to (e), you identify roles and responsibilities of the Uganda Communications Commission. 

I would like to agree with the general concerns of stakeholders that what this Bill seeks to do is to bring another body that will operate parallel to the Uganda Communications Commission. I am so passionate on this subject where in this country there is a tendency for government to re-do or what is commonly known as to re-invent the wheel. This comes with budgetary implications. 

I would like to suggest that rather than spend energy on this Bill and rather than spend the valuable time of this Parliament discussing this Bill, as Parliament we should look for a way of reinforcing Uganda Communications Commission instead of creating a parallel body that is just going to make a lot of demands on our already constrained budget and cause us budgetary problems. 

I want to ask government whether this Bill is a result of the ingenuity of government as they seek to innovate and try to make the sector stronger or is this an idea that is borrowed –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, honourable. I just wanted to give some information. There is a very clear difference between Uganda Communications Commission and NITA (U). As the word goes, UCC is entirely responsible only to regulate communications companies for example, MTN, Zain, Orange and many others. NITA (U) would be entirely responsible for IT which means computers; computers are very different from telephones. So that is why the two are absolutely different. UCC is responsible for communication with phones and NITA (U) will be entirely responsible for IT. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for his information but how I wish he had spent some time reading page 2 of this report. Under objectives of the Bill, if I may read, “Specifically, the Bill envisages that the new NITA (U) will play the following roles in the information and communication technology sector:
 a) provide high quality information technology services to government.” At the moment that is happening. I know there are a few problems but it is happening.

It did not require us to legislate on the formation of NITA (U) for us to have high quality services provided to government. And you can go on and on, I do not think we really need to dwell on this. All I am saying is that if it is found that UCC is lacking in some of the roles that you seek to strengthen, the best thing for government to do is to strengthen UCC, to arm them with the necessary personnel, to empower them so that they may be able to play this role.

I would like to guarantee that if we continued with this Bill, you as ministers of government are going to face a lot of trouble trying to resolve conflicts between NITA (U) and UCC. This is something that I predict and I believe will happen sooner than later.

So I would like to propose that this Bill is not necessary; this Bill just seeks to cause more problems than it seeks to resolve. This Bill is not good for this country. We should not really go in the direction of constraining our limited resources while we are actually fully awake. I wish to propose that this Bill be withdrawn, even before we go to the committee stage because it is not going to serve the purpose, anything new as it were.

I do not know whether it is possible to do that at this stage but it would have been my wish that the ministry or government humble themselves, this should not be seen as a defeat, it is good for the Opposition as much as it is for our friends on the government side. I wish to move that the Bill that has been presented before this House for a second reading be withdrawn, further consultations be made with a view to strengthening the Uganda Communications Commission. I beg to move.

4.28
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report that they have given us and to say that this is a very important organ that is going to help the management of information in this country.

It has already been made very clear. The UCC has its own problems and one of the ways of making organisations inefficient is to give them many roles. This one is clearly going to ensure that the increase in the amount of technology being used now, the inflow of all the gadgets, all the equipment that is being poured into the society are regulated. And therefore we need a special organ which can regulate this.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to support this motion and call upon - 

HON. MEMBERS: Which motion?

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill be read the second time. You are free to support it or to oppose it.

MR TOSKIN: Yes, I am supporting the motion. I am calling upon the House to support this motion without any question. I thank you.

MR MAGULUMAALI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to call the attention of this House to the notice board. There is a very clear notice there that reads: “To all Members and staff: Be careful…” There is a message on your e-mail asking you to give information -(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) I am coming, I am trying to raise my point. Please, give me an opportunity.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a member of the committee to come and debate his own report and yet his name is distinctly written even in ink for everybody to see?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I realise he is a member of the committee. You see, as a member of the committee, this is your report which you are debating. But if just to pass information, there you can come in but not a contribution. 

MR MAGULUMAALI: Mr Speaker, I was giving information.

THE SPEAKER: No, you started debating, honestly. You can take time. I will give you an opportunity if you have information to pass on.

MR MAGULUMAALI: Mr Speaker, I was giving information to the House. I am giving information about the notice which has been put outside there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will give you an opportunity at an appropriate time. 

4.32
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work done and my concern is instigated from page 3, that is, the concern of the stakeholders. I am yet to be made aware by the committee what great role some authorities we have in this country have played. We have had one like the Cotton Development Authority, among others, that would otherwise be falling under the Ministry of Agriculture. 

In this case, the stakeholders are raising concern in defence of Uganda Communications Commission and the committee is voicing a concern of having this authority established. I do not know why the government has always not listened to the concerns of the people of Uganda. 

Think of the public expenditure; I do not know whether we are creating these authorities to create jobs or to think about the concerns of the taxpayers. 

Think about a 12-man board; of what use would it be to this country? The bigger the board, the higher the quorum and at the end of the day we will be having activities of the board being stalled because of either lack of quorum or any other reasons here and there. 

For my case, I would not see the issue of having a 12-man board in the authority at the same time coinciding with the concerns of the stakeholders about the duplication of the roles of the Uganda Communications Commission and this authority in place.

The other clarification I want to seek from the committee is on page 4, bullet two. That the ministry should expedite the presentation to Parliament of the three long awaited cyber laws. Which one would come first in this case? What happens if you have conflicting issues in the same regulatory systems you have in place? 

You are making one, it is going to pass and after a short while you bring in another one. You will have two laws failing to be in harmony. What will happen in this case? That is exactly what we had with the Land Act. We have the Act first before the policy. At the end of the day we are thinking of coming up with a policy and already the Land Act is in place. We do not know what to do when. Just rest my fear; what comes first and how would you deal with that situation?

The other concern is siding with the recommendation of the committee that there is need to have a small, lean and efficient size of the board of directors to avoid inefficiency. It is my prayer that you go with this view up to the very end otherwise I do not see why we would have this law in place. I thank you.

4.37
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are in a difficult situation presented with a law that seeks to improve IT services but on the onset the committee with all its energy fails to convince some of us that actually we are dealing with a matter of IT. We are not dealing with earth movement or property movement or garbage collection - we are dealing with ICT. So the issue of having a small team dealing with it convinces everybody else without doubt. 

I am therefore looking at the concerns of the stakeholders in this report with a lot of interest. If you look at the Bill in as far as duplication of roles is concerned; the Bill on page 8,6(d) seeks to regulate and certify information technology education in Uganda. What will the Minister of Education be doing?

When you go to members of the board, you have commissioners - information technology is okay and finance and planning is okay. But when you say you want a commissioner in charge of local government, what does this one mean? It is useless because you have already established a commissioner for information technology anyway in (c). Why do you have to put there a commissioner responsible for education when you have a whole ministry?  

There is also a proposal within the Bill on page 9, (i) that two eminent Ugandans with expertise in information and communication technology should also be incorporated as members. But the rest of the membership comprises of eminent Ugandans with relevant expertise; why do you cram this group? You need very few individuals. They are going to deal with machines and information. 

I also have another concern regarding E-waste. I have not seen anywhere in the report or even in the Bill anything regarding e-waste. E-waste - the management of garbage that comes as a result of information technology. The minister showed us a piece of computer. He should tell us that he will be able follow that computer to get to know where it has been thrown. He should be able to indicate that they are going to look up for the batteries of all the telephones we hold in town. 

I am saying this because despite them being extremely dangerous, they are thrown anywhere, any time, by anyone. This has not been indicated in the report not even in the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, those are my preliminary observations. I know that the view of hon. Amuriat might have sounded harder, but to be in the middle of all that, we should be more appropriate. I would like to urge Members to agree with me to refer this Bill back to the committee and have it smartly cleaned so that it appears like an ICT Bill. I thank you.

4.42
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.

There have been concerns that there are duplications that are going to emerge as a result of the creation of this new body. However, when you look at bullet 2, on page 3, you realise that it says that this body is empowered to provide quality information services to Uganda. This means that nobody has been giving quality information to government. 

If this body is going to provide quality information to government, I do not see how that conflicts with the policy of that very Government. We are not saying that the creation of this body should see the closure of the private sector. The issue is about you coming to compete with a government body. 

In the fourth bullet, the report is saying that this is going to threaten the security of private investors. Which security is more important, of the private investor or that of the nation? What I know is these people are going to supervise and take interest in national security and you know that without national security one cannot have security of an investment. So this is in the interest of even the investors. I fail to see –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way. I hope you have got the Bill with you. When you read the powers of entry and inspection on page 16 – this is where the worry is. They are allowing the authority to go and inspect anywhere, but tactfully in 2, they are also saying that notwithstanding sub section (1); a staff of the authorised office is not entitled to enter a dwelling house except for the purposes of collecting information relating to information communication technology matters and for the exercise of his functions under this Act. 

This is vague, but it is specifically created for a class of individuals who are going to deal in high category ICT projects from their bedrooms –(Interjections)– yes, this is what it means! So, you have to defend this position before you make the business people not to worry about your intentions.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you for the clarifications. What I can say is that that is your interpretation. Otherwise, as far as I am concerned, that is not the intention of this Bill.

I get surprised when people get worried by the fact that IT people will be first required to apply to this body for authority to create – why are you worried about applying? We must have systems and procedures to follow. We are not going to work in a chaotic situation; you must be where we can be able to trace you. We should be able to tell that so and so has applied for this and that and has been authorised so that Government can keep track. Why would you want to work in a chaotic environment? I do not, in any way, see the reason people should get worried about being tracked.

Lastly, yes, I agree that a board of twelve people maybe a bit big; this needs to be worked down to a smaller figure though I also do not agree with the fact that being big is a reason for abuse of office. Even if you are one person –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, hon. Byandala for giving way. I would like to give information to my colleagues that the concerns of the size of the board have been taken care of in the amendment.

MR BYANDALA: Okay, thank you very much. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I support this Bill; I appeal to my colleagues to do the same. Thank you very much.

4.48
CAPT. JOHN OTEKAT (NRM, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing this report; I support the Bill.

However, I would like to say that I notice that in the recommendations by the committee at page 4, there is something that says that the Bill should have a provision for the enhancement of access to information and communication technologies and so forth. I thought the committee should also have looked at schools and colleges; that is the starting point, if we are to enhance access to information and communication technologies by our people. 

I am happy with what the Minister of State for Information Communication Technology has been doing. Though he has been only moving to schools around Kampala, there is need to focus more on colleges and schools outside Kampala.

On the fourth recommendation by the committee regarding the small and efficient size of the board –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give my colleagues some information to the effect that as we speak, we have just finished phase one of computerizing schools. Under the Uganda Communications Commission we have been able to provide solar computers even to schools that do not have electricity. And beginning next month we have chosen two schools from every district, all the way from Amuru down to Kabale – each district is going to have a school with computers. Thank you. 

CAPT. OTEKAT: I would like to thank the honourable minister for that information and of course urge him to go to even those schools where there is no electricity and make a provision of probably solar energy so that they can also benefit. But I thank the minister for his effort. 

Mr Speaker, my other concern is on the fourth bullet on page 4, on the recommendation of the committee. My thinking is that the committee would have been very specific because if it just says, “Small and lean,” normally when you are making the law you do not just say, “Small and lean,” it is better to be specific as to how many members of the board of directors would be lean and small. [Mr Baliddawa: “They are in the amendment.”] If they are in the amendment then that is okay but I thought that you would have even put like five or seven in these recommendations so that when we are reading through the report we know the number you have suggested. But all in all, I would like to support that we pass this Bill so that issues of ICT are straightened up. I thank you. 

4.51
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report submitted and I stand up to support the motion that we go ahead to debate the Bill on establishing the National Information and Technology Authority, Uganda (NITA-U).  

This is based on the ground that currently we are in e-governance; many of us are grappling to catch up with computer literacy and I would like to sincerely thank the Ministry of ICT for the effort put in place, first of all, to bring on board parliamentarians to become ICT compliant. And I would like to urge everybody to continuously search for this information and communication technology so that we gain the skills. Otherwise we shall be relegated into the past world. 

I would like to support the establishment of this authority based on the object of the Bill and considering the fact that currently government has taken the aspect of electronic funds transfer, which is e-governance more or less, using electronic devices. 

It is creating a lot of concerns in some aspects in as far as monitoring and evaluation is concerned. So there is need for an authority in place to monitor the technologies we are bringing in this country and even to put in place mechanisms to ensure that those who are applying those electronic gadgets are able to fulfil the government policies in as far as streamlining the information technology is concerned.

I would like also to bring on board the increasing fraud in banking due to the e-banking. So, we need experts who are in charge of e-governance and e-technology to ensure that we are able to monitor and where necessary, improve on information communication and technology.  

So on those aspects, I look at the aspect of making sure that we put in place a lean board rather that having 12 members as the committee has proposed in the amendments. So that we are able to make sure that the government is in compliance with the technologies of the world and our people are able to adapt to this technology.  With this, I submit my case. Thank you very much. 

4.54
COL. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, on page 3: “That the Bill would promote duplication of roles with other statutory bodies like Uganda Communications Commission, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation….” Are you talking of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation or the Broadcasting Council? Because Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is not a regulatory body, isn’t it? I would like the chairman to clarify if he is talking of UBC or another one. 

Two, I would like to also be assisted by the chairman - you know fortunately the Chairman and the Minister of State for ICT are specialists in this field. You should really help us to internalise and understand that Uganda Communications Commission is a regulatory body and it is concerned with telecommunication spectrum. It also provides spectrum to telecommunication, phones and the rest, which it is restricted to. The Broadcasting Council is concerned with broadcasting management – administration generally; these are different things. 

Members have not internalised this very well simply because what is from (a) to (e) generally also concerns the Uganda Communications Commission. And you should help us to isolate what we are trying to set up, NITA (U) and UCC.

I thought that the distinguished Members are very conversant with this one but the Minister of State for ICT showed us a computer and he stopped there as if – explain to us so that we can really appreciate that UCC is concerned with telecommunication; that it provides a spectrum; that ZAIN has a certain spectrum it uses and it cannot flow or eavesdrop into MTN and then we know that that is UCC.  

Then explain to us that this one is “broad” as the word you are trying to use here, which is actually on page 4: “The purposes of addressing the various concerns of the sector stakeholders and having a broadly acceptable law…”  In other words, this one encompasses all ICT activities, technical and administrative, isn’t it? Then I will be home and dry with that kind of explanation. And I thought hon. Baliddawa could really help us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We create ministries with technical staff whose purpose is to provide the Government of Uganda with services. We have the Ministry of ICT with a full Permanent Secretary and his technical staff, the commissioners and now we want to remove the functions of that ministry from the ministry and establish an authority. I do not think we are doing service to this country.

I have read the Bill. If you read the functions, that is, the powers of the authority, these are the functions of the Ministry of ICT with the capacity of the people there. If the minister is coming here to tell us that the ministry has no capacity to do this work, we shall understand and help. 

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable colleague that although the ministry has its functions as stipulated in its mandate, I think it is not out of order for such authorities to be created. We have Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Road Authority, and so many other authorities that have been created. It does not mean that ministries have abdicated their roles to those authorities. So this is not the first time that an authority will be created. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman of the committee. If the ministries are supposed to create authorities for the sake of it, then this one is a wrong one. 

All of you recall very well that we passed a loan in the Seventh Parliament for providing of course computers and technology at district and sub-county levels. It was handed over to UCC but nobody has come here and told us that UCC never did the work. If it is computers which the minister was showing us, what we should have done is to strengthen institutions.

In Uganda we should not create institutions just for the sake of it, but we should strengthen existing institutions -(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give information that the operations of the Uganda Communications Commission so far in the area of IT, for example providing computers to schools, have been under a different fund which is known as the Rural Communications Fund. These are funds which are derived from one percent of the total profits of the operators. That has all been happening in the absence of an authority that we want to establish. 

Like the honourable colleague, who is actually very senior probably to many of us in this sector because he saw it all when he was still a minister in communications, put it that the primary role of the Uganda Communications Commission is to regulate and make sure that - for example where do you go if you are overcharged for air time, or if you are fooled around and you are not happy that a telecommunications operator is charging so much money, you run to Uganda Communications Commission with your complaint?

When this authority is established, it means that if someone, for example, gave you a substandard computer which is actually the primary drive of any economy - like now as I see honourable, the document you have there is one of the products of a computer. If you did not have a computer that document would not be printed. You cannot run to Uganda Communications Commission and say, “My computer which I bought cannot print.” 

So when this authority is established, UCC will go back to its basic role of regulating. As a matter of fact, it is only because this Parliament has always been lenient and given us a chance to re-establish ourselves. Otherwise they would have already raised the issue by saying, “Hey look here, Uganda Communications Commission, you are supposed to regulate so why are you an operator?” Because if I were MTN and I said, “Why do I give you my money and yet you are a regulator and at the same time an operator?” 

So we want to withdraw all that and bring it into the national IT authority if this honourable House allows us to establish this authority.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister -

THE SPEAKER: But aren’t you done with what you wanted to say? Should we really continue with the debate? Wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister. I think the minister needs to read what we approved in the Seventh Parliament, that that rural fund you are talking about had the component of computers. As much as you are getting the one percent, some of it comes from that loan component.

Civil servants are supposed to work and if we are going to make authorities so that people who are employed there are paid high salaries, yet civil servants are being paid lower salaries, I think the best we could do is to strengthen the civil service to do the work. Because what the minister is talking about can be done very competently within the ministry.

I will give an example. You know I am a co-operator and we have the Commissioner of Cooperatives who handles cooperatives but he has not made a Cooperative Authority to manage cooperatives in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. So this duplication of work is a serious matter. The issue of the taxpayer is the one we are quarrelling about. This taxpayer needs to be really saved from unnecessary expenditures. 

You even talk about women: women are more competent at computers than men -

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you think it would help us to know what is happening in other jurisdictions in as far as this subject is concerned, Mr Minister? I think you have to tell us what is happening in other jurisdictions and that will help us to understand why you need the authority or not.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened carefully to the concerns of the Members. I have particularly got interested in the concern which has been picked from our report that there was general concern by the stakeholders about the possible duplication of roles. For your information, we did address this concern in our committee deliberations.

The role of Uganda Communications Commission is specifically to regulate the communication industry. 

In ICT, Information Communication Technology has two parts: there is communication and there is information technology. UCC was set up to regulate communication and broadcasting. We do not have a regulator to regulate information technology. We have been speaking about this country being a landlocked country -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. I am asking you, what is happening in other jurisdictions?

MR BALIDDAWA: I will give you an example of Rwanda where they have RITA, Rwanda Information Technology Authority. That is a special purpose vehicle that has really propelled the development of IT in Rwanda. 

THE SPEAKER: Let him give us the information then we can use it. He has started with Rwanda.

MR BALIDDAWA: In South Africa they have INCASA. It is also a body specifically that regulates IT. In Kenya they have a body called Information Technology Authority that regulates IT. So – (Interruption)

MR AKENA: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way. I just wish to point out that the Rwanda Information Technology Authority begun as a think tank created by an Act of Parliament in 2002. Its mandate was to explore how to bring Rwanda into the communication age and to make information technology part of the whole process. 

In 2006, through another Act of Parliament, it was transformed to carry out more of the functions and its role is quite different from what is envisaged in this Bill but it generally gave the direction and position of how to tackle the holistic problem of how to bring information technology within government, society, the education system and business. Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, it is good for the minister to name other jurisdictions. What we are trying to create here exists, but he should also tell us whether the equivalent of our UCC also exists in those jurisdictions.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need to know is whether it is normal to have this kind of establishment. It may not be the same size or as perfect as others but is it the normal way of doing things? This is what we are asking and I think that this is what he is trying to indicate.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The creation of such a body is normal. It has been going on and it exists in so many jurisdictions. The typical one closer to us is Rwanda Information Technology Authority. Anyone who has gone to Rwanda will be able to believe that Rwanda has made leaps and bounds in IT because of the establishment of RITA. RITA specifically deals with IT. If this country is going to be able to export knowledge as a commodity, we need to have a national information technology authority.

Secondly, currently we have so many IT initiatives that are going on this country but all these initiatives are not coordinated, are not on the same platform and they are not standardised. It is going to be difficult for this country to implement e-governance without a body that coordinates these efforts. That is why it is important for NITA to be established. Most of the concerns that have been raised have been answered in the amendments that we have proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification that I am seeking from the chairman is, in Kenya as you have mentioned, the Ministry of ICT is in charge of that. What would be the problem if these functions were performed by the Ministry of ICT?

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I have sat and listened carefully to the very good contributions but I think that we are missing out one thing. We need to update ourselves to be able to reach and float with current debates. Everybody here should be aware that we are in an information and technological age. You cannot move if you do not have an independent authority, which will devote most of its time to ensure that all sections of our society are able to - I have been listening to hon. Nandala. Fortunately, he is a former bureaucrat in the Ministry of Finance. In that ministry, the collection of taxes was done departmentally but once we set up the Uganda Revenue Authority, the collection of taxes went up and it is better administered now. 

So please, we cannot argue that once you have a government department, you will be able to think. Sometimes you need to think outside the box and we are thinking outside the box by establishing an authority in ICT so that Uganda can compete with other countries. 

The justification is what is missing in the contributions. People are not convinced that this is worthwhile. But I am telling you that unless you do it, you will be left out in the whole world because throughout the world there is no country where ICT has not had an authority, which authority has been a stimulant in advancing all aspects of development. Thank you. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Speaker, people are referring to the ministry. In my knowledge, the ministry is in charge of policy and development. By creating an authority, we shall be creating an independent body that will be a regulator of the industry. So let us not mix up the role of the ministry and the role of NITA.

The role of UCC has nothing to do with IT. By the time UCC was created, the concept of ICT had not yet caught on. People only knew about communication and broadcasting and that was the television, radio and telephone. 

Today we have so many people who have blackberry telephones and you have the software. So you need the authority that will be able and competent enough to regulate that industry, which is emerging so fast and becoming so lucrative for a country like ours.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and thank you, chairman of the committee for giving way. The clarification I seek from you is whether, if it is put this way, this new authority takes over the role of the Uganda Communications Commission so that we have a new authority and they do away with UCC. Would that help to solve the problem, or as I proposed -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is it that UCC is going to be replaced by this one? I thought they are saying that they have different functions. The other one will remain to carry out certain functions and this one will also do other functions.

MR BALIDDAWA: We called in UCC and got their contribution. UCC was in agreement as regards the establishment of NITA (U). There is no duplication of roles, there is none. On the contrary, they will be complementary. UCC will continue to carry out its role of providing licenses, spectrum and an environment in which other operators can operate while NITA will specifically address IT. 

Hon. Members, I think what is confusing us is that we have failed to distinguish between communication and IT.  ICT is made up of two arms: communication and IT. NITA (U) is going to regulate the IT industry –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I will give you time to go, compare notes and study what is happening because we are moving around in circles. There is no new information coming up, people are repeating themselves. I think let us end here so that tomorrow we can continue with the debate. The House adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 March 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

