Tuesday, 26 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that many hon. Members are involved in the current exercise of Presidential nominations and in view of the fact that, as a result of that, we do not even half the quorum in this House, Is it in order for us to move to the committee state?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, unless hon. Adonia Tiberondwa is now the Chairman of this House to give us reasons that because of lack of quorum, the reason he has given is, other hon. Members are involved in the exercise which exercise I had not been told.  But since there is no quorum we shall adjourn for 15 minutes.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR BAKASHABA RUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought in Clause 4 fees to be charged should have also been included among the functions of the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Paul you were not understood by some of your Colleagues.  Could you repeat.

MR BAKASHABA RUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I said, I thought amongst the functions of the council the fixing of fees to be charged should have been included.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then move a formal amendment if that is the case.  Move a formal amendment.

MR BAKASHABA RUHANGA: To advise fees to be charged by practising Medical professionals.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, I do not have the amendment circulated by hon. Bakshaba Ruhanga.

DR BYARUHANGA PHILIP: Mr Chairman, first of all the hon. Member has not circulated his amendment.  But more important, in Clause 28 part 6 this is catered for very ably.  I think it is not fair really to provide for licensing and fees in Clause 4.  It fits best in Clause 28 part 6 . Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Bakshaba Ruhanga, if that is catered for in Clause 28 (6), will you withdraw then.

MR BAKASHABA RUHANGA: I withdraw, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  I now put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I request that the Minister should concede to this so that Clause 7 reads as follows; just by adding the words “as under” and we delete Clause 2 by just adding the words “as under”.  I beg to move. Mr Chairman, I will repeat what I have said.  By having the words “as under” on Clause 7 so that sub- Clause 2 is deleted so that Clause 7 reads as follows.  The Council shall have a secretariat to assist in carrying out of its functions as under, and then we go ahead so that Clause 2 as proposed in the Bill is counseled, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move, and this will not be a matter of repeating the secretariat twice which is unnecessary.  I beg to move and sub-Clause 2 would automatically also be counseled.  I beg to move.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, what the hon. Member is trying to introduce is probably just another way of drafting and making exactly the same point.  So I really do not see the reason for changing this Clause as it is.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to add on to the Minister’s words that really it is a matter of drafting but in statutes its usual to spell out clearly the functions of a council or a board as it is at the moment.  The amendment proposed by hon. Wanendeya is not really drafting style, and it would confuse issues. So I think that I would support the Minister that we oppose the amendment proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya, do you still want me to put the question on your amendment or you want to withdraw?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I would insist but if the Minister thinks it is better that way, I will leave him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: When I was introducing this Bill I said there was an omission in the printing. The correct sentence we agreed up on was that, there shall be a registrar of the council who shall be a public officer.  That word public officer has been omitted between be and appointed. So I request that we insert it as we pass this Clause. That there shall be a registrar of the council who shall be a public officer appointed by the health service commission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Bbaale.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:I now put the question that Clause 8 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR IMAGA: Mr Chairman, Clause 9 (4), I wish to propose that Clause 9 (4) be deleted.  Mr Chairman, if we prepare a report three months in advance, that report will not be accurate.  Because a report covers what you have already done and what you propose to do. So this section serves no purpose.  Therefore, I propose that it be deletion.  This section is covered under 15 (2).
 
DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, the Clause reads: The registrar shall within 3 months not after 3 months. I am still of the opinion that the point should be left as it is. It is very important that the registrar has a time limit to present his books;and it is crucial that this must be done regularly otherwise the council may lag behind business. 

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: While I actually support the Minister, I wish to advise that while making a report, a report normally covers a period.  Normally you cannot make a report when you have three months to come to the end. You come to the end ,and the report has to be within three months after.  It cannot be before.  Otherwise the report will not be complete for that period.  I think hon. Imaga is correct.  It has to cover a period and normally it is three months after the period not before. Otherwise it will not be reflecting the operation of the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know the Minister is a medical Doctor.  But then I think he has learnt.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, having been given this technical advise, I do concede that it is deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 sub-section 4 be amended as proposed by hon. Imaga.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR GASATURA: Mr Chairman, as advised by the technicians in accounting, I propose that Clause 9 be amended to add sub-section 4 to read that, the registrar shall within 3 months after the end of each financial year submit to the council a general report of the affairs and activities of the council.  I beg to move.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of clarification. I thank you, Mr Chairman. With your permission Sir, I am seeking a clarification from the Minister and perhaps through him the drafts man of this Bill. Mr Chairman, if we look at all these Clauses there is a confusion about gender action.  In some cases they are saying the registrar and his functions.  But if you look at Clause 8 (3) (b), there, they say the last sentence.  His or her removal from office.  In other words there is total confusion as to whether they should use he or she or not.  However, since the promulgation of the new constitution, draftsmen have been directed they should use gender sensitive words. So, I wonder whether the Minister would at least have a word with draftsman of this Bill to be gender sensitive and use words which are either gender neutral or which are he or she but not to confuse he and she and others as the case may be.  I wonder whether the Minister could clarify.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order. Is the hon. Member in order to bring something new which is not relevant to the amendment moved by hon. Gasatura?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member was pre-occupied with certain Clauses. Any way you have reminded him. Hon. Kanyeihamba we are on Clause 9 section 4.

DR BYARUHANGA PHILLIP: Point of clarification . Mr Chairman, the point raised by hon. Gasatura is valid. But I want clarification, Mr Chairman. In Clause 9 section 4 we are putting the registrar on notice to prepare some kind of report to give to the council for council’s deliberations before Clause 15 (2) is effected by council. So, really we still have an obligation to request the registrar to make some kind of report to the council. Then the council will cause may be on the directive of the Minister, the council shall cause to be prepared in respect of each Financial Year, (a) and (b) of that sub-Clause.  So it is still relevant and we should include it in hon. Gasatura’s statement.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this is a very clear statement,especially after the improvement by hon. Gasatura. Then if you could hear from hon. Wasswa Nkalubo that reports are normally made after a Financial Year, and he has already made an improvement.  So I want to put the question on this amendment.  Let us not waste time over simple matters. I now put the question that Clause 9 sub-section 4 as amended by hon. Gasatura as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended.


MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Mr Chairman, before we pass this Bill there is an area which hon. Abu Mayanja drew our attention to;and this is in sub-section 3 of 9 where we have a chairman. I suggest we really maintain chairperson.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, order please.  Let me deal with 4 first then I will to you.  I now put the question that Clause 9 sub-section 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, notwithstanding that we have passed all these Clauses.  The issue that I raised is a constitutional one about gender sensitivity; and I had asked the Minister to make a general -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will come to you hon. Kanyeihamba. I will come to you.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:I was saying that when ordered for re-printing these words were not changed. For example 9 (3). In the interpretation Clause we only interpreted chairperson, there is no interpretation for chairman.  So I want to propose that we maintain chairperson throughout in this Bill and therefore that the - sub-Clause 3 instead of writing chairman, we replace chairman with the chairperson. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 (3) be amended as proposed by hon. Bbaale Bwanika.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 (3), as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 (3) as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:I propose that in accordance with provisions of the constitution, in this Bill where the word “he” or “his appears, it should be worded in such way by the draftsman as to the gender sensitive.  There are certain words which are used as I read in Clause 8 (3) (b), where it says, his or her removal from office. Obviously when you read in Clause 9, then there are inconsistencies where they only say, his, his or him, him without any reference to her. I therefore, suggest that, there should be consistency that it is either his or hers, or they should use such gender sensitive wording in conformity with the provisions of the constitution.  I beg to move.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I do recognise the point made by the hon. Member, but what is written here is the guidance which we had from the past Parliamentary council; and we had abide by it. I do not know whether this would not-whether the hon. Member has got a suggestion as to the option we ought to adopt.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, I did and I gave an example where actually the draftsman himself may be the first Parliamentary council, drafting Clause 8 (3) (b), said, if the opinion of the council the registrar becomes incapable of performing the duties of his office, and council recommends to the health service commission his or her removal. You see, first he says his, then when it comes to removal it is his or her. Him has now become her.  So there is inconsistency there immediately and the Minister can see it. You do not need the first council’s opinion to know that there is inconsistency.  

So, I am saying that we should use his or her throughout or the gender sensitive provisions which are reflected in the constitution for example, instead of saying he or she, you say the registrar.  The registrar could a man or woman so as to avoid using he or she. But if the Minister concedes to this point, it is not a very matter the draftsman will actually correct these views when they are printing the final position.  So really it is not a matter of argument or debate, it is a matter of drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is a matter which should not attract debate.

DR MAKUMBI: I have no objection of replacing the word his which comes after duties of with the word registrar and doing the same for his and her.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Precisely, I wanted to inform the House that -and my Learned Friend the hon. Member for Rubanda that when we make attention, it probably would not be fair to the Minister who is the lay man, but when we have expressed all these views, when the Bill goes back to be turned into a statute, then the draftsman corrects commas, re-writes the phrases, things of that kind.  Those things are done, and we should not really  pass a formal Motion on them I think they may not be necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Exactly we shall proceed.  The Minister has taken note, and Parliamentary councils will correct this as they make the final Bill. I now put the question that Clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the Question that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that last word of Clause 12 sub-Clause 2,instead of the word council, it be changed to read secretariat.  The point over here is that, the secretariat may not know the juggles of financial problems for which the secretariat can negotiate on its own by changing banks rather than the council itself because it may take a long time for the council to meet and decide on petty things over here because the council can at any rate be audited by the Auditor General and therefore, change the word secretariat instead of the council.  So, I advise the Minister that the last word sub-clause 12 should be changed to secretariat instead of council because you already have the council shall; and therefore, since the account will be operated by the secretariat, they change to the secretariat; and Mr Chairman, this is a technical way of managing financial affairs.  Thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: While I honour the view of hon. Wanendeya, what we are looking at, that the council has to make the policy.  The secretariat is involved in day-to-day running. It will be very dangerous if you left the policy matter to be decided by the secretariat. The council should decide the policy, and give it to the secretariat to implement; and that is we run organisations.  it cannot be the other way round. Except somewhere else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 12 section 2 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 12

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 12 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 13

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 14

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 15

MR KIDEGA LAK: Mr Chairman, the body we are creating is going to be a body corporate; and in this country we have known of people who are resistant to make returns. Now, this Clause here appear to be hanging. In that it demands the return but it does not say anything if the return is not submitted, what happens?  So I can be a registrar not to pay a return three will pass, I do what I can, I keep on pleading, I am too busy. So, I am now trying to move an amendment that another Clause be added to read, 15 (3). That if the council fails to meet the return, a penalty should be inserted. I am sorry not to make the actual amendment but I think that is the idea I have.  That penalty should be inserted that this body cooperate should be punished for not submitting the return-for failing to submit the return; and this is in a very law we have. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: I can see the enthusiasm of my hon. Friend to try to make this council very efficient by putting a stick on top of the council.  But how do you punish them?  Do you punish them individually in their personal capacities, take them to jail, severally, individually or what type of sentence would you imagine would be passed on the council. The law is very clear, if the council does not work, the Minister will dismiss it and bring another one, and they are supposed to keep-they are auditors, if they have misused the funds, the Auditor General will point it out to Parliament and the necessary police action will take place. I do not think there is any way we can-we have never introduced such a penalty in any of the statutes we have passed.  

The only point which I think should be raised under this Clause is the starting of the wording in Clause 2. Which says that, subject to the Minister’s direction; and it reads on that the accounts can be kept subject to the Minister’s direction.  The accounts cannot be kept subject to the Minister’s direction. Accounts are accounts.  Accounts are kept in an accounting order. There is no way the Minister is going to direct the accounts to be kept separately.  Debits are debits credits are credits.  The balance sheet is a balance sheet, trial balance is a trial balance. Is the Minister going to come up with a new evasion of how to keep accounts.  How does he subject himself to directing the accounts to be kept. It is like saying the Minister of Health will direct how the Doctor will -the nurse will inject a patient.  These are already scientific things which -and I really propose that we deleted that, the keeping of books subject to the Minister’s direction. The Minister may not be even an accountant. For all I know currently, the Minister for Health if he was to direct books of accounts to be kept the way he likes, I think it would be funny.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, would it not be in order to dispose of the amendment proposed by hon. Friend here;and before hon. Karuhanga makes-because, -and it is important, and it is not related to this. Should we not dispose of one amendment and then tackle another amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are correct, hon. Abu Mayanja.  Could you take your seats hon. Members. I think hon. Karuhanga was going beyond the point he wanted to talk about.  You know he has been absent for several weeks. So I think he was just excited.  Let us turn to the -hon. Titus Kidega Lak, on what you have heard do you still maintain that amendment. Or you would like to withdraw?

MR KIDEGA LAK: Mr Chairman, as I made the position, I clearly mentioned that this is a body cooperate.  Hon. Byaruhanga is already a Lawyer he knows what a body cooperate is. You cannot punish individuals within the body cooperate.  This will be breaking the law. So what I wanted to emphasize is that, -(Interjections)- what I am trying to say, Mr Chairman, that it is even wrong to say that a law of that nature cannot be made in this House.  I am very aware of the cooperative statute which the members of board should submit returns within three months after expiration period, and this statute was passed by this House; and so hon. Karuhanga was part and parcel of this House when the statute was being passed. So I still maintain that there is nothing wrong with inserting a protective Clause so that a return is submitted in time.  Otherwise, if we leave it loose, anybody can play around with the returns.  Thank you.
                      
PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: I wanted to inform the hon. Member who moved this Motion, rather to bring his attention to Clause 16 of the Bill.  Which says that the accounts of the council shall in respect of each Financial Year be Audited by the Auditor General or an auditor appointed by him. This is the function of bringing to account the financial provisions relating to this Bill.  The Auditor General has very wide and extensive powers to comment on whether council has conformed to this statute, whether they submitted their financial statement within the period prescribed by statute, and if not, then they have also extensive powers to recommend action that should be taken including penal measures of those affected. Therefore, I was suggesting that in light of the provision of section 16, which requires these accounts to be submitted to the Auditor General, there is no necessity to make a separate provision which the hon. Member calls Penal.  Because these powers are already vested in the Auditor General and they are exercised by his office.  I thank you Sir.

MR OKWERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform by Brother who is trying to move this amendment that normally in a body like this one we are creating, it is a government body; and the government cannot itself to court and imprison itself for failing to comply with provisions of the law that established it. But if it is failure on the part of any officer, that officer can always be handled administratively without taking the council to the court.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I will not hide and I make a contribution. I think the amendment is misconceived. There are legal matters or provisions of the law for which we need punitive criminal sanctions; and there are others for which we provide political sanctions. This matter is one which is only suitable for political sanctions; and we have provided for that by requiring the Minister to submit the accounts to Parliament. 

Now, if the Minister does not submit the Audited accounts to Parliament within the expected time, either because the council has failed or refused to submit accounts to the Auditor to be Audited, we would raise the matter in Parliament; and the Minister would deal with the matter politically. So, it would be very difficult as hon. Karuhanga was saying to go and punish 15 men and women because they are a body cooperate. You punish them, you ask the Minister why.  You put him here on the carpet, where are the accounts. Then he says I am sorry the council has not produced them. You say, sack them! Here we provide sanctions by sacking them , by doing that kind of thing. So it is not a matter which is suitable for punitive criminal sanctions like imprisonment or fines. Therefore, I would like to advise my Friend to withdraw  the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Hon. Titus Kidega Lak, do you still insist. Or you withdraw the amendment?

MR KIDEGA LAK: Mr Chairman, I think I got a better explanation from hon. Abu Mayanja.  Otherwise the rest of my colleagues were not helping me very much. So, I concede to the amendment. (Interjections) I said I withdraw the amendment, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order. Hon. Members, caution please.  We have certain urgent matters to transact in this House please.  Let us not spend a lot of time here on new arguments here and there.
 
MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the advice and I am going to be very brief.  I would like to move an amendment in section 15 article 2 and delete the words “subject to any directions given by the Minister in relation to the keeping of accounts”.  Delete that, and start the sub-Clause with “the council shall cause to be prepared in respect of each Financial Year and not later than three months after the close of the Financial Year, a statement of accounts which shall include a report on the performance of the council during the Financial Year”. etcetera. I make this deletion for the reasons I gave earlier when I was discussing the amendment of my hon. Friend. Thank you.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I do understand the point the hon. Member is trying to make.  I have no objection to withdrawing that. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to improve on the amendment before it is voted on, Mr Chairman, and I hope that my Friend here will accept my additional amendment. I agree that the first phrase should be deleted. But there is also another phrase which is really redundant in view of what we have already passed in 9 (4). In 9 (4) we passed in requiring the registrar to make a general report of the activities of the -(Interjections)- no it was improved and passed; and that general report is again included in 15 (2) which says, a statement of accounts which shall include a report on the performance of the council. Which is the same thing as what was already passed. So, Mr Chairman, I just wanted to also delete that one to include a report on the performance of the council if he accepts.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, the hon. Friend has already briefed me about what he wanted to say.  So that is why I sat down very fast to give him the Floor if you do not mind.

DR BYARUHANGA PHILLIP: Thank you very much Colleague.  My worry is that, in 14 we have made a provision which we have already passed.  Where the Minister has to approve the expenditure of the council.  Now, if we delete 15 (2), which is the budget and even keeping of accounts.  If we delete 15 sub-section 2 as amended by hon. Karuhanga, we are now removing any lee way in which the Minister may come in to give some direction. Is that fair?

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we should not move in circles.  First of all, the deletion that, the Minister may give directions on accounts is normal and okay, it should be deleted.  Because what we passed in 9 and  14 are completely different. In 14 we are saying, the registrar shall give a financial report. But the council has to prepare financial accounts. These are different.  Now the report of the council shall include the balance sheet among other things, and shall include any other information which is related to the financial activities and performance of the organisation. Now, the Minister shall approve the budget.  But that does not mean that he has got to tell them how to prepare the accounts.  When he is approving in effect, he is looking at the previous financial year, the performance of the Financial Year, and looking at what they want to do, the cooperate plan, and then he approves the next budget.  So, Mr Chairman, hon. Karuhanga’s amendment as accepted by the Minister is a valid amendment,and it has nothing to do with the other two because they are only supplementary.

MR KARUHANGA: I would like to say that hon. Ongom asked me whether he made his amendment subject to my accepting it;and I would not like to accept his amendment. 

Secondly, hon. Byaruhanga -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Is it in order  whether we have got all time in the World, but especially, when we do not have too much time.  When a Member moves an amendment,and the amendment is accepted by the Minister, a piloting the Bill. Is it in order to continue debating that thing when the amendment has been accepted by the Minister responsible for the Bill?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is out of order, and I will now put the question. I now put the question that Clause 15 (2) be amended as proposed by hon. Karuhanga.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 (2) as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose that in Clause 16 sub-Clause 2 be amended so that instead of having 4 months it should be 3 months as under sub-Clause 2 of Clause 15 so that everything is synchronised and it does not go beyond that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order Caution hon. Members. If you had not circulated your amendments in time, please do not take out time here unnecessarily. I will entertain a few of these amendments at this moment which is actually another method of doing things.  I did that on your behalf but do not thing it is the normal procedure. I will now rule that unless you had circulated your amendments, I am not going to entertain.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: I wish to advise hon. Wanendeya that according to Financial Act, all the accounts of government should be ready after 4 months. That is end of October.  Now this has to be within line since we are using the same Financial period that is from July 1st you are give 4 months to prepare your accounts ready to be submitted to the Auditor General. That is according to the Financial Act. So we should not create something different.

MR WANENDEYA: In the first instance hon. Wasswa Nkalubo should have advised me through your Chair.  But he was addressing me directly. (Laughter) In view of what the advice is since I have not been quite acquainted with the Financial Act, I withdraw my amendment.  Thank you.

ABU MAYANJA: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am very ignorant of these accounting matters.  But may I know why in this one we have provided for the Financial Year beginning 1st July to 30th June.  In the Bill which is coming, the nurses we are providing for a Financial Year beginning from 1st January to 31st December. I am asking because I have noticed it, some are from July to June which is the government Financial Year; others are from January to December which is the calendar year. Why should the nurses be from January to December, and the Doctors from July to June.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: I do not know which Bill the hon. Member is having. The current Bill which we shall -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order. You are out of order. Hon. Member you are out of order. We are not dealing with the nurses Bill here. Hon. Abu Mayanja with due respect, we are not dealing with the nurses Bill here.  So please, do not raise the matter which is not yet before the House. I now put the question that Clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 17

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 22 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:I now put the question that Clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 26

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 28 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 28 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, you -(Interruption)- I raised a very valid point about the fines in 28. The fine being not less than one year; and the imprisonment being not less than one year and the fine not less than UShs 200,000; and I said that, that way of providing was dangerous. Because it does not put a maximum. The judge can award-the only limit would be if he the magistrate, the limit provided by his Grade his or her Grade with due respect to hon. Matembe who is away. So, if you leave it like this-are we going to leave it like this, Mr Chairman? I thought that the hon. Minister -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, if you have an amendment on this one propose it.

MR ABU MAYANJA:I do not know what to put, I do not know -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why are you raising it?

MR ABU MAYANJA: It is they who want to know.  I cannot say how much time do they want to-okay, it should be not more than one year, and not more than UShs 200,000 

DR MAKUMBI: We have the duty of protecting the community. Considering what we are trying to stamp out limiting the amount to a mere UShs 200,000 is something which is more or less nominal. 

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. I am grateful for the Minister for giving way. Mr Chairman, my reading of this is that, it would be dangerous for practitioners to be given such a little fine when they commit crimes involving professional negligence.  The amount of UShs 200,000 now might look a lot of money.  In no time after this statute is passed, it might become absolutely meaningless; and when you make it-or might be more.  I think what we need is a minimum and a maximum as it is now.  Because there is a general law and I think it was passed during the regime of hon. Abu Mayanja’s Attorney General, which adjusts court fines in relation to inflation. So I was suggest that we should say, not less than 200,000 shillings as an amendment, and not more than 5 million shillings.  The reason is, that if in the commission of his duties this professional commits a serious crime where somebody dies, at least the family is going to be compensated with money which we know is going to be in the area of that amount; and I think Dr Luyombya would be very useful to give information at this stage since he is in the private business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you are actually dragging me to mishandle the House.  In that, you are taking me back and then open debate which is very abnormal.  If you feel that this should be amended, let us go back and then you will commit this thing to the next stage.  I think that would be the procedure.  Because I have already made a ruling, but when my Senior Brother there rose up I gave him the way but he has opened a kind of debate. Which is really not the procedure. When we have already made a decision, I think the best thing to do is to wait for us until we go back then raise that matter and we come back to handle it afresh.
 
MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. I was seeking information -(Inaudible)- it is up to him to make the necessary reply to the question raised by hon. Mayanja. Mine was just information to the Minister not an amendment.       
    
DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, after careful consideration, I would be willing to insert the words “not less than UShs 200,000 and not more than 3 million shillings”, and then for the period not less than one year, and not more than 3 years.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the Minister but in terms of today’s money, 200,000 shillings is really not the equivalent of one year in prison. Therefore the period in prison should be not less than 3 months and not more than 3 years, and not less than 200,000 shillings, and not more than 3 million shillings or both.  But otherwise, Mr Chairman, 200,000 shillings is now not really-has no relation to a whole year for those of who have been in prison.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection to the proposition of 3 months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 28 be amended as proposed by hon. Abu Mayanja.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 28 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA:  Clause 29 really I just want to make it more emphatic by putting the word after ‘dental practitioner’ ‘shall’ instead of ‘may’ given the gravity of the matter in clause 28 about penalties.  So, a registered medical and dental practitioner shall apply; he is under obligation to apply, therefore, shall and not may; because when you use ‘may’ you give a possibility of option, of not applying.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the hon. Member’s Amendment, on the grounds that while he may be a dental practitioner, he may not want to practice; so, why should force him?  So, it should be ‘may’ it is human rights; you cannot force me to go and look into people’s mouth.  Mr Chairman, if he has got really to have a practising licence in a private practice, he must apply for it.  So, he has no option.  

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I think we are landing into a problem of language rather than the actual essence; because if a practitioner wants to practice then one must be registered.  But there is a possibility that a practitioner may not continue with practising and, therefore, he will not be coerced to pay for the licence.

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA:  Okay, I will study it further, but for the time being let me withdraw the Amendment.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33 agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to.

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, clause 40.3 there is the question of the Chairperson of a committee.  Now, we have defined the Chairperson in the definition clause 2, I think, to mean the person who is really the head of the whole Council.  So, when you say that he is the Chairperson of a committee, it will mean that person who was appointed under the other one.  So, I think, this should be changed to something that the person presiding or whatever, I am leaving it, I will not move a formal Amendment but I am pointing it out so that the draftsman can make the necessary - in order to avoid the confusion between the Chairperson here the Chairperson defined in clause 2.

MR KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Normally in this type of situation it is the definition which says a Chairperson means a Chairman of the whole council and Chairpersons of other committees; you do not define it in the main body but you define it in the definition.  So, I think we can leave it to the draftsman to do that.

Clause 40 agreed to.

Clause 41 agreed to.

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43 agreed to.

Clause 44 agreed to.

Clause 45 agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48 agreed to.

Clause 49 agreed to.

First Schedule agreed to.

Second Schedule agreed to.

The Title

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, the Title of the Bill should read, The Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996, and not 1995.

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA:  Since this Statute is for Uganda, I propose that really we exclude the word ‘Uganda’ in this Title and call it, The Medical and Dental Practitioner Bill, 1996.

DR MAKUMBI:  	Mr Chairman, I have no objection to that.

The Title as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.
(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled The Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996 and passed it with some minor Amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that before the report is adopted clause 48(f) be recommitted to provide that a person who commits an offence under that clause shall on conviction be liable to a fine of not less than UShs 300,000 and not more than UShs 3,000,000 or imprisonment for not less than three months and not more than three years or both.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 48(f) be amended in the manner indicated during my previous Motion and for the reason which I gave in my previous Motion.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I have no objection to that Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 48 (f) be amended as proposed by hon. Abu Mayanja.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48 as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME


THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled The Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996 and passed it with some minor Amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Medical and Dental Practitioners Bill, 1996 be read for the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a Third Time)

(Title settled and Bill passed.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I beg to as your indulgence to allow the Attorney General and Minister of Justice to formally table before you a Resolution which will enable the exercise for the presidential election to take place, without which it is impossible; and here I would like to say that even if this matter on your Order Paper, but since it is an important matter, I seek your indulgence and accept that the Minister tables this Resolution.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr J. Ekemu): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House under rule 10 suspends the normal procedure and invoking rule 28 accept to consider the Motion for a Resolution which I intend to move for the provision of facilities to the presidential candidates in the next forthcoming election campaigns, I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

MR EKEMU:  Mr Chairman, in moving this Motion for this Resolution, I would first like to draw the attention of hon. Members to section 7 of the Presidential Election Statute No.3, which to refresh your memories says in 7.1; “The Commission shall provide security for the protection of each candidate.  But subsection 2 says that the Commission shall as soon as possible, but before nomination day, with the approval of the legislature signified by resolution, offer such facilities and funds to candidates and the Commission may consider appropriate; and any facilities and funds offered by the Commission shall be used exclusively for the election purposes.  

Mr Chairman, it is under this section that I beg to move this Resolution.  I can here some hon. Members laughing, it is because I think, the thing has come at the eleventh hour, but Mr, Chairman, we are completely within the law for me to do this, and my Colleague, hon. Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs who would have been here personally, but he was not able to be here, but I was thoroughly briefed and I am confident that we are within the law and Members are at liberty to look at this Motion and Resolution and pass the Resolution.  Mr Chairman, this resolution seeks to make provisions for the presidential candidates.  It could have been tied to matter of security because that was one of the things which this House said members campaigning for presidential seat should get; but the Presidential Elections Statute adequately provides for security.  It is only the provision of facilities that requires the parliamentary approval and hence this Resolution. What I am seeking the provision for will include UShs15 million cash package for general campaigning expenses for each candidate, and then there is a provision for an executive four wheel vehicle for each candidate with five tyres which tires may be replaced during the campaign at a cost of not more than UShs l,200,000 this is estimated to be the cost roughly of these big tires which can enable the candidates to run through the countryside.  In addition, I am also seeking approval for a provision of a car battery worth UShs150,000  

Mr Chairman, hon. Members, of course, know that the car batteries are a heart of a vehicle and it is only proper that we should make proper arrangement for this, and it has been estimated at that much.  As far as the maintenance of the vehicle there is one major repair at approximately UShs 2,000,000 which is envisaged.  Mr Chairman, I think this is extremely moderate; in terms of the cars which are contemplated here, a major repair could go well beyond UShs 2,000,000 but it has been considered that an estimate of UShs 2,000,000 would be fair, moderate and prudent.  There is also a requirement of four minor repairs.  

I would want to imagine, Mr Chairman, and I would like hon. Members to imagine this must include service of the vehicles, and it is estimated at UShs 250,000.  Why it is four, because the period of the campaign has been considered and it is expected that if the presidential candidates handle their affairs well, which we are hopeful it will be, they will only have these vehicles serviced about four times; but if the work is intensified, this service could even be more than four times.  Now, in moving this Motion, I would like to assure hon. Members that the Budget considerations were taken account of, almost in terms of shilling by shilling in order to arrive at this.  

So, I think, Members should not have of any undue worry to think, maybe, these matters have been blown up; I think they are extremely fair and it was our commitment these facilities must be provided to the presidential candidates.  It is in my humble submission that one of the best ways, I think, to level the ground and ensure that the democratic process will be given due consideration and facilitated. 

Mr Chairman, therefore, I wish to invite the hon. Members to quickly look at this Motion and pass it.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Atuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Motion.  First, let me thank the hon. Minister for bringing this Motion and in fulfillment of the constitutional provision.  But, while thanking the Minister, I would like to say that the Resolution begs a lot of questions.  One, I believe that for purposes of presidential campaign what is being provided is totally inadequate.  

Mr Chairman, I think we should be able to first of all realistically ask ourselves what is the ideal logistics that a presidential candidate requires for his campaign, and secondly to what extent can the government and for that matter the country assist that presidential candidate.  I am not saying that the presidential candidates should be assisted fully on the tax payers money; but all I am saying is what is realistic, how far can the country assist a presidential candidate in the context of our politics today?  

The presidential candidates are campaigning on personal merit; the law has made it rather difficult to raise money even on personal merit, and for those who possibly were not holding positions which could give them chances to have a little bit of money for presidential campaign, we are simply making it impossible for them to fulfill their national duty if they want to contest.  

So, the Constitution says we in this House will pass a resolution to see what assistance the country can give, let us be realistic and say an ideal situation is this, how far can we go?  Even if, we are saying we are going with Shs.15 million and we are talking about an executive four wheel drive, we have not said, is it a new vehicle, is it in sound condition?  Because you may have a situation in which somebody comes with a ramshackled four wheel drive and say, Mohammed, here is the four wheel drive with four new tires; we have emphasised five new tires rather than the condition of the vehicle. Mr Chairman, I think, this is rather ridiculous on the part of those who are coming; this is a serious situation in which people who are coming up are a little bit incapacitated.  People are campaigning on individual merit and the law has been - the period during which they could have raised money has been rather restricted, and we simply saying the ground is not leveled, although the hon. Minister talked of a ground level; this type of tokenism is a little bit, making the position difficult.  What were we thinking at the time when we say this House should think about; a presidential candidate will need, for example, this four wheel drive possibly personally driving in it? 

I understand the state is going to provide security; now are these security men going to walk behind this four wheel drive, when the presidential candidate is driving from Arua throughout the country and going down to Kisoro and are they going to run behind this vehicle?  So, Mr Chairman, another ideal thing is to say can we move one step ahead and say, you are having a sound vehicle, possibly a new one and let there be a vehicle for security people who are guarding this man.  Mr Chairman, I am also looking at other things; this UShs15 million, things like posters, things like costs for - even if the presidential candidate just looking at himself and one, two advisors; costs of accommodation, costs of address system and all these.  

So, Mr Chairman, I am aware that at one time a number of presidential candidates even put their bill for these presidential campaign up to Shs.4 billion; but what we are providing here, just a quick calculation shows that we are giving these people really hardly Shs.20 million.  This executive four wheel drive, could be vehicles which the Electoral Commission has already used and they can be given; so, when it brakes down they state will come and say, but we gave you a four wheel drive and you can get stuck half way between here and Gulu and possible that is the way of leveling the ground.  

So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move that this resolution should one, increase the cash shillings from 15 million to UShs 50 million; two, I beg to add these words that an executive four wheel drive should be qualified with either sound; a sound executive four wheel drive or a brand new four wheel drive.  

I also wish to amend the resolution by saying an appropriate security vehicle to accompany the presidential executive four-wheel drive should also be provided by the State.  Mr Chairman, I think if the state can move further then we can know we are serious about this.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not have a lot to say about this Resolution, except that I would wish to recommend that this executive four wheel drive vehicle be sound or new, but should remain the property of the Commission so that it is not a gift to a presidential candidate, but is some official vehicle given to the presidential candidate to assist him in his campaigns.  The Shs.15 million, even when we were debating the we quite well know that these presidential campaign will cost candidates quite a lot of money; they have been allowed to raise funds from within and abroad;  we know the limitations of our own Treasury and for now I believe that the UShs 15 million is a good gesture, it is not enough but it is a good gesture and a fulfillment of the commitment in the law which allowed us to consider giving some money to presidential candidates.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende):  Thank you very, Mr Chairman.  I think this is good but I have a lot of reservations, and the reservations I have are in the attitude to the elections which do not appear to me to indicate that there is total commitment and determination of our friends on the Front Benches to see that there is a level playing ground during these elections.  

I am concerned that government functionaries some of whom are politicians like these Resident District Commissioners, according to the Constitution which we made Resident District Commissioners were supposed to be senior civil servants, but all these posts are still manned by politicians and they are misusing these positions to make it impossible for candidates other than one to put his message across to the people of Uganda.  Now, we are going to hoodwink - this resolution seems to be hoodwinking people of Uganda into believing that we are very keen to provide free and fair elections; that all candidates have equal access to the electorate, they are being facilitated and then their message will be listened to and the people will eventually make a free and independent choice.  

But, honestly, is that the case?  It is not, and it is really very painful for me to make that admission; it is not because some people - especially one candidate, my hon. Colleague, hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, they have organised hooligans to stone him, he has not been allowed to open offices, because the Constitution says we do not have parties - but how can one run a presidential election without having some kind of organisation; how do you do it?  Can I move from here and go to Kapchorwa when there is nobody there to organise a meeting for me and I just go there, drop down and start saying Karimojong come here, there might be there cattle raiding, but Kupsabiny come here, I am going to talk to you, I am so and so; no, that is not possible.  

So, Mr Chairman, I am saying - you know, people have criticised, but ultimately things will come out.  Now I appeal to the government of which I was a member only yesterday, I appeal to the government very seriously, if they want us to say we have had a fair election, if they do not want to have some kind of a Mugabe fiasco, they must immediately instruct their functionaries and others to stop behaving like hooligans; to allow candidates to be heard fairly.  After all, that is the right of the people of Uganda; the Constitution of which I had the honour to be one of the makers says all power belongs to the people, and they shall exercise it through periodic election, that is the time for the people; and we are saying this is the first time people of Uganda have had an opportunity directly to elect their President.  Now, we say that in on breath, but in another breath we stop them.  This is really bad; so, Mr Chairman, I do not think that we can really ever provide - whether we provide Shs.50 million, Shs.500 million, whatever - because the candidates are not in the same position and nobody will say they are in the same position.  

Ssemuju cannot go eradicating poverty, yes, he cannot go on such; not all candidates can have the machinery of State to mobilise, to organise huge rallies with the state media and so on and so forth, on a campaign to eradicate poverty at the time of elections.  This is so, I mean, we are adults.  Mr Chairman, then there is whole campaign of disinformation by the government media; people a misinformed and meetings - I will give you an example, the other day there was people registering the supporters, the hundred men, in Mubende, and I was told by people - because I also come from Mubende, there 400 people who turned up to sign papers for hon. Ssemogerere, the State radio said that they were only 70 people and he was not able to make a hundred.  

So, Mr Chairman, let this money if they want to use it, it can be used but to me it would be more meaningful if the people of Uganda were given an opportunity to hear their candidates.  Remove the impediments.  In Mbale, according to the government newspapers, the people were shot at by LDUs, not ordinary civilians, but they were shot at with guns -(Interruption)

MR WAPAKABULO:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to allege that the public was shot at in Mbale, when in fact, the LDUs had to shoot in the air to rescue the Deputy District Internal Security Officer with his assistant, one of whom had been punched by the organisers of Mr Ssemogerere’s group?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Abu Mayanja is expressing his concern about what he has been reading in the public press, let him substantiate.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you very much; the chapter and verse was Sunday Vision -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, of course, we cannot be in Mbale or anywhere, but I was Minister of Information when the New Vision was started, indeed I had a lot of to do with its origin, and it is a government created, financed, machinery and everything was bought by the government.  Now, if there is such a report in the government newspaper - I know newspapers tell lies, they report things which are not true, they make mistakes; but if a statement of that kind, and it was reported that there was firing, that people were injured, the people lost property, shoes and what; now, I ask the illustrious former Chairman of the CA, hon. and Learned Friend, were the people injured in - or were they injured by firing or what; I can be corrected.  I have not need to exaggerate, and becoming serious, I am really concerned and I wish that these elections should be a valid and should be seen to be a valid expression of the feelings and the opinions of the people of Uganda.  

MR NTIMBA:  Point of order.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member on the Floor earlier on alleged that “hooligans” were organised to disrupt a rally or a meeting in Mbale.  Would it not be in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to substantiate that allegation about that so called hooligans?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Abu Mayanja, could you substantiate?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, in fact, I used the word ‘hooligans’ in respect to other things in Rukungiri and Fortportal; in Mbale I stated specifically that it was LDU who fired on the people, and I was corrected by the hon. Wapakhabulo who said that they fired in the air, but I said the papers reported that some people were injured during the firing, and that is what I stand for.  Now, Mr Chairman, I do not think could be quibbling; this matter is much too important!  Some of us are soon getting towards the end of our lives -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you please summarise?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Yes, Mr Chairman, I am appealing to the government that it is good to give logistics, but it is not enough, it is -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Thank you for giving way for information.  Another Members was asking a point of order as to whether the speaker would not be asked to substantiate whether these people he called hooligans were really organised.  I would like to inform the speaker that in one of the papers who reported the incident in Kabaale reported hon. Rugunda as saying that the people who disturbed them were read to finish these people off.  So, obviously how did he know that they were ready to finish them off, if they were not organised, Mr Chairman. 

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful for the information;  but I was saying - and people can draw their own conclusions.  I was saying that it is important for the country, what we have gone through, what we are trying to do, and for the place in history of our leaders, after all, that is what they are trying to build, it is important that these elections should be valid and should be seen to be valid.  But at the moment the exercise up to this time does not give a great deal of confidence that the elections will be free and fair.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I support the Motion for Resolution, Mr Chairman.  Now, unfortunately in politics there are always reasons why the playing field is not leveled.  Short of someone saying here is the way, enter.  So, much as I agree with hon. Abu Mayanja that we must be seen to be leveling the ground in which the players are involved, it is practically difficult.  

To begin with, Mr Chairman, a lot of things that happen in this country are neither the responsibility nor even in the knowledge of the government, and that is why I have said before that when candidates are performing their function there ought to be proper arrangements made for these candidates’ protections and keeping of the peace.  

Secondly, we have been told that the people must be allowed to freely express themselves when they are voting, but there are also other times when they express themselves freely, democratically and people do not like it.  I was in Makerere one time when the students could hardly be allowed to listen to what I was saying, and these were preachers of democracy - that they had democratic freedoms and they expressed themselves.  Factual errors, in Rukungiri we were fed on lies, regarding what happened.  In fact, I have received first hand information that all that happened during the visit of hon. Ssemogerere is people again freely expressing themselves in a most peaceful manner - yes, Mr Chairman, about how they felt, about the politics of this country, and I want to repeat that it was peaceful.  

So, I think, really if want the playing ground to be level, we must also establish among ourselves a level of credibility.  I think it is not correct for us to go about inflaming situations, it is not correct; and by the way, it is not only the responsibility of the government to keep the peace;  it is the responsibility of everyone of the 17 million Ugandans, more so, those who aspire to leadership of this country. 

So, I also want to raise that word of caution, that we must not inflame situations.  Acts have got consequences and they are scientifically predictable consequences, we should avoid this.  I think it is correct that we should have a peaceful, free and fair election.  Whether even after we have made guarantees for that everybody will accept the results, I do not know, because even now we are told that the Mugabe things was a fiasco, I do not understand; yes, it was a fiasco, indeed, because candidates withdrew, and what circumstances did they withdrew?  

I would like, Mr Chairman, that people do go down and study these cases; because it is not correct for us to start - Mr Chairman, if I could be given my opportunity by hon. Ssebaana Kizito and he can always have his time to contribute to the debate.  So, I think, Mr Chairman - anyway, I should be allowed to summarise; I listened careful to what a Colleague was saying and I think it is only democratic that the hon. Member should also listen to me; because it is not a one-way traffic.  So, I think, the candidate should be facilitated maximally and I would like to support what hon. Omara Atubo said, this Shs.15 million, maybe, should be raised so that there is, at least, a million shillings for every district; that would make it Shs.39 or a round Shs.40 million.  I think democracy is a very expensive exercise, and I think, contributing to that by the State should be seen, at least, as a good intention on the part of those in the power that we have as free and fair election as we possibly can.

Lastly, let me appeal that in spite of the financial and material provisions we are going to make, it is incumbent upon every Ugandan to help those in authority to make sure that we have a free, fair and above all peaceful election in this country. 

Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  This is an important resolution for which I wish to thank the Minister; I wish to say that I agree with hon. Omara Atubo, that apart from the vehicle referred to in this resolution there be another vehicle to carry aids, subordinate staff for the campaigners for the presidential seat.  I also want to reiterate what hon. Mayanja has expressed as fears.  I think, when we offer ourselves for election we should not feel as if we are offering ourselves to danger.  We should feel that a politician is a Ugandan who has offered his services to the nation, and therefore, that Uganda should be facilitated.  This is one way of facilitation, but there is also another way of facilitation which is very important.  The facilitation which is very necessary is that of removing officials who have become a menace to politicians.  Hon. Mayanja was referring to the presidential campaign, because this resolution is about the presidential campaign.  However, there are so many intimidations all over the country, about politicians who are trying to offer themselves for the host of positions which are open for election very soon; and what is paining is that even if it is reported to the government that such and such a thing is happening, we do not see much action from the government; we do not see a condemnation of this.  Do we want to conclude that government condones.  

For example, when RDC of Mbale - he says you can come and open your office, that is saying to Dr Ssemogerere; then later on he says you cannot come and open your office, and by that action alone, a lot of people are incited, even the LDUs are incited, because they think that this presidential candidate is doing something which is illegal, whereas the Constitution itself, which is so new, and many of us have engaged ourselves in making it; the constitutions guarantees freedom of association, freedom of speech, freedom of though, freedom of movement, freedom of assembly, and here is someone who is offering himself to the public to be elected to a high office, and he is impeded in his job, in fulfilling the requirements of the Constitution. Should we not as the Government condemn this kind of activity?  The Rukungiri issue and I am very sure that it happened in Rukungiri because hon. Prof. Kagonyera is a very good man and he is a very good Friend of mine, -(Laughter)- he is a perfect gentle man, he is a man I would like to speak at my wedding if I were to wed again -(Laughter)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from my hon. Colleague John Ssebaana Kizito as to whether he is such a great support of the second wives and concubines association. (Laughter)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  No, I am not a support of that, however, I only used it to describe the hon. Friend Kagonyera George.  He comes from an area which treated hon. Ssemogerere his entourage the way they treated him, really I wonder because when you see a person like him -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this House has been informed and it is true that the people of Rukungiri mobilized themselves in a very peaceful manner to express their feelings and wishes and the fact that they were so peaceful in expression of their feelings and wishes demonstrates the calibre of one of their leaders Prof. Kagonyera who because of the people he leads they were very peaceful in expression of their wishes, no there was no hostility it is very well known if you went to Rukungiri you would find out that people - you know the constitution says that, people have power, now those people of Rukungiri in their power entrusted to them by the constitution they gathered and expressed their wishes and feelings are they prevented from doing that and the credit goes to the hon. Professor and other good leaders in Rukungiri. (Applause)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: I am just wondering myself where expressions -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Sebaana Kizito could you wind up.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Yes, I am winding up.  Mr Chairman, I am just wondering whether freedom expression will include; freedom to through stones at a person whom you should not agree with, I also know that these people camped outside the room of hon. Ssemogerere the whole night singing and dancing, and disturbing him in his sleep, is that the freedom of expression we want?

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  I just wanted to inform hon. Sebaana Kizito and others of the same school of thoughts who fought very hard in the C.A to make sure that the multiparty political system is put in the constitution and failed.  I just wanted to inform them that there is a gray area in the constitution.  This gray area while allowing freedom of association decided that the time we are going to have these elections will be under the Movement System, now they also stopped political parties from opening branches and offices and this in article 269; and I can read it for refreshing his memory if he so wishes, but I am sure he knows it by heart.  Now, what has been happening is that, members of the Uganda People’s Congress together with the members of the Democratic Party combined and went around trying to open branch offices of their political parties before the nomination of the candidate who would be standing under the Movement System. (Interruption)

 MR GWAIVU: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is hon. Karuhanga in order to mislead this House, it has been clearly put, these offices are campaign offices for the presidential hopeful.  I want anyone here to bet we go to Jinja Lubas road plot 42 there is a campaign office for hon. Ssemogerere and it is written there very clearly for you hon. Karuhanga, that is a campaign office for presidential hopeful Dr Ssemogerere.  Is he in order to mislead this House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members please.  The opening of these offices vary from place to place in Apac they even opened a UPC office way back last year. (Laughter) Proceed please.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Members if only the hon. Member had bee patient I was going actually to support his position only that he did not have the patience and I had said from the beginning that there is a gray area in the constitution and my statement which was going to follow if I had not been interrupted was that, after the nomination day tomorrow, the candidates will be free to open branches for their campaign and one would assume and I think this is why the Government had not interfered or the Electoral Commission had not interfered because in the president Museveni’s campaign team they have zone offices for the candidate,and equally Dr Ssemogerere’s campaign team should also open campaign offices countrywide where they so wish.  

But what is baffling the citizens of Uganda is when this type of thing is taking place.  A person like the Chairman of the Democratic party comes to my constituency on Sunday addresses people, puts on his DP hat -(Interjection)- yes, and this is not in the law this is contrary to the laws, you are not supposed to wear these type of things.  Now, what happened then to the citizens is that they resort to article 4 up to 6 of the constitution which says that, where you see anybody trying to sabotage, abrogate, amend any part of the Constitution you are duty bound to do everything in your power to protect the constitution. (Applause) 

However, I was very please by the statement of the prime Minister yesterday who actually condemned the act of hooliganism and appealed to the people to remain calm -­(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, Hon. Karuhanga do not turn the information into debate.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, it was information directly to hon. Ssebaana Kizito and I would like to conclude it.  The Prime Minister, because it is being said that the Government is not condemning it, the Prime Minister has stood up and condemned it and I would like even this House condemn some of the Members who are Residence District Commissioners who are mis-using their power in trying to top a free and fair Electoral exercise and we should together condemn them because they should not be playing with our elections and condemn especially the members of opposition who are crying foul play saying that this is not a free playing field when they are the first culprits, one Mr Masika registered  many people in Mbale was there an Electoral officer?  And then they say this is not a free and fair election and Ssemogerere says, that when he fainted in Kapchorwa and Dr Yyeko, Members of NRC proved it, he said this is not free and fair election.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it really in order for hon. Karuhanga who knows the Rules of this House really to abuse them by turning a point of information which should not be more than three -(Interjection)- yes, he just pointed out particular thing which - and turned into argument.  Is this really in order to turn a point of information into a really contribution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, you know we are dealing with a very serious national issues, but some times out of serious sympathy I have be allowing hon. Abu Mayanja even to contribute for 40 minutes or even beyond, but if in the opinion of the Chairman, a Member has a very good point to put across we exceptionally allow, but hon. Karuhanga should not take it as a normal routine.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. A Resolution tabled before this House is very clear, but from the past contribution, I seek your guidance the Member has diverted to other issues which are not within the Resolution, should I seek your indulgence, Mr Chairman, to direct Members to address themselves to the Resolution before the House.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know hon. Members, this Resolution has invited a lot of issues surrounding the exercise some times it is within.  Please hon. Members be precise, hon. Sebaana Kizito wind up.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Thank you very much.  I am really surprised that some Members of this House turn political harassment into a pleasurable thing just because the person who was harassed was not of their opinion.  I really take sympathy with hon. Karuhanga for the fact that, the Chairman of DP went to his constituency and harassed actually he is not the only one, hon. Karuhanga has been harassed by people from the Movement itself according to newspapers  -(Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, as far as I am concern, come the 8th of October, 1995 this country was ushered under the Movement System of Government and everybody in this country is politically under the Movement System, therefore, the Chairman of DP while he wears his hat is a Member of the Movement and, therefore, he should not be said that, some people should be singled out because there some people who wear the Movement skin when deep inside it is not exactly where they are.

MR KARUHANGA: Now, in conclusion, Mr Chairman, I wish to propose a small amendment, (f); I want to propose that we provide comprehensive insurance  -(Laughter)- for the vehicle referred to in (b) because it is very important that -(Interjection)- yes, comprehensive insurance will also take into account the person accident insurance of the occupants of these vehicles.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality, Mbale):  I thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to support this Motion for the Resolution moved by my Colleague the Minister, I think it is the evidence of the people of Uganda’s desire to have a playing and fair ground on which the politician seeking high office will play.  When one wants to say about a level ground it is not so much that what happens is when one blench the law, but it is the act that are done or rules that are adopted that ensure that those involved in exercise are not disadvantaged as against the other.  

Of course this is against the background of the fact that Uganda as a country must continue and for Uganda to continue we must always have the President of Uganda and once you have the President of Uganda there are certain things be they present security or do they desire the country that must take place even during election and, therefore, some people tend to confuse the incumbency with the leveling of the ground, an incumbent is an incumbent in United States Air Force One continues to fly for the presidential candidate who is president until the last day of campaign they never pack  Air Force One and let the President beginning going in a Foca Friendship across United States.  Of course they do not give equivalent of Air Force one to those contesting the presidency, but they are given some assistance through mechanisms which they have set there which are not equivalent to the privilege of incumbency, so we should write that off. 

Now, what we look at really what creates a level playing field is one, the genuine independence of the body administering the election.  We should ask ourselves is the interim Electoral Commission independent?  They were elected by this House, they were actually appointed by the President, but this House pronounce itself on those people and as far as I know there was the desire to include a draw spectrum of political opinion of this country in that body and what makes a body independent the fact that, the law provide that once we ascertain their money those finances cannot be withheld, two that they take instructions from no quarter.  Therefore, really having looked at that we already say there is an independent body managing the process of elections due to take place. 

Two; we look at the question of access to the population, are the people who want to be elected having access to the voter.  Now, that comes after we have identified who are the candidate at the moment we do not have candidates we have politician from one end of Uganda to the other some of them sit in the gallery here, they say they want to be candidates, yes, but we cannot bring the test of access to the people until those people become candidates.  So, when they do acts prior to becoming candidates which actually blench the law then they should not begin shouting foul before they become candidates, so that when some one decide not withstanding the constitution the constitution says, “not withstanding anything in it, the election for Parliament and President under the new constitution shall be under the movement system of governance.”  Two, that there shall be operating of branches, opening branches and so on and so forth, but that does not preclude a candidate opening his or her office.  So, what happened in Mbale was this, information was received by the RDC that hon. Ssemogerere in the name of IPC is coming to open an office in Mbale.  Now, some of us were there the RDC consulted my advice was seek guidance from the Electoral Commission, first of all these people are not yet candidates, but they are coming to open a political office in the name of IPC.  The Commission advised that they should not interrupt hon. Ssemogerere’s group provided he has come to open an office for campaign in the name of Hon Ssemogerere.  

On the basis of that, instruction in writing were given to the Police, please do not interrupt this arrangement and all other organs.  Now, when his motorcade came there was not a single interruption, in fact, what happened was that when they reached the point of opening offices in a lodge belonging to former Justice Masika they paraded 300 or 400 people in front of a building around Mbale clock tower and, therefore, blocked the road to soroti to and from so that vehicles were being stopped and those people who wanted to go this way could not go nor could they go that way, even then there was no interruption.  But, I think there was a desire to create an incident in Mbale anyway,so while the people who - (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: By who?

MR WAPAKABULO: By those who came to that place, they wanted to cry foul play and as they went along shouting ‘Museveni kini, Ssemogerere ju’, the people never interfered they went and stopped in front of this building they continued shouting ‘Museveni kini, Ssemogerere ju’, now because the roads were blocked the ISO person was coming to pass and this was normal because he is expected to be there by the nature of his job anyway, when he was identified and another fellow who was in there was punched by one of the people organising this meeting and when he did that, the crowd began stoning the ISO person, the LDUs who had been told to stand aside, the Police the other way opened fire to protect that person.  When that was finished there was a stampede, some people were hurt.  The exercise of protecting had been done those who were hurt sorry, they were hurt, but the exercise was finished, there was calm restored by the Police and hon. Ssemogerere and his supporters continued and opened their office in Mbale talked to wanainchi and went away there were no personal harassment of hon. Ssemogerere his life was neither put in danger nor was anybody was deliberately hurt by Government agencies.  The following day Sunday, hon. Ssemogerere drove through Mbale town and went to Kapchorwa and I was not in Kapchorwa so I so not know what happened there, but what I know, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Information from Dr Yyeko who was in Kapchorwa.

DR YYEKO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  On Sunday afternoon hon. Ssemogerere arrived in Kapchorwa with is supporters and he found us preparing to nominate our candidate that is Yoweri Museveni when there was a big crowd we were on the other side of the building while he was on the other side.  While the exercise was going on I was asked to go and see hon. Ssemogerere who was having some health problem.  Well when I reached there, I found him seated on the chair his coat and tie had been removed I do not know whether he removed it by himself of by his aid, I greeted him he was sweating at the time I found him seated in a room without a court and without a necktie. (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I know that, Yyeko is a Medical Doctor, is it in order for a Medical Doctor to blench the confidentiality of the patient by telling us, Mr Chairman, it is completely totally contrary to the medical ethics.  


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, as far as different professionals are concerned you are not allowed to divert certain information for example, if you are a Banker you are not allowed to talk about somebody’s account in public and so on, but if you are in Parliament any information can be abused in order to substantiate and you stop here.  It is in order, please hon. Dr Yyeko you can continue.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of procedure. Mr Chairman, I seek your indulgence in your wisdom much as this might be -(Interruption)- to listen to, Mr Chairman, I think you and I were involved in such an incident. It might be very unfair to expose one in - to take advantage of one’s weakness especially health you and I soon or later are going to be in such circumstance. I beg you, Mr Chairman, I am very much a Movement person I would very much like to see Dr Ssemogerere run because I would not like my candidate to run alone, but I think it would be unfair to take advantage of the powers in this House to expose somebody to nakedness basically because he was in circumstances that, may be, he was not totally in control of.  All of us have weakness I beg of you and I beg of my Brother that we do without the detail of what happened, let it go in the Press, but let us not take advantage of the powers in this House.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to try and stop Dr Yyeko  who is about to confirm the statement by Dr Ssemogerere that he never fainted when the New Papers alleged that he fainted and he said he never fainted, Dr Yyeko he is trying to confirm that he never fainted and some people are saying that he fainted by Omara Atubo and others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members I do not take part in debate here mine is to listen to how the debate is going on and I have to be as fair as possible to all of you.  Now, if there is a point of contention and somebody would like to give substantiation and he is a Member of the House so long as it is a point clearly we are not going to the detail.  Here is a case where something happened or did not happen we were not there, but there is a Member who wanted us to know whether it happened or did not happen.  Please, hon. Members do not drag me into making decisions on my own, I am just here to be fair to everybody.  I think it is in order for one of the hon. Members who were there to either confirm whether something happened or did not happen without going into the detail.

DR YYEKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I said, I found him seated without a coat and without the necktie I just greeted him  -(Interruption)

MRS OKER: Point of order. Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me way. I would just like to inform my hon. learned Doctor Yyeko that he should just precisely state clearly what happened to Dr Ssemogerere and not to go into details because that is Medical ethics  -(Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, Dr Yyeko we are not interested in the details, but rather to confirm what happened or did not happen.

DR YYEKO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, as I said, I greeted him and he replied to me and said he was going to be fine,I stayed for about one minute with him and then I left I did not at all in anyway said, to the people of the New Vision that the man had pressure neither did I said that, the man should be transfer to Mbale other were the words of New Vision people I never talked to any of them neither did I make that diagnosis that was all.  I do not know whether he fainted or he did not, but I found him seated.

MR WAPAKABULO:Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In fact, I am glad that Dr Yyeko has gone on to give his narrative because also, those of us who are anxious in anticipating, we were reaching a stage where we were going to be unfair to Dr Semogerere.  Because if he had gagged Dr Yyeko to stop where he had stopped, it would have been even worse for Dr Semogerere.  Because people were trying to react as if there was a lot of terrible things which hon. Yyeko was going to reveal.  The thing, though, Sir, that on Sunday I saw a motorcade of vehicles that he had used driving towards Kampala through the town of Mbale and again I would like to confirm that the population were very kind and peaceful and that hon. Dr Semogerere and his entourage were not harassed.  What I know is that, there is a lot of anxiety to try to create situations so that we can address diplomats.  But I think what we should do is talk to our people, those diplomats have no votes. (Applause)  And every moment we are trying to organise incidents so that we may address diplomats.  In the process of registering nominations in Mbale Municipality the days were clearly laid out, on Friday the supporters of hon. Semogerere peacefully stood in front of the CEO’s and did exactly what they wanted to do.  

On Sunday those of us who nominated President Museveni, we did so also peacefully and the supporters of Mr Mayanja came in a trickle and eventually - not this Mayanja, I know there is another Mayanja who is intending to stand.  But in all cases there was no interruption which is evident that really the officials are playing fair on an equal ground.  But for that incident which was provoked, there would have been nothing.  When I spoke to people they said but Sir, the Constitution says 1,2,3,4; why are people being allowed to open offices?  I said hon. Semogerere is entitled to open his office in Mbale, much more so after nomination.  He is free to come, mobilise his meetings in accordance with the law.  I know we have a right of association, a right of assembly, a right of speech.  But all those are according to law and taking into account other peoples’ interest as well, as well as to what the wishes of the people are.

MR BYARUHANGA: Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I will give an example of Masindi where actually the UPC office was very well known as a UPC office before.  Now, it is called an IPC office.  So what happened they removed a small stroke on U and it became IPC. (Laughter) 

Now, this one caused a problem.  It caused a problem because those people who were mobilising for Semogerere were from that office.  Now, it caused a bit of resentment, but we the leaders being mature we controlled the situation.  But I want a clarification.  Now, is this office Constitutionally allowed? Because it is really known as a UPC office.  Thank you.

MR WAPAKABULO: That office could carry that name although contrary to law up to the time of nomination.  But after nominating, after hon. Semogerere nominating and becoming a candidate within the meaning of the law we passed here, then that office shall have to read the office of the election of hon. Paul Kawanga Semogerere.  If it reads otherwise, then a question will arise whether he is acting in compliance with the law.  But that is not for this House.  It is for the independent Electoral Commission to decide which way they would treat it.  But my view if asked, that would be the position.  I therefore Sir, wish to say that the areas that indicate the leveling of the ground, independence of the Commission, the freedom to have access to the people, that one we shall judge after nomination and I hope that our factionaries in the field of all sides for the candidates, for the government and those onlookers will be well behaved to enable Ugandans have a free and fair election.  And I am confident that, that will be the case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member has finished.

MR KARUHANGA:  I thought he had accepted my information?  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to clarify further on the IPC office.  According to our Constitution, the old political parties which existed in Uganda before the 8th of October, are allowed to continue to exist.  Any new political organ cannot exist in Uganda until and unless Parliament makes new regulations governing the existence of new political parties and new political organisations.  Like IPC -(Laughter)

MR WAPAKABULO:  So Sir, there will be this process here of this resolution. As I conclude Sir, is another further evidence, fortification of the position that we are resolved to have a level ground leading to a free and fair elections.  I thank you Sir.

MR NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  I thank you, very much, Mr Chairman and I raise to support the resolution.  And I have a feeling that, reading the resolution as a former administrator I find that the resolution is very wordy and I do not know why the Minister had to labour so much on talking about the tyres, the car batteries and minor repairs and so on and so forth.  Because motor vehicles being what they are, the moment you start talking about tyres and batteries then a question might arise as to what would happen if five minutes after the vehicle has been handed to a candidate, the windscreen is shattered, or the tyres burst and so on and so forth.  

So, I thought Mr Chairman, in order to simplify the resolution and to avoid having too many provisions which can be disputed and result into unnecessary arguments and counter arguments. I wanted to propose the following amendments.  My amendment reads as follows: In pursuance of Article 67(4) of the Constitution of Uganda, and section 7(2) of the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Statute 1996, the National Resistance Council hereby resolves that, the Interim Electoral Commission provides for each Presidential Candidate the following:

(a) A brand new four wheel comprehensively insured executive motor vehicle, which shall be adequately serviced and repaired as and when necessary during the period of campaign.  Substitute motor vehicles shall be made available when such repairs and servicing is in progress.

(b) A suitable four wheel motor vehicle for aides of the Presidential Candidates.

MR SIBO:  Point of procedure.  Under the provisions of the Finance Act, any Motion involving financial provisions can only come from a Minister.  So, what you can only do here is to request the Minister to amend his Motion if your proposals are going to involve any more money than is being proposed here.  Thank you, very much Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA:  I thank the hon. Member.  I think this can be done within the context of my proposed amendment.  I was talking about provision of motor vehicles for the Presidential Campaign’s aide. And (c) -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just want to differ with hon. Sibo’s interpretation of the law.  He is talking about under the Finance Act.  We are now discussing this law under the Interim Elections Act and under the new Constitution.  And therefore, I do not think you would like us to go and discuss it under another Act.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just to inform hon. Karuhanga and the House.  Actually it is constitutional, it may have been a slip of the tongue from hon. Sibo that this House may not raise a cost unless the Bill is moved by government.  

MR WAPAKABULO:  Sir, what I wanted to say is more-or-less said. But it is up to the Attorney General to advise who is also moving the Motion.  It is I think said that any Motion or Bill that seeks to impose a charge on public funds shall or an attempt to raise.  If for instance they present estimates here, we are not allowed to raise them.  We are only allowed to bring them down and it is for the Minister to agree on conviction; then he could actually say that maybe I am convinced, just add this.  Because then you are adding an additional charge on public funds.  It can only be come down at the incidence of this House.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Minister will say so when he is winding up.

MR NTIMBA:  Finally, Mr Chairman, (c) shillings 40,000,000/- cash package for general campaign expenses.  Now, Mr Chairman, I was prompted to make this amendment not knowing whether these motor vehicles are being lent to the candidates or whether they will be allowed to keep them after the campaign?  However, whatever the case maybe, I think my amendment is valid either way and I do hope the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General will appreciate the effort I have put in this.  Because throughout this afternoon, I think we have been almost trespassing relevancy and I am anxious that, we reach a conclusion to this important and urgent resolution.  I beg to propose the amendment and I support the resolution.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Mr Chairman, I beg to say this first that, I would like to appreciate the hon. Minister’s resolution, which has been brought in good faith, for leveling the ground and for allowing justice to prevail.  But I will like also very faithfully to oppose it.  I am doing so because, Mr Chairman, we are going to be the very first nation to go that far for the purpose of democracy.  I remember when elections especially that to the office of the President was carried in the United States in 1992, I happened to be there that very July.  But it was done in November.  There were three at first aspiring candidates including Rose Perot who happened to spend a lot of his dollars to the tune of billions, his own money.  We are setting here a bad precedence, Mr Chairman.  A person parts with 2,000,000; then again 15 million, a car and other things.  And some of these I am sorry to say, might have been no-starters and may not go very far but he will have begged and walked with all this at the expense of the taxpayers.  And if we are setting this precedence, there are ably qualified people in all the constituencies who will like to come to this Parliament.  Are they also going to be facilitated? (Applause)

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate the Reverend can only recall the name of Rose Perot in the United States.  He forgot that the other candidates, that is in the last US elections 1992, George Bush and Bill Clinton, where in fact facilitated. Those who had to run with their own money like Rose Perot, were coming in as an independent.  In the United States, you will probably be aware that they spend lots of millions of taxpayers money as to what they call matching fund.  And clearly our aspirants here, will have to match more than match to what the government contributes to them.  Because it will take a lot more than 15 million to run around Uganda.  In any case, we may end up with not more than two candidates or even if they are three.  And after that Uganda surely would not like to see their former presidential aspirant walking on foot.  What is wrong with keeping our candidates decent?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman, I think the most important provision that should be made to all these aspiring or would be candidates, should be security.  That should be in place for all of them and even when they talk about vehicles to carry police, that is already a state matter.  We cannot budget for that one from here because there is already a provision that, whenever these people go around, they have to be protected.  That is another thing where we seem to be underrating the work of our Security Organ.  Mr Chairman, even when we talk about these other reporting by the Press.  Hon. Members will be aware that we have a law in this country now regarding Press and Journalists and if in any way they are in their reporting, there is that law already in place.  And we must, appreciate how we have walked in this country; from Uganda Argus, through Voice of Uganda, to the Uganda Times and the reporting then and what The New Vision now reports.  And that is where you go wrong.  Whether you are a director, whether you are a Minister, there is nowhere you can be covered.  You must be exposed.  And that is what is making even the New Vision to remain in place and compete fairly.  Because if we begin to allow this paper to report only positively on what government has done, it is going to be the mouthpiece of government and will cease to cover things fairly well.  With this Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose this resolution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I call upon the Minister to reply.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Let me take this opportunity to thank you all hon. Members for your contribution.  I will in my reply just touch on one or two things which I thought I better look at.  Hon. Omara Atubo in his remarks thought that this provision is only token and he was very clear about it.  I do sympathise with his feeling because the best way to look at it, Mr Chairman, is to imagine yourself being a Presidential Candidate.  And I think that is what hon. Omara Atubo tried to do.  And I think that is good.  Because if we look at it that way, really 15 million is more or less a token.  But we cannot of course consider these things outside our own knowledge of what we have in our own country.  Our own budget.  The estimation of 15 million shillings was arrived at by the Commission after fully considering what their envelop is and what they think can reasonably be afforded.  In any case, the Statute says ‘that the Commission shall as soon as possible but before nomination with the approval of the Legislature by a resolution, offer such facilities and funds to candidates as the Commission may consider appropriate.’ So, much as we would have liked something better, much as the circumstances on the ground might be so different, but this is what the Commission thought will be appropriate.  In fact, Mr Chairman, it is even -(Interruption)

MR SIBO: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  It is not clear to me in a proposed resolution whether what the Minister has proposed is a complete hand out, giving out completely or whether there is any idea of lending to the candidate?  Mr Chairman, what I have in mind is that we have come a long way from 1990 to today when a government was organising rigging.  Now, the government is all out and out for a fair and free election.  So, there is no way we can have an even ground with one president already in a fleet of cars and so on, and then you have got these other currently three candidates with no vehicles of their own.  Could the Minister consider the possibility of lending them at least if this is hand out, could he consider giving or probably lending them a second vehicle for their escort?  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR OKWERA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I find it very difficult to support the Minister in this resolution, Mr Chairman.  Because the Minister has not told us as of now how many candidates are involved in the race.  That is one. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, this is a very important matter because we cannot budget for the number which we do not have yet.  Are we going to budget for 100 candidates or one candidate?  Number two; Mr Chairman, the Minister has not told us in (b), what could be the cost of these executive four wheel drives?  We do not need to give executive a blank cheque in this case.  So, the Minister should clarify these two positions, Mr Chairman.  Thank you, very much.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, I have made a quick calculation of how much money is involved in this exercise and it comes to 50,000,000 million shillings.  Now, I know that a four-wheel vehicle is about 30,000,000 million and when you add the 15 million that is 45 million; when you add the batteries, and other things, it comes to 50,000,000 million.  Now, various candidates have different needs.  There are some candidates who - and we have authorised them to get foreign assistance.  Some of them have already bought vehicles and they do not need vehicles.  This Parliament is forcing them to have additional vehicles which they probably do not need.  But they may need posters.  They may need to spend money on a different campaign item.  I think what we should do is authorise a certain sealing of money, which is regulated here and say that the Commission will authorise each candidate to spend so much on known items for the elections and stop there and not to regulate them on use of one battery or two batteries, or a car or no car.  And we are wasting a lot of time talking about such a wordy thing as a resolution.  We know how much money is involved in spending here.  We are not changing the amount.  We know it is 50,000,000 million, just authorise it and the Commission will regulate.  And the Statute says, that they must account for this money and they must use it for the election and that they will audit it and it is section 7(5), 7(6); all these are already stated.  So, why not just to summarize? Give them money and the Electoral Commission will authorise them.

MR EKEMU:  I do not know how hon. Karuhanga’s intervention will help the House.  But I presented the Motion before the House and that is what I was trying to reply to.  Now, he says I should summarize and forget all about that I have gone by.  I think, Mr Chairman, 

that will not be the correct procedure.  But I was just replying very briefly and straight forward.  I said that, I noted hon. Omara Atubo’s concern and I sympathised with it.  But I said that within the means of the Electoral Commission, the proposal we have made and agreed at 15 million shillings.  Of course, anybody would have liked to give the candidates much, much more; even beyond 50 million which people are talking about.  But the question is, we must examine this within our means.  So, I will like just to stop at that.  

Hon. Mayanja, it is unfortunate he has left.  But he raised very touching issues, Mr Chairman, which although was not substantially relevant to the spirit of this Motion, I think were very fundamentally important and he gave the Members chance to think about the question of violence in electioneering, the question of hooliganism, especially if it is organised.  But, even the Prime Minister has come out and I think government has condemned that.  And I would like to take the opportunity to say that hon. Members; we should not talk in total disregard of the fact that we have laws in our country.  Even as we go through the electioneering.  We are going to have the laws.  

In fact, I have taken the privilege to remind myself that we shall have to strengthen all the systems of the law and if there is going to be any hooliganism, we shall have a law in place.  And I will like Members to take encouragement on this.  And as another hon. Member said this is not the work of one person.  I think we all take the responsibility.  If there is any hooliganism, we have to take a lead to bring it down.  Because sometimes hooliganism starts because the leaders do not know how to handle the situation, they allow the electorate to over power them.  But I would like us not to be carried away by that.  Those will be incidence which we should expect and which we shall guard against and try as much as possible to control.  So, I would not like the House to be swing absolutely by the fears and anxieties raised by hon. Mayanja, especially together with hon. Sebaana Kizito.  

I think hon. Kagonyera made a fundamental point that the responsibility is on every one to keep peace.  And I think this out-weighs all those.  There was a saying that, Ugandans are merely being hoodwinked.  This could be an unfortunate situation.  We bring this resolution because government wants to make provision for the candidates.  This is a demonstration that government is not discriminating against any candidate.  The resolution does not say that the incumbent is going to be provided for much more than others.  It is very straightforward.  Now, to say that this is mere hoodwinking is rather unfortunate, Mr Chairman. Because this could star a feeling in Ugandans whereby they will have no confidence in the kind of thing we are setting in place.  And I thought I would have liked to answer this issue more simply if hon. Mayanja was around.  But now that he is not here, maybe I will satisfy myself by saying, he did not very much mean it.  

The question of freedom of expression, is a very delicate one.  Some people think that, when we come to a time of electioneering freedom of expression is so absolute that anybody can say anything the way he likes at any place with impunity.  But this is not the case.  Whenever we talk about freedom of expression we must bear in mind that, freedom of expression must be guarded by the laws within the armpit of decency and a sense of responsibility.  Otherwise to talk about freedom of expression just widely is not - I think even we must be a little more careful.  Because at this time many Ugandans will want to express themselves in many different ways.  Sometimes they will want to express themselves in certain places in a way which we might think is negative.  And yet to them that is the only thing they are saying and that is the only way they can say.  I think a good example has been sighted in the House about the expression in Rukungiri.  I was not there.  But if people of Rukungiri teamed up and expressed negative views about certain things, even about a candidate, that is a part of their freedom so long as it does not degenerate into violence.  Mr Chairman, I still think we can accommodate that and carry on.  

I will like to make clarification on issues which were raised.  The question of the four-wheel motor vehicle - I am not leaving anything Mr Chairman.  But maybe the hon. Member should let me first clarify.  The question of the four-wheel vehicle which is intended to be provided to the candidates.  This I am properly advised, is going to be a brand new vehicle, it is not going to be a ramshackle.  

The other question which was raised is the question about aides and the security.  First of all hon. Members, of course under section 7(1)’the Commission shall provide security for the protection of each candidate.’  Now, what you are worried about is only the mobility of security.  I would have left it to be covered by this provision.  But, I can go a little further because I am now properly advised again to say that, there is going to be provision for a brand new double cabin pickup for the security of each candidate although this is not provided for in the resolution.  But it is understood that it is covered by the provision of security generally.  So, I think hon. Members do not have any fears about this.

With regard to the sum of 15 million shillings, I am properly advised that the Commission in accordance with its budgets which it has approved, is only able to spend 15 million on the candidate at the moment and I do not have any information to enable me to revert that position.  I would really properly urge the Members that we consider taking that for what it is.  Hon. Gasatura made a reference to candidates.  I think what is fundamental is that, the candidates are not going to rely absolutely on this provision.  They are not expected.  By the fact that, the hon. Candidates offer themselves for this enormous task.  It is also expected naturally that they must have some solid resources around them and even if they do not; it is expected at least that they should be prepared to spend the little they have to support themselves, as government supports them.  

So, I think this is a prudent effort, it is not an effort which can satisfy everybody, it is not an effort which can really make all the candidates be put on a level ground.  But I think government will have tried its best in this.  Now, in winding up, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am seeking clarification as regards to the vehicles.  Are they going to be returned after the elections or it is a gift to them?  It is silent, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR EKEMU: Mr Chairman, as a fear again I do not like to dictate any position, Members are free.  One hon. Member actually suggested that the vehicles should be retrieved back to the Electoral Commission at the end of that.  But I think, Mr Chairman, we have not reached that stage if after my winding Members really insist on that, then it is going to be up to them to amend the resolution accordingly.  But I think before you do that, hon. Members, I think as I said it is always better for you to imagine yourself to have been in the shoes of a Presidential Candidate.  What would you have liked?  I personally would have liked that, after such a tedious running around the countryside, even if the vehicles were five wheel drive; I would have asked you to say well, let me at least now relax with a remainder of it.  But as I say if hon. Members feel differently, it is going to be entirely up to you.  

But, in winding what I was going to say in brief is this; that the spirit in this resolution is something new in our country.  I do not remember in the past Parliament discussing officially support to Presidential Candidates in this manner.  So, I think this is an innovation and I think it is a good innovation.  I think we should support it.

Finally, I will like to make one remark and say that we cannot go into too many details as far as this is concerned.  I think the Electoral Commission is a capable organ and will be able to work out the rest of the detail.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

MR KIGYAGI (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like of course to support what the Minister has said.  But Mr Chairman, I would like to move that we add an amendment.  These candidates have contributed 8 million to the Consolidated Fund.  I think it will be fair to them to allow them retain these vehicles after the campaigns.  

Secondly, I would like that we also bring it out that these vehicles should be comprehensively insured during the time of the campaigns.  Because the danger is that, the Electoral Commission already has money.  So it is not necessary to use the Finance Act which hon. Sibo was referring to.  So we can use our laws to ask the Electoral Commission to comprehensively insure these vehicles during the period of the campaign.  Mr Chairman, I would like to move.

MR EKEMU:  Mr Chairman, I have already indicated that if it is the wish of the majority of the House that the candidates retain these vehicles, it may have to be voted upon.  Otherwise, I do not have instructions to say that.  As regards insurance, Mr Chairman.  Comprehensive insurance is usually personal responsibility of each person.  So, really we cannot make it a matter of state, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I thought I heard the Minister at first saying if it is the wish of this House, we can retrieve the vehicles.  Then at the end he says, if it is the wish of this House we can leave it with them.  Two, he said for comprehensive insurance, it is a personal responsibility.  From this resolution if I understand it that the intention was to leave the vehicles with the Presidential aspirants, then it can be a personal responsibility.  But if the meaning is meant that the vehicles belong to the Commission, then it is the Commission’s responsibility either way the proprietor would want to insure them comprehensively.  So, Mr Chairman, I would want as you call for the question, to endorse the motion by hon. John Kigyagi amending this.  That ‘they be retained by the Presidential Aspirant after the elections.’

MR WAPAKABULO:  In view of the question taken by the Mover, I would like to suggest Sir, that we amend to add another paragraph to say, the vehicle referred to in paragraph (b) above, shall be retained by the Presidential Candidate on the completion of the election.  Two, and that the vehicle shall be insured comprehensively for the period not exceeding six months by the Commission.  The point Sir, being this that one, we agree that the vehicle will have run all over the whole of Uganda, it will be more of a nuisance and a problem to come back to the Government.  In fact it is just good riddance that we leave it there.  But because this vehicle is going to go into the rough and tumble of elections, we may have to be called upon to hand in another one.  But since there are those people who are prepared to take the risk, why do we not insure it?  But for a short period comprehensively i.e. against the vehicle itself, the replacement of the vehicle, fire and also the inquiry to other people who are found on the roads in use of the vehicle or those in it.  So that we give it protection both the vehicle and those concerned for the period either of six months or four months.  It could be even four months by the Commission.

DR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  In view of the fact that, some Members have expressed different options on the vehicle and its status as far as insurance is concerned.  I will like to make an amendment to this resolution.  In essence consolidating all these sections of the resolution into a financial package which we should give to the Presidential Candidates and then we should be able to account how he has used that money.  The break down as per this resolution, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)  Can I be protected, Mr Chairman?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order.  But I think what you are trying to say is very unpopular you can read from the thing there.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think what the hon. Member would like to do is to accept what the resolution is saying, plus what hon. Wapakabulo has added, plus saying and if a Presidential Candidate is not interested in any of the above items an amount equivalent to the amount can be spent -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, why is it that Members are hostile to this if these people do not want to use the vehicles?  I think this is not fair to them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think there are two issues here on the amendment and I will call upon the Minister to give his views.  There are two amendments which are standard.  One, that the said vehicles be retained by the Presidential Aspirants.  Two, that the same vehicle be insured by the Commission for a period of about six months.  I think those are the two amendments which appear to be supported by the House.

MR EKEMU:  Mr Chairman, first on whether the candidates should or should not retain the vehicles.  The position is that under section 7(2), the Commission is supposed to provide these things including vehicles as facilities.  And this is why the Commission is going to provide even security and maybe a vehicle for the aides as facilities to facilitate the candidates.  It is not a donation, Mr Chairman. (Applause) 

It is to facilitate the candidate in as far as he is a candidate.  The moment he stops being a candidate, that is after the elections, then government has no obligation to facilitate him.  So, Mr Chairman, in terms of the strict interpretation of the Statute, there is no way I can see these vehicles being surrendered to the candidates.  There is no way.  It is very, very clear, it can only be facility. (Applause)  The second point with regard to insurance, Mr Chairman, I have no objection for the vehicles being insured.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, the Resolution as amended be adopted by the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, as you know between tomorrow and Thursday this week, there will be nomination exercises for the Presidential Aspirants.  These exercises will involve I believe a number of the hon. Members of this House either directly or indirectly.  I, therefore, consider that I have to adjourn the House until Tuesday next week starting at 2.30 p.m. (Applause) With that we come to the end of today’s session.

(The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until 2nd April, 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)




         

