Tuesday, 24 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but in a particular way, I want to welcome back our distinguished honourable member who is now with us after sustaining a serious accident. You are most welcome! 

In the gallery this afternoon we have students from the School for International Training, an accredited institution of higher education on world learning. They have come to observe how business is conducted in the national Parliament. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda! (Applause) 

We have other guests but when I get their particulars, I will introduce them to you but you are most welcome. 

2.47
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise a very simple question to government. The President of Uganda is going around the country mobilising teachers and students to become patriotic; to teach patriotism and to form patriotic clubs in the country. 

The President has also promised that this effort will be provided for in the 2009/10 national Budget. My question is when should we expect a statement from government to inform us on how this initiative intends to be driven by government so that all of us can get involved because it is a huge initiative, so that when we interact with the people we know what to say.  

The reason I am asking this question is simply because it is such an important concept that we need to move together as a country. It has generated such immense interest in the public as gauged through the media, on radio talk shows and on the Bimeeza. Everybody is talking about it and we need to move together in the understanding of the definition of patriotism and the role that each one has to play. I really would like to ask government when they plan to bring the statement to this House. Thank you.

2.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister in charge of the Presidency will make a statement in a month’s time because this matter requires a lot of reflection. (Laughter) 

2.49
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter and I wish the Leader of Government Business could take it more seriously. It is not a joking matter. The syllabus is already being implemented. We do not know who drew up that syllabus; we do not know the contents and you want one man or the President to finish first and then you come here to do what?

It is not for the Prime Minister to decide what should happen in this Parliament. It is for us to decide when the statement should come. It is not his responsibility. So, I think we should take this matter seriously and direct that the statement –(Interjection)- the Rt hon. Prime Minister should know that I am on the Floor. (Laughter) 

Fortunately, the minister who was said not to be around just arrived and maybe we could get something better now that she is here so that we really get to know what is happening in our country. I thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am a student of practical politics and public administration. This matter has financial implications. It has also to be considered by the Ministry of Education. It requires a cabinet paper and that is why I recommended that the Minister in charge of the Presidency would make a statement but if you would like to give her a timeframe, and then she fails to fulfill that timeframe that will be your business. But that is my estimation. You can give her one day if you like. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the essence of this is that a programme has started, as hon. Kamya was saying, and that they also want to participate. You can give them a general statement but other details can come later. Just tell them what it is about, what is expected of the leaders at the level of MPs, at the level of district chairpersons. That is the kind of statement we want. The details can come later.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Fine, Mr Speaker. As long as they do not pin us down to details, she can make a general statement even within two weeks. As long as you do not come here and pin her on the financial implications and so on. She will make just a general statement. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I think let us have a general statement. When the general statement comes, it will be an opportunity for you to debate it but in two weeks, let us get that statement and clearly think about it.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the Rt hon. Prime Minister. I am sure the President of this country cannot just embark on a tour on this very important issue without information from the appropriate ministries and advisers. Is he telling us that the President works on his own or what? Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The President normally consults us but there are occasions when he can make decisions on the spur of the moment and then we have to work out the implications of the decision. He does it from time to time and he is entitled to take this decision because the socio-political terrain is very complex. (Laughter)

2.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the response. Again, we cannot avoid being concerned simply because left in the dark, we have a full right to respond the way we perceive this campaign. And when we do so, like in the papers today, there is talk about warning those who are sabotaging the campaign. And when we ask to be informed so that we know and therefore we respond from an informed perspective, we are denied this knowledge. You cannot help this country by taking that position. 

The fact of the matter is that, we want to objectively respond to the President. Otherwise, we would respond the way we are responding and we have a right to do that except that on a matter as important as patriotism, there should be no conflict between any sides about it. So, really the appeal from this side is that we are helped to be able to be rational not to be seen to be opposing the President all the time. Maybe he has something really crucial that we do not understand and that is why we are asking the Minister for the Presidency to help us. Since she is for the presidency, she is capable of consulting with the President very quickly and coming back to the House rather than giving us the three/two weeks to say the things we have been saying on radio for which the President seems very upset about. So, Rt hon. Prime Minister, this is the appeal from this side.

Secondly, since I do not want to come back, we requested for information on the position that the President pronounced when he was in Arua in regard to what would happen if the people voted for Dr Kiiza Besigye. We were promised two weeks, last week and the other week we were promised there would be a response and it keeps going on and on. It cannot be the tactics of the Government side.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF THE PRESIDENCY (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much my colleague, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. The information that was requested about what appeared in the newspapers as to what the President said when he was in Arua will be responded to next week because I had to find time to find the owner of the words so as to make sure that I can be able to respond properly because it was the newspapers which were being quoted. So, I have got that information and I will bring the statement here next week.

As for the tours, I also undertake to brief the House and if possible maybe we can have a seminar for Members of Parliament on patriotism. (Laughter) 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank the hon. Minister for the Presidency for the information she has given and we accept it except that it will only be fair if we assume that next week is next Tuesday because next week could be any day. If she can bring the statement on Tuesday, it will be next week rather than saying next week because we have several days, it is only fair that you are specific. 

THE SPEAKER: To be safe what we can say is, latest Thursday.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Okay, that becomes next week. I accept that day, Mr Speaker. As for giving a seminar or a class on patriotism, first bring the statement then we will see its worth - (Interruption) 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the President already told a congregation that patriotism means transformation; love of East Africa; love of Africa; love of oneself, etcetera. That definition seems to be fairly comprehensive. So, as a way of giving information, I am just informing the minister that it might not be necessary to have that seminar if that is the definition of patriotism as far as the President is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue of the seminar will come after the statement but we need the statement and then if you need the seminar we shall have it. I think we have exhausted this subject. 

3.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sorry to have brought this matter here but I felt I should raise it. This is something that concerns the citizens of this country especially those who travel. A few weeks ago, we read in the papers and we heard in the news that for Ugandans to now get British visas in order to travel to Britain, they must get them from Nairobi. I want to be educated. Uganda is the current chair of the Commonwealth; we have just spent a lot of money to host it. Uganda is one of the historical colonies of the British Government. Even at bad times we have never got visas outside this country. What we are going through now –

THE SPEAKER: But was this not refuted on the same day or the day after by the High Commission in the same papers? Was it not refuted?

MR OKUPA: It was refuted but just yesterday we were in the protocol office here in Parliament and that is why I am bringing it here now. We have to go to Nairobi to get visas so that we can travel. It is based on this that I have decided to bring it up here. So it is something that is real and I thought when the High Commissioner refuted it, it was not the case but it is still going on. How can we be treated like that? We are not second class colonies of the British Government. The President of this country is the chairman of the Commonwealth, so can the Prime Minister or the foreign affairs office clarify whether we have a problem with the British Government or not; or our Committee of Foreign Affairs asks the High Commissioner to come and clarify to Ugandans what this means. Thank you.

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Okupa for the clarification he is seeking and I would like to assure you that I am going to bring this to the attention of the Minister of Foreign Affairs so that he can come to the House and appraise us of the arrangements that the Uganda Government has with the British Government in regard to accessing visas to the United Kingdom. I thank you. 

When we leave the House today I will get in touch with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and I will impress on him the urgency of providing this information to the House and I believe this will be done by Thursday.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY STALL OWNERS AND VENDORS OF GABA MARKET

3.04
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition by stall owners and vendors of Gaba market to Parliament of Uganda and I will go through it very briefly. It is signed by over 450 stall owners. 

This is the humble petition of marginalised and endangered stall owners and vendors of Gaba market represented by me, their Member of Parliament. Briefly it states as follows:

“That the petitioners are stall owners and vendors of the market situated in Makindye Division in Kampala District; 

That in the year 2003, the stall owners formed a public limited company named Real Gaba Market Property Owners Association; 

That in the year 2004 and with the support from the President’s Office and their area Member of Parliament, the stall owners applied for leasehold of land on which the market sits which was granted in June the same year by the Uganda Land Commission; 

That the leasehold was granted under instrument No.347881 Plot 182 Kyadondo, Block 251; 

That your humble petitioners, Mr Speaker, are aggrieved that since the year 2003 their company has been hijacked by a handful of members and that the company has not filed annual returns, nor conducted an annual general meeting nor elected association directors; 

The vendors and stall owners have persistently petitioned the Registrar of Companies for redress but his advice and legal directives have been wholly ignored and undermined; 

That in the year 2004, an agreement was reached between Kampala City Council, the vendors and stall owners of the association that the management of the market be left to the association leadership on condition that they remit Shs 2.2 million monthly to KCC while retaining 30 percent of the total collections to be deposited onto the welfare account of the association; 

That the dues collected since 2004 have neither been remitted to KCC nor to the vendors’ welfare account but have ended up in the pockets of a handful of individuals;

That the humble petitioners are shocked by the blatant corruption and misuse of daily and monthly dues collected from them for the past four years; 

That the group which have hijacked their market have registered another private company and are making attempts to change the market land proprietorship into the names of another company; 

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners lodged a caveat on the said land but to their shock the caveat was fraudulently removed without following the due process and even the title white page of the same land has now disappeared from the lands’ registry; 

That your petitioners, Mr Speaker, are shocked that there is a group negotiating with an Indian investor for the sale of the market at a cost of Shs 2.0billion. 

That your petitioners, Mr Speaker, are also shocked that instead of being assisted, the Kampala Resident District Commissioner, the Makindye Deputy RDC, Makindye Principal Assistant Town Clerk are aiding and supporting wrong doing.  The same team has used Police to block the registrar of companies from supervising the annual general meeting and have used Police to block any vendor’s meeting on the pretext of fears to cause insecurity in the market;  

That the vendors have made efforts to seek the intervention of the President’s Office, Vice-President’s Office, political assistant to the President, the Mayor of Kampala and the RDC of Kampala in vein;  

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners are praying as hereunder:

That since KCC and the office of the RDC have failed to sort out their matter, Parliament intervenes, like in many other cases, to avert the precarious circumstances and predicament faced by the stall owners and the vendors in the markets;

That Parliament calls the commissioner of lands registry to accounts for the disappearance of the title white page and the removal of caveats on the market land;  

That Parliament prevails upon the commissioner of lands registry and all individuals involved to produce a duplicate certificate of title of the market land for safe custody; 

That Parliament prevails over the DPC Katwe, O.C. Kabalagala, O.C. Gaba to stop interfering with the directives of the registrar of companies on the association affairs and with all efforts by vendors to hold an annual general meetings, hold fresh elections and file company returns;

Lastly, that Parliament prevails over the commissioner of lands registry to hold any transactions on the market land until all issues surrounding its ownership are resolved;

Mr Speaker, your petitioners as duty bound will ever pray.”

It is signed by over 450 vendors and stall owners of Gaba market. I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I lay this petition on the Table. Thank you! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, you remember that at the beginning, I indicated that there were some people in the gallery whose identity I did not know.  But I can confidently say the guests there are guests from Gaba market, in hon. Mabikke’s constituency. You are welcome! (Applause)  

Hon. Members, you have heard the petition. I notice that there are cross-cutting issues in the petition:  some on the registry, titles and others on companies. I do not know what you think; to which committee is this petition to be sent?

HON. MEMBERS: To Local Government.

THE SPEAKER: So, the petition should be handled by the Local Government Committee and expeditiously report to us within three weeks (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST OF GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 52.0 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE TWO BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (BTVET), PLUS REHABILITATE 42 TRADITIONAL AND CONSTRUCT 15 SEED SECONDARY SCHOOLS (ADB EDUCATIONAL IV POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING EXPANSION AND IMPROVEMENT) PROJECT

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a request by government to borrow Units of Account 52.0 million from the African Development Bank to finance two business, technical, vocational education and training institutions, plus rehabilitate 42 traditional schools and construct 15 seed secondary schools.  I beg to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on National Economy should handle the subject and report to us within three weeks.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MORTGAGE BILL, 2007

3.15
THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you remember, last week we were handling Clause 7, dealing with customary land vis-à-vis mortgage. Do we continue with the debate on Clause 7? 
 
PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I had informed you, I was not in the House when this matter came before the Committee of the Whole House. But I had the opportunity to read through the proceedings of that day. I thank my honourable colleagues who expressed concerns which were similar to concerns that the committee that handled in this Bill, although they did not specifically bring out clause 7.  

The big concern really is that customary land as provided for in our Constitution and laws - the primary intentions were to ensure that the customs, particularly in use and in collective ownership, are protected.  Otherwise, when land belonged to the state, that issue was not there.  

My big concern and I would like the minister to see it from this perspective is that, let us make that protection part of our law. But more importantly, to suggest that in places such as ours where much of our land is customary land, we should not evolve from customary ownership to registered ownership of land in the same way that we have elsewhere. That is not positive at all. And if you do not include that provision of using customary land for mortgage, it will force us to discuss and agree as a community, because it is not sustainable to own these lands as community land for ever. 

Therefore, if you now make it possible to mortgage, it becomes possible to commercialise community ownership of land. The only problem is that community ownership of land has a problem of succession; the people who agree at any moment in time on how to use the land, when they are not there, their successors always do not have the same agreement. We now have a terrible problem in our community; people went to the camps, and when they came back, they started saying that you came as a nephew, so you do not have land. This is simply because once the commercial aspect becomes prominent the issue of ownership becomes a serious matter. I can assure the House that if we put this, and people start mortgaging land – it is one thing to talk about using land collectively and another that when the resources come, they should be used collectively. 

Therefore, we feel that the issue of customary land should be left to the people involved to sort them out without the law; as families, as sub-clans, and whatever level. Leave it outside the land and let them sort themselves out. If they agree to the extend that the bank believes them, then it can be handled at that level. But if it is put in the law as it is being proposed, we are going to run into big problems. We will not help the process of transforming land in this country. We will create opportunities for conflict which we do not need and we will not enhance any other thing.  

I speak as somebody who comes from a place where community ownership of land is a big thing, and I would kindly beg the House that we actually delete Clause 7 and allow customary land to evolve into commercial registered, freehold as it has happened elsewhere. It will save us all these burdens. 

So I beg that the minister considers this and we adopt this; clause 7 will just complicate peoples’ lives. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was not here last week and I missed the general debate. But I am happy that that particular section was deferred and I caught up with it. 

This is a matter that we should debate in national interest without bringing in any party considerations. The way I look at this section, I see it as one way of amending the Land Act indirectly. The law is very clear; customary land is provided for in the Constitution, the customs are complete. We do not need to supplement any custom with this statute. All the customary laws are complete and have got mechanisms for resolving issues that arise within these laws. So, Parliament cannot sit here and go ahead to amend peoples’ customs. I my view, this section is unconstitutional.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Okello-Okello, the purpose of this law is to facilitate the citizens of this country to access funds that are in banks. And we appreciate that large parts of the country have customary land; do you what us to leave them so that they do not benefit from facilities that accrue from mortgages?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do private practise and I do a lot of mortgage matters. There isn’t a bank in this country worth the name, “Bank” that will lend you money when you do not have a certificate of title! And the idea that we have in Uganda that land is for raising money is false. Before I left public service –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, hon. Okello-Okello, former Commissioner of Lands and Government Valuer. I wanted to pass to you this simple information that currently, Centenary Bank is doing exactly what you are alleging that no bank is doing it. Centenary Bank is doing that today. Thank you. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my colleague for that information. If that is the position, then we do not need to provide for it here. If that is what Centenary Bank is doing, delete this section because it is already happening. (Laughter)

I was saying that when I was still in the Ministry of Lands, we took stock. Less than one percent of the titles in this country are mortgaged. The primary use of land is not to look for money, there are many other advantages. People have been getting money from banks; even those who do not have land. You can give in your car log book and get money. So I think the question of customary land –

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, in your absence, contributions were made here and some people suggested, for instance, for the Northern region that goats can be used, baskets of dry beans and so on. But can we continue with this kind of thing, using goats and beans to get bank loans? Don’t you think we need our people in those areas to also get bank loans?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, if that statement was made here, that in the Northern region we use goats to get money, it was a very big insult. There is not bank that accepts a living thing with blood as collateral for a loan! (Laughter) You might get the loan today and the goat dies at night, or the Karimojong raid, what would you do? 

So, I would like to appeal to my colleagues that for the sake of moving together as a country, let us delete Section 7. Mailo land will one day disappear; even in the mailo land areas, there are people with titles, you are not barred from getting a land title for yourself. So to provide like we have done here is very dangerous. The very people who will lend money to our people will make sure that they fail to pay the loan. So I do not support this and I beg the House that we delete this section. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On the issue of this provision, we had debated it last week and you put the matter to vote. My thinking was that we were going to conclude on this matter and I move an amendment. So I do not know what you propose that I should do. Do I move an amendment at this time or we first conclude with –

THE CHAIRMAN: We are trying to find the way forward, if you have something, suggest it. 

MS AMONGI: I have a proposition to amend section 7 by introducing a new –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Chairman, when I rose and made my contribution, I was conscious of the fact that while some of my colleagues who made their contributions come from those areas where the issue of customary land is  very strong, I thought that coming from the Acholi sub-region, where most reference to the issue of customary land is made, the matter that I raised would first be responded to by the Minister for Lands, because it is our very considered view that we should not make a law that ties the volition of land ownership in our sub-region  to the level of customary land. 

Secondly, in the circumstances that we have now, where they is so much land conflict, even without this kind of law, having a law that allows individuals to bypass the process of agreeing with the community or households, and end up getting the same money and leave people in a land crisis – I think a time like this when the land issue is so bad requires that we should not introduce this amendment and we made an appeal. So before we reach the amendment stage as was proposed by hon. Amongi, we would like to hear from the minister and hear what his views are and then we can see what follows. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, she was here when we had this debate, and actually information was passed to the Members that it is possible to have a certificate out of customary land, and certain sections of the Land Act were read. But again it was resisted that it was not possible. So I was asking her to see whether she has made consultation because she was here, so that she can help us to move forward. But since you want the minister, let the minister talk. 

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate that either because of the heavy schedule of duty or otherwise, you and hon. Okello-Okello were not in the House last week. But this particular clause was exhaustively debated; very serious points, legal and otherwise were raised by hon. Katuntu and others. We actually showed them that customary ownership has evolved from tribal, to community, to family, household and now there are even individuals. At one time, it was argued that once it is customary you cannot have individual ownership. 

By the time we adjourned, we were at the point of finding a solution, as the Chairman has stated: do we completely delete it or do we have an amendment which can protect people. You are right to say that there are risks for the community where customary land is held communally in case you mortgage and there is a default. That would certainly carry a very high risk of the whole community being disposed. This was raised and the extreme position was none other than hon. Amuriat, and it did carry the day. We are now trying to find out how we can protect the families and the communities. Otherwise, we have exhausted the issue 

Even the point of whether unregistered customary land is being mortgaged, evidence was produced here on how Centenary Rural Development Bank is doing that. Some of us have benefited from that and micro-finance is helping people in the villages on this. So, if hon. Okello-Okello is in the country and as he says, a consultant, then I am surprised he is not aware of this. Possibly he is consulting only in Kampala and not in Kitgum. But I can assure that people in the villages are benefiting from unregistered customary land being mortgaged in the bank and the banks are doing this work very well.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Sorry, but you can come in afterwards. I thank you very much. I also would like to thank the Minister of Lands. Maybe he did not pick my point at the beginning but though I wasn’t here last time, I went through the Hansard to equip myself with what transpired in the debate. 

The problem was that you, the lawyers, were debating the law, but I am talking about the real issues. Regardless of the law, the reality on the ground is that customary land ownership is a wrong framework for doing business because you cannot clearly define the ramifications associated with it.

Secondly, customary land ownership, once you provide a legal framework, imposes a dangerous degree of vulnerability to those who do not know the law. Even your brother, if he gets to know that you do not have the law, will come and lie to you just to persuade you into signing something for him. And even if you discover the truth the next day, it won’t be of help because the land will have gone.
 
The lending that is associated with customary land holding that you referred to, Mr Minister, is actually based on trust and not the law. Those who give it out, do it on a collective basis in such a way that the onus of ensuring recovery is on collective community pressure and not the law. Once you base it on the law, you run the risk of putting the community you think you are trying to help asunder. It is not about the law; it is about the stage of development of land issues in our communities. Let those who can agree with their families let their friends, brothers etc register land and develop it. This is happening everywhere, even in Acholi and Lingo. Otherwise, once you make a legal framework for the manipulation of customary land ownership without the framework to manage the communities, you will generate conflicts. It is a real fear; it is not about the law and that is why we made this appeal.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have heard all the arguments, but all of us are trying to make the best laws for the people of this country. Last time we had a problem in relation to this customary land issue. So, could you please allow hon. Betty Amongi who claims to have a proposal on rephrasing clause 7 present it so that we can hear and determine whether it is acceptable and improves the situation before we move? Nobody on this side is in for making a bad law for this country.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Betty Amongi, what amendment do you have? Could you present it now? It could be of help to us to break through with this. Please, read your amendment.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I know the arguments we put up last time. I also know that there are communities from other parts of the country that argue that although they have customary ownership of land, in their culture and customs, they are allowed to mortgage such land as persons or individuals. And given all the extreme positions, I am proposing an amendment to clause 7 to introduce a new sub clause 5, which will read as follows: “Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to customary land, which is owned by a family or community.”

When I read Section 3 of the Land Act Cap 227, incident of forms of tenure, I realised that the customary tenure system is further categorized as “…ownership can be based on individual, households, family, communal or under a traditional institution…” As a person who comes from an area where land is communally owned, my major interest is to protect such land; land that is owned by families. 

This proposal, if approved, will help those who may be in need of using their land though, as a leader, I would discourage such individuals from venturing into mortgaging their land held customarily. That will be my role. I am saying this because those Members who, last week, argued that in their areas there are individuals, who want to mortgage customary land, will also be catered for by my amendment. That is the amendment that I am proposing. I beg to move.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Chairman, I second the amendment to clause 7, but I propose that we insert the following words: “Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to customary land, which is owned by a family or a community.” I think this solves my major concern. I hope this will assist those individuals who have got customary land, but have not succeeded in converting it into freehold because of the long processes involved. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the amendment should come in to help those who have fears; it should be to allay those fears. I think what hon. Amongi is saying is that we should allow customary land, which is owned by individuals, to be mortgaged rather than the one owned by families or a community. Isn’t that enough protection? 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Chairman, I was here last week when we had a debate on this issue. At the time we closed there was a motion on the Floor by hon. Amuriat to delete clause 7 –

THE CHAIRMAN: It aborted. I do not have to repeat that; that one aborted. 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Chairman, the issue of contention at that time was –

THE CHAIRMAN: That one aborted because of reasons, which are very clear. Can you continue with the debate rather than referring to what happened then? 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: But, Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you continue debating rather than referring to what happened then?  Yes, hon. Okello-Okello.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I have seen the amendment but there is no single individual who owns customary land. That person must be, by himself or herself without a wife, husband, children, not even relatives. There is no such a person because with customary land, relatives can claim it when the individual is not around; there is no such a person.

MR KAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank hon. Okello-Okello for giving way. I think hon. Okello should look at Section 3 of the Land Act, which clearly spells out the various categories of customary land ownership. There are people who own land as individuals, but under customary ownership there are those who own land as families, clans, tribes, call it, but still under customary ownership. So there is no way you can say – and this is enshrined in the law. I do not see why one –(Interjections)- even if one does not have a wife, children, relatives, yes, he can still have land owned under customary ownership as an individual. What is wrong with that?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I was a part of the committee that handled the Land Bill, which is now the Land Act. We set up a sub-committee of four technical people, chaired by the late hon. Okulo-Epak, I, hon. Werikhe and another person. I am surprised that hon. Werikhe is making this statement here. We provided for an individual just in case - because we did not want to leave any ground uncovered. Otherwise, in reality there are no such individuals; we just let it be there to avoid leaving any room. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Okello-Okello, what he is reading now is not part of the Bill that is under consideration; it is in the current Land Act.

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I would like to urge hon. Okello-Okello, somebody who I respect on land issues to again look at the provisions of the Land Act. Please, can you look at Section 3, which provides for individual, household, family, community, traditional holdings under customary title? So, for you to argue that there is no individual who owns land customarily - I am one of those who own customary land as individuals.

My understanding was that the minister responsible for this Bill concedes to this amendment. I want to thank hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Steven Mukitale for this amendment. I accept this because I know the risk involved. 

As a community to which I also belong - somebody can easily mortgage land and leaves the whole community to suffer. So at the stage of development at which we are, I think it is good to protect the community and families. We cannot deprive individuals and individual households who own land customarily from mortgaging it. I think we have debated this enough, I move that you put the question. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I am even surprised that the Minister has conceded to this amendment. When you look at this amendment - if you take away a family or the community whom are you legislating for? How many individuals own customary land that is still a subject of a custom? None! Once you remove the family and community out of it, all that you have is unregistered land. You can call it anything, but it is unregistered land. 

If you want to encourage registration of land, and I do believe that that is a policy that your ministry should be encouraging, such individuals should be told to go and register their land, get a proper land title and mortgage it the way they want. 

So, you do not have anything to concede in this, Mr Minister; you are only undertaking your responsibility of promoting ordinary commercialisation of land, redundant.

I am absolutely amazed; this amendment does not change anything. In fact even if I conceded to it, you will have no application to it; and there is no point in making a vestigial law that has no practicability. That is why I asked you not to focus on the law, but to focus on what is on the ground. What is on the ground is not helped by conceding to this amendment or providing clause 7, please!  

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, I would like to invite the hon. Leader of Opposition to look at section 4. The certificate of customary ownership does not apply only to community or family. Section 1 says, “…any person, family or community holding land under customary tenure may acquire a certificate of customary ownership…” So, even as an individual you can still acquire a certificate and therefore we are legislating for even those individuals who are not necessarily under communal land ownership.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want to inform hon. Werikhe that the concept “custom” should be understood. A custom is transferred from one generation to another. So if Ekanya Geoffrey is granted land and he happens not to marry and produce and he dies, that land remains the property of that community and that clan and that custom and must be managed in the way that community decides and operates according to their customs. So we cannot sit here in this Parliament and introduce a new custom.

Even if I have a certificate of occupation under customary land, the custom dictates how I use it. So, what the minister should do, and what we should do in this House, is to encourage those whom we think apply for free hold titles and then they go for lease and can mortgage it. But for the sake of peace in this country, let us not tamper with customary land. 

I want to be on record, Mr Chairman; I do not want to be associated with that and if the House wants to pass that I do not think they will have quorum. That matter is very serious. The people of this country own land, a woman and a cow, if you touch those you will face pangas from the local people. (Laughter)

MR TIBAMANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. You see hon. Members, you can only own land according to four systems, namely, mailo, free hold, leasehold or customary. You cannot hold unregistered land because that form of ownership is not known in law. Therefore, if you are in Gulu town and you own a piece of land which is not part of the customary land, it is not registered. How are you holding it other than customary law? So when it belongs to you and it is in Gulu -(Prof. Ogenga-Latigo rose_) no information. You also refused to give way. But I will give you a chance.

If you are in Patiko and you have your communal land but you have managed to go to Gulu town and acquire a piece of land which is unregistered, we are saying that you can mortgage that land even though you are holding it customarily because according to me you can only own land according to those four systems and no more. You cannot hold interest in unregistered land unless it is customary. 

So I think it would be wrong to prevent the Gulu person from mortgaging such a piece of land -(Prof. Ogenga-Latigo rose_)- I will accept the information.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you hon. minister for giving way. I am not a lawyer but I know that the provision in the Constitution is very clear that land belongs to the people. In other words, regardless of what form you are talking about, that land belongs to the people. 

It can belong to you in a customary way where custom dictates issues of ownership, issues of use and even issues of inheritance. That is why they are talking about customary land. Issues of inheritance become very important. And again that is why I said that that provision really makes clause 7 redundant once you accept that. 

If you have any individual who has a plot of land and does not register it and he/she goes to the bank with a customary certificate, that person is just a fool because you will not get the same value for the same piece of land. That is why I am saying that the Minister of Lands and his staff should encourage everybody who has land that has no customary dispute to register it. There is more value in that. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But now if I may ask: I see these forms from the IGG being sent to Members of Parliament; what do you do with your houses in your constituencies? Do you declare them as your property or do you declare them as community houses? (Applause) Don’t you declare them as your property?

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the information and in particular for saying that land belongs to the people. Yes, but go on. Land belongs to the people and shall be held in accordance with the following four systems. Outside that you have nothing. 

So if you are in Gulu and you have your plot of land in which you have put a shop but it is not part of your communal land, you cannot hold it otherwise. It has to be customary and that is the kind of land we would say that if one had a shop he/she could mortgage it.

And the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying, “Why not register it?” I agree. We should register such land. But you know for you to register that land in Gulu may require up to a minimum of Shs 3 million yet this fellow wants just 500,000 to invest in his shop. Surely! Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Unfortunately we are dealing with two situations which are unrelated. We are dealing with issues of legislation which are clear and then we are trying to relate the pieces of legislation to the application of that legislation under circumstances which may not be very common to most of us here.

Let me explain the issue of unregistered customary land. Unregistered customary land, even if it belongs to an individual- I know hon. Omara Atubo has many pieces of land and some of them might not be registered. He might claim that he is holding them under customary title and therefore they belong to him as an individual. But then should anything happen to him now, God forbid; his children and his wives would come into the picture immediately. And then the elders of the clan will have to come in and find a way of protecting the interests of the various offspring.

Hon. Amongi’s amendment tries, with a lot of intelligence, to go around this position but we might have to bring back the other concept of the family into the picture. This is because if you are talking about unregistered customary land belonging to an individual and the individual wants to mortgage it, you have to take care of the interests of the offspring of that individual. What do you do with the dependants of that person? If hon. Amongi could find a way of insulating the interest of the dependants, I would stand up and support her.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When we talk about mortgages, we are talking about two types of mortgages, the registered mortgage and inequitable mortgage. A registered mortgage is only possible where you have a certificate of title and that encumbrance is registered on the white page. Then you have a registered mortgage, with a number or an instrument. 

We also have the second type of mortgage, which is equitable. This one does not need to be registered even if you have a title so long as you deposit the documents of ownership with an institution or individual. 

Can the minister or chairman of the committee clarify to me what sort of documents they envisage to be deposited with the institution lending? Unless this Bill wants to create a third mortgage other than the two, which are already known in law.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Katuntu, as a lawyer I expect you to have read this Bill in detail and I mean in detail. Can I draw your attention to page 4 of the Bill? Look at the definition of informal mortgage. Informal mortgage means a written and witnessed undertaking, the clear intention of which is to charge mortgager’s land with the repayment of money or monies worth obtained from the mortgagee and includes - this is what you are mixing, an equitable mortgage and a mortgage on unregistered customary land. So this is already catered for in the form of informal mortgages. So the law is aware of the equitable mortgage, it is aware of the unregistered customary land and it is all called informal mortgage.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The clarification that I want to seek from the Minister for Lands is, in getting registration for your customary land, do you conduct a formal survey where boundaries are defined and you have an instrument clearly defining the boundaries? This is because the problem that you are going to run into is that once there is dispute over that land in terms of failure to pay -(Interruption)- I am just asking the minister -(Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. The honourable member is asking what documents to give when you are mortgaging your customary land. In my area, people are already mortgaging customary land. What happens is that the bank or the person from whom you are getting the money goes to the ground, they measure the land and they ask all the neighbours whether this land really belongs to this person. When the witnesses approve that this land belongs to the person, the bank will take the measurements to find out the size and an agreement is made. 

I would like to inform members that customary mortgaging is already happening and we don’t want to say that all the customary land is communal. In my area, we have one piece of communal land for grazing, which is actually becoming smaller and smaller because individual people are reclaiming that area. 

I would like to give an example of my own area. After we returned from exile, individual families demarcated areas for themselves. We know that this area belongs to Baba Diri and this to Michael Werikhe. The demarcations are there, so when you go to mortgage, you mortgage your own land and not other people’s land. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank hon. Baba Diri for the information. While your information applies very well for Koboko, it does not apply for Agago unfortunately. Therefore, your example is not useful to the people whose interests I am mandated to defend in this House. 

The point I am making is this: people can make false declarations but if in our circumstance somebody says I am registering my interests on customary land and people agree but not everybody signs and then there is a default on the loan, you cannot execute a right over that default on your land. The next neighbour will say, no, the boundary of that land does not reach here; this is my land. 

As a bank or country, we run into disputes that are totally unnecessary particularly when we think we are trying to help our people. The appeal that we are making to everybody is that what we are telling you is the reality that we are confronted with everyday in regard to land issues in our areas. If you don’t have a problem, the most appropriate thing is to listen to us. 

I would even appeal to the committee, if it were not for this purpose, to consider a delay for the Committee of Parliament to go to those places and they hear what the people will tell them. I urge Parliament to listen to us because we are the ones every day confronted with the issue of customary ownership of land. We know the wrangles, we know the escape strategies that arise once the issue of selling the land arises; and the blame that others will give and we know that even when we agree genuinely, if the business fails, and you cannot pay, they will just go back and say it was Prof. Ogenga-Latigo who after all convinced us. It is not about the law. That is what they will do and it will cause real conflict in the community, hon. Members.

We are talking about the consequences of making it possible under the law and not under communal understanding which hon. Baba Diri is describing. It is not the law. 

Even the agreement of payment of such loans is totally different, please. This provision does not help to cure any deficiencies that we had identified. Let us just delete it, and when time comes we can review and amend the law itself.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Listening to the debate in the House, especially the arguments being advanced by the hon. Minister of lands, it looks to me like Government is yearning so much to protect land owners who own land under customary tenure. However, I would like to testify as a member of the committee that a certain omission was actually made during the proceedings of the committee.

Whereas we interacted with bankers, whereas we also interacted with women activists and other people, the people who own land under customary tenure were not accorded the opportunity to interact with the committee.

I would like to inform this House that cultural and traditional leaders within our communities in areas where land is owned under customary tenure have got a say on how affairs of land can be conducted. Therefore, not involving them in this process of law making was certainly a serious omission. What hon. Omara Atubo and others who are fighting for this section of the Act, is to claim they are speaking on behalf of these people and yet those people are alive and kicking.

I think the wisest thing for this House to do is to involve these people. I would like to suggest that we defer or stay this particular section of the Bill until such a time that comprehensive and adequate consultations have been conducted involving going around this nation especially to areas where land holding is under customary land tenure, seek opinions of these people.

Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, we have a standing procedure in this House. I have a report of the committee here and if you look at the Members who signed the committee’s report and there is no minority report attached to it; No. 3 is Amuriat Oboi Patrick, Kumi County and we cannot go on meandering like this. You had opportunity in the committee even to call those cultural leaders to come. Now at the last moment you are saying – I do not know whether you want to withdraw your signature. But is it in order for a member of the committee who has signed the report to come and oppose his own report?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think in the Bible we have the story of Saul who became Paul. It could be that this has happened to him, and since the Bible approves it, there is no reason why Parliament cannot approve it. (Laughter) But really hon. Members, what do we really do? What do you want us to do? Let him complete.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, if the rules allowed, I would like to withdraw my signature -(Laughter)- because I do not think I should -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have already ruled that you are now Paul. You are no longer Saul.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I have a feeling that this particular section should be revisited. There is a lot of reaction coming from - in fact reaction against that particular piece of legislation. From the 20 telephone calls I received from the constituency of Kumi today, 19 of them disapprove of that particular provision. 

I want to say what I said the other day on the floor of the House that as we legislate, we should put our country first. As we legislate, we should not imagine, as we legislate, we should believe that –(Interjections)- hon. Ecweru, I am surprised that you are making such a comment, moreover a representative of the people of Amuria, who would not agree with this provision.

What I said last time is: whereas this provision could have been good, it is not good for now, it is a provision for the future.

MR ECWERU: First of all, I cannot be blackmailed, Mr Chairman, as you know I was elected by about 17,000 people. I stand here to emphasise one thing. I also come from Teso and hon. Amuriat cannot pretend even for a while that he knows Teso more than I do -(Interjections)- I want to make this abundantly clear. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it because of the coverage you have made traversing the entire Teso?

MR ECWERU: Mr Chairman, I have been a commander of 7,000 people, Amuriat has never commanded even a single person. (Laughter) My grandfather was bequeathed 50 acres of land by the clan. He owned 50 acres customarily. He did bequeath 19 acres of land to my father, William Ecweru. William Ecweru has bequeathed to us his children each three acres of land. While it is customarily clan land, I can mortgage these three acres of land. 

One colleague was very clear; it is true an institution like Centenary Bank is already giving loans on this but the dilemma is the protection that they should get from government has not been there. What this Bill seeks to cure is to protect those individuals who by virtue of being in customary ownership want to access loans from the bank. I want to make it abundantly clear here to hon. Amuriat that I know Teso more than you will ever know.

THE CHAIRMAN: How do we find a solution?

MR OKECHO: In view of the discussions that have been going on for the last one week and also today and bearing in mind that these questions need to be handled differently between various communities in Uganda, I think the best thing is for us to put a question to that issue and we resolve it by vote. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: At the moment what I have is a motion to amend clause 7. Should we vote on that?

MRS OGWAL: Before we pronounce ourselves on the amendment on the Floor, I am seeking clarification from hon. Amongi and the minister who has conceded to define for me that individual. Does he have parents? Does he have a wife? Does he have children - so that I understand who this individual is because this individual tomorrow may turn out to be my husband and I will wake up and find the land has been mortgaged and I have no where to stay. Can I have a clear definition of that individual? Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, like I stated before, there is the Land Act which I quoted which is already a law. My interest is that I need to protect communal land, family land; the individual is already categorised under section 3 of the Land Act. Unfortunately, in the Land Act it is not defined but under customary tenure, incident of forms of tenure, there is recognition that individuals, household community, and family can own land. 

Basing on that, I felt that to reach a compromise, where there are people who have argued that there are individuals in their communities under customary ownership. If it is not in Lango and Acholi, this provision will not affect the customary ownership tenure. 

My interest is that last week there are those from the Western region and other areas who indicated that there is individual tenure system under customary owned land. My amendment is to make provision so that we cater for everybody and I think like Ben Wacha has indicated; there can be an improvement on that. But that is the basis of my amendment. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Before you put the question, Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Lands and the chairman of the committee. 

I own some customary land and I wish I could use that land to borrow money. But here we are the minister and the chairman of the committee seem to be more keen than I am to see that I have used my land to borrow money. What is making me very suspicious is that even the people who come from areas of no customary tenure are forcing this thing on us. What is the thinking behind this thing? What are they trying to do? What is the hidden agenda? I am the one who should use my land to borrow money and I am saying do not provide for it. But somebody says, no, have it. What is all this? (Laughter)

MR ATUBO: Hon. Okello-Okello, nobody is going to force you to take your unregistered land to the bank. The mortgage is a contract between a lender and a borrower and it is up to you to go to the bank. There are many people who have got land titles but they do not even bother to take it to the bank. So, it is up to you – this provision is permissive. If you want to take your land and get some money, the mortgage says you can but you are not forced.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose further amendment that cures, in my view, the concerns of hon. Cecilia Ogwal to the effect that the motion as moved by hon. Betty Amongi would read: “Provided that the provision of the section shall not apply to customary land, which is owned by a family or a community which land is mortgaged with the consent of the spouse and the children of the mortgager.” 


MR CHAIRMAN: Okay, Betty do you agree to the amendment?

MS AMONGI: Yeah, I second it.

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion on the amendment by hon. Betty Amongi as improved on by hon. Alaso.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, by the amendment we introduce family law as a new word in the law. Unfortunately, in the interpretation clause that we passed, it is not defined; how do we proceed with this? 

THE CHAIRMAN: They said we should leave it and it comes in at the end. I put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in clause 12 replace sub-clause 1 to read as follows: “The rate of interest payable under a mortgage may be reduced or increased upon agreement by the mortgagor and mortgagee, which shall: 

“(a) Not to take effect until a consequentially agreed memorandum spelling out the new interests has been dully signed by the borrower and the lender;
(b) State clearly and in a manner which can be readily understood the new rate of interest to be paid in respect of the mortgage; and
(c) State the responsibility of the mortgagor to take such action as he or she has undertaken to take under the memorandum to ensure that the new interest rate is paid to the mortgagee.”  

The justification:

(1)	Written contracts cannot be unilaterally valid without the consent of the other party;
(2)	To bar the lender from varying the interest rate as and  when he deems fit provided he 
	gives a variation notice to the borrower;
(3)	To protect the borrower from unjust increments of interest rates; and 
(4)	To ensure optimal benefits of both the mortgagor and the mortgagee. 

MR ATUBO: I accept the improved amendment, which is really interested in protecting mainly the borrower. 

MR WACHA: I want either the minister or the chairman to clarify to me whether this means that every time the interest rate goes up, there has to be fresh negotiations between the borrower and the bank.  

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, hon. Wacha is saying exactly what I have just read out. 

 MR WACHA: That the bank has to renegotiate? I do not know how practical that is because first of all, there are a lot of factors which bring up the interest rate for lending. It is not necessarily within the confines of the powers of the bank; that is No.1. 

Two, can you imagine a possibility of a big bank like Stanbic with so many borrowers having to renegotiate their contracts every time the interest rates goes up; is it possible? 

I think the situation now is that every time the interest rate goes up, the bank puts a notice in the newspapers and it is assumed that every borrower would have read it. You do not have to renegotiate the terms of the contract again; is it practical? 

MR ATUBO: Well, hon. Ben Wacha is concentrating on the practicability, the number of mortgages and the thousands of borrowers the bank has. 

But if you look at the original provision - I would like you to read the original provision because it provides for variation of a mortgage. If you read the original provision, and then you look at the rephrasing of clause 12, you may be thinking of the practicability; the difficulty involved between the thousands of mortgages but apparently that is one of the protections which will have to be there between the borrower and the lender and it was agreed upon. 

The bankers never objected and we think that is one of the provisions which we should apply. It may be less stringent in its application but surely the rates are a very important part in the mortgage industry. 

But surely some banks have not been very straight in the way they handle this issue of interest rates and we think that it is a key factor in the relationship between the borrower and the lender. That is why we are saying that when the interest rates increase the mortgagor should be involved because he may say that he does not accept the rate and he will find a way of just paying off; and that is it. So if you look at that hon. Ben Wacha and what we are rephrasing, we are not bringing anything new; we are -(Mr Gabriel Opio rose)- yes, hon. Gabriel Opio.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The interest is the price and when you are entering into a sale or purchase, you agree on the price. Otherwise, if you do not put there a provision for negotiation overnight, the bank will raise interest and when you fail, it takes over your property. So in the interest of the borrower, we must create a provision for the borrower and the lender to have some discussions over such a situation. Otherwise, overnight when the interest goes up and you cannot service your loan, the bank will take over all your property.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to appreciate the spirit of this amendment. However, I would like to call upon the members to look at this situation from a practical point of view. The borrower is usually interested in paying to the bank as less as they can while the lender is interested in getting as much as they can from the borrower. In a situation that the two parties cannot agree, what is this Bill providing to harmonise that?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Bahati, you should have said that the borrower is usually interested in paying as much as agreed upon when the mortgage was created. What the members are asking is: should the bank or the mortgagee be allowed to increase the interest as it wishes without the consent of the mortgager or should there be some talking between the bank and this person?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, this is a common practice; mortgagers are always shifting interest rates after every three years. I do appreciate that we should protect the borrower because the interest rates are already high, but I am imagining a situation where the two parties do not agree. If I have got a mortgage from the bank and there is an evaluation that sees the interest rates move upwards and the law provides for me to negotiate, I will certainly not agree to pay more.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. A mortgage is an agreement between two people; it is a contract and the terms are agreed upon at the beginning. If there are to be variations, what this amendment is saying is that the two parties must come together to find a solution. If they fail to agree, the originally agreed upon position prevails. That is all.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, under normal circumstances, the interest rates on the mortgage are fixed until that mortgage is disposed of. If we provide for this, we are going to encourage the lending institutions to raise interest rates every now and then; they will say it is provided for in the law. My sense is that a mortgage is a contract that is signed and registered; no party can get out of it. We should not encourage the lending institutions to disturb the borrowers.

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually, when you start negotiating for a mortgage, put a provision for the variation of rates so that they are known. When you put variations, then you should indicate the mechanism of agreeing to that variation.

MY KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to re-strengthen that very position you have just brought out. Parliament should not sit here and act as if it is the business person or borrower dealing with the bank. The borrowers have their own responsibilities throughout the time of the mortgage and the loans that they obtain. We should not have many extra fears. 

When we go to negotiate with banks, there are terms we agree upon from the very beginning. I know that banks are also sensitive; they cannot simply change these terms without referring back to the borrowers. This includes the time of rescheduling payments to the banks. Otherwise, shall we also come and legislate on the rescheduling of payments? We cannot!

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we dispose of this one? There is an amendment by the committee over which a debate has been held. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete sub-clause (2) of clause 14. 

Justification: the clause restricts payments that the mortgager may be required to make at the time of discharge of a mortgage to one month’s interest. Two, it constraints long term financing.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I just want to get some clarification from either the minister or the chairperson of the committee. Under sub-clause (3), I see that the discharge will be on a prescribed form, but is the form coming later on?

MR ATUBO: The form will come under the regulations because as you see, there is a provision for the minister to make regulations. You can read clause 41.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

 Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that we add a sub-clause (3)(d) to clause 17 and it should read as follows: “any potential mortgagee”. I am saying this because as a mortgagee, I may realise that Bank A is charging me a very high interest rate and making me unable to pay and I go and negotiate with Bank B at a lower interest rate. That bank should be allowed to apply to the other bank to transfer that mortgage.

THE CHAIRMAN: I see! Ok. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Okello-Okello, I would really urge you not to bother with that amendment. It is superfluous. If you read 3 in full, you may find that actually your amendment is not necessary. 

Furthermore, in law - because we have to make a good law - there is no such phrase as “potential mortgage or mortgagee.” I know the intention you have is already taken care of in (a), (b), and (c) but you are now bringing in a new phrase called “potential mortgage”. That would bring into the law something which is extraneous and difficult to define and defend.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, the situation I am talking about is real. It happens in the market. I may not have the legal language but the Minister of Lands, being a lawyer, should put it in his own appropriate legal language. That is what is going on in practice. If you go and negotiate with another bank which is offering you a lower interest rate, that bank should be allowed to apply for your mortgage to be transferred to it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any harm? 

MR OMARA ATUBO: There is no such thing as “potential mortgage”. Please, hon. Okello-Okello, you are a legislator; by the time you come to make an amendment, I am sure you have really done very deep thinking and consultation. At this Committee Stage you should, therefore, come with a complete thing. 

If you are asking me to assist you, I would have no problem if it was before Parliament, but I am now in the heat of things. (Laughter) I do not have time to think for you. If you do not mind, therefore, it is already taken care of. I know you have a good intention but it is not necessary, please. I cannot step out of the House and start drafting something for you. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I want to put it this way: “any second mortgagee”, because this is what is going on in practice. I do not know why the minister does not want to provide for it. It does not do any harm. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what do we do? 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, this is a very small matter. We say, “any subsequent or second mortgage.” It will be any of the two. 

MR WACHA: I would like the minister to explain to me the justification for bringing in all these people, including the person who hon. Okello-Okello is bringing in. To me, they are actually outside the Mortgage Bill. Aren’t we going against the concept of the doctrine of contract? Why are you bringing these people into a document on a contract in which they were originally not involved? 

You are referring to the law but there is “privity” of contract. That is also in law.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Ben Wacha, on those extraneous persons who are not conceived by the “privity” of contract, are you saying that any person who has an interest in land which has been mortgaged; two, a person who has granted a surety for the payment; and three, any creditor of the mortgager who has obtained a decree of the sale of the mortgaged land? You may be lucky you might be the creditor and therefore you have an interest in that.  

These are not just foreign interests being brought in. If you import what hon. Okello-Okello is saying, a potential mortgagee is not one of those whom the law can have in mind like the surety and the creditor. 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I am saying that you are going to make it impossible for a transfer to be effective. It is not in the interest of the mortgager or the mortgagee. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: But surely, hon. Ben Wacha, before you take that step of transferring, don’t you think these people are subject to the consent of the mortgager which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld? The persons may make a written request like this. Don’t you think it is useful? 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I move that clause 17, sub-clause (3) be deleted. The justification is that all those persons who are enlisted here are not party to this contract.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the amendment by the committee do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing that we delete the expression, “…period longer than one year…” appearing in the second line of paragraph (f), sub-clause (1), which is on page 20.

The justification is that any land dealings in respect of time periods shall be done with the consent of the mortgagee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in clause 19, sub-clause (2), replace the words, “21 working days” with, “45 working days” which appears in the last line on page 21. The justification is that an adequate time period should be given to the borrower to rectify the default.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: We want a new sub-clause (4) to be inserted to read as follows: “A mortgager will be deemed to be in default warranting the mortgagee to serve upon him a notice in writing of the default requiring the mortgager to rectify the default within the prescribed number of days as stated in sub-section (2) if the mortgager fails to meet any obligations to pay the principle sum on demand or interest or any other periodic payment of any part of it under the mortgage after a period of 30 days from the date when the obligation to pay becomes due.”  

Justification: An adequate time period should be given to the borrower to rectify the default. Two, the law does not prescribe the duration after which failure to pay amounts to a default. Lenders may develop intentions of hastily enriching themselves, an opportunity to make demands even where the delay to pay the monies due is only for a few hours, their aim being to enforce the remedies available to them without having to give the borrower opportunity to redeem the mortgage.

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, we have talked about the increase in days and now we are going down again to raise the period; I do not know why.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman and hon. Members of Parliament, we take it that the borrower is normally in the weaker position and that one of the weaknesses in borrowing is sometimes to be too anxious to get the money without really assessing all the circumstances of the financial deal.  It is only when you fail that you have a problem. So, we are actually giving a lot of days and opportunity to the borrower to redeem his property. 

I think as a legislator for the common people who vote for you, you should be very happy that instead of 21 days in 19(2), we have increased it to 45. We have also said this before you rush and sell any property; that is a new sub-clause. Unless you are saying that the 30 days which we are proposing are not enough and so we should increase it from 30. If you look at the proposal of the committee, adequate time should be given to the borrower to rectify the default. This is the whole purpose for the new sub-clause (4). It is a good clause for the borrower.

THE CHAIRMAN: The strength of these two parties is not the same. The borrower is in a weaker position than the bank and so I think they are trying to see how to help.

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with you entirely, but I have a fear that we are over-emphasising the position of the borrower forgetting that the lender sometimes has the pressure of the borrower actually. If all these laws are packed together, they weaken the position of the borrower to access the funding. We should also look into this area with care.

MR KAWANGA: Well, on this one I think we should always assist the borrower. In fact, under equity the protection is even greater. There is a principle called the equity of redemption and it gives it six months. So this period is not long.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we recommend that we change clause 24(2)(a) to read as follows: “…entering into and taking physical possession of the land or a part of it during the day time using only such force as shall be reasonable in the circumstances.”  

Justification: It is often the case that taking a mortgage property requires reasonable force as the defaulting mortgagee may still remain reluctant to yield to the consequences of his default.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BYANDALA:  Mr Chairman, we are proposing that we replace sub-clause (3) of clause 26 to read as follows: “A copy of the notice to sell served in a court in accordance with sub-section (2) shall be served on - 
(a) A mortgager; 
(b) Any spouse or spouses of the mortgager in respect of a matrimonial home; 
(c) A surety;
(d) The independent person as provided under this Act.”

Justification: The persons mentioned above have direct links with the mortgage.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have just passed an amendment on section 7. The amendment improved by hon. Alaso also requires consent of the children in the case of customary ownership. I do not know whether the chairman would also include, in the case of customary land, the children and the spouses.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. 

HON. MEMBERS: Adults.

THE CHAIRMAN: Adults. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, under clause 27(1), we are proposing that we replace the expression, “to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable as at the time of sale” with “to take all reasonable steps to obtain the best price as prescribed in the regulations.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, for practicability, delete sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4) and consider to be put in the regulations I referred to above.  

Justification: The formulation of sub-clause (2) – “average price at which comparable interests in land of the same character and quality” - is problematic. Valuation is not an exact science and so the better approach is to focus on the transparency of the sale method, ensuring that the mortgagee takes reasonable steps to obtain the best price. 

Delete sub-clause (6). Justification: it is redundant. An agreement, which is contrary to the existing law, is void.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in clause 28 delete the word “recorder” appearing at the beginning of the second line of sub-clause (4). Justification: it is a repetition. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question -

MR BYANDALA: No, no, I am still going on.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you got another version that you are reading from? Are you using a different report from what I have? I have one amendment.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, there was clause 28, sub-clause (2).

THE CHAIRMAN: You have an addendum?  

MR BYANDALA: Yes, Mr Chairman. I want to add at the end of sub-clause (2) these words: “…this may include but not be limited to the mortgagee placing an advert including a colour picture of the mortgaged property in a leading English daily specifying the place of the auction and the date of the auction, being no earlier than 30 days from the date of the first advert.”

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, why a coloured photo? The reason I am asking this question is because there are times when the preferred advertiser has problems with pages and you have got a deadline and the pages where they can accommodate you in newsprint are those that do not have a coloured image. So you can run away from the deadline simply because the law specifies a coloured photograph. Why do we restrict these detailed graphics?

MS AMONGI: I am wondering why it is only in a leading English daily when in my area, a local paper like Rupiny can be read more by the local people in circumstances where you have included customary land. Is there a specific reason why you have to do this? Can we just say, “a daily paper”? Being specific to an English daily is a bit –

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, responding to hon. Kyanjo’s submission, all this is done to increase transparency. We have seen adverts in papers where the photograph is not clear and you depend on only the description. You can get the shock of your life. So we want to increase transparency as much as possible.

Commenting on hon. Betty Amongi’s issue, we saw that it could also be a burden to the mortgagee to start putting adverts in all the locals. It would become a very expensive affair, which at the end of the day will be passed onto the mortgagers. So we thought that if we put it in the widely read English version, which covers the entire country -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is saying is: why don’t you first of all consider the location where the mortgaged land is situated. Does it have a local daily, whether it is English, Luo or Luganda? The intention is to capture the area where the land is situated because that is where the interest is plus the other dailies.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I have no objection if she can put it in the format she wants.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you put it there. It is not difficult to do that. You can say, “English and the local daily”. Let us exhaust hon. Amongi’s problem.

MR KAWANGA: Normally, the expression we use is: “a paper which has wide circulation in the area concerned”. The man bringing the publication can put it in English or in whatever other language but let it be as wide as that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I put a technical aspect to my argument, which the chairman did not seem to appreciate. When we talk about a coloured picture in a newspaper, we are talking about the typeset of that paper. If you went to the paper at a time when all coloured pages have been taken over by other advertisers, you will not be able to advertise on that day. Suppose you have a deadline? What you should insist on is a clear picture. If you talk about a clear picture, Mr Chairman, it will work out neatly whether coloured or black and white.

THE CHAIRMAN: If the space is taken by others, you extend the counting of the days. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to re-draft sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “A purchaser prejudiced by unauthorised, improper or irregular exercise of the power of sale shall have a remedy in damages against the mortgagee exercising that power.”

Justification: The expression “a person” is ambiguous and should be qualified since the clause only provides for protection of the purchaser.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, under clause 30 I want to add “f” as follows: “A purchase of mortgaged land shall not pass or be transferred to any of the persons named in a, b, c, d and e above within 15 years from the date of purchase.” 

I am saying this because a practical case happened in this city. A mortgaged property was sold by auction, which was reportedly ripped, and a few years later it was transferred by the buyer to the auctioneer. So we should really stop that temptation of lenders using their position to get the property later on transferred.

THE CHAIRMAN: Fifteen years? The period is very long.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Okello-Okello, if you do not mind, I do appreciate the mischief you want to cure - the risks that may come up and abuse by the lenders who may use their position to buy. I have come across some of those cases. However, the point is, as the Chairman has put it: is 15 years really the right remedy?

You can come up with an amendment. Look at this: “Sale by mortgagee to herself or himself. The following will not be permitted: purchase the mortgaged land without the leave of court.” Why don’t you think about this provision? You have to go to court to get that leave. Once you get that leave and it is transparent - court has granted it to you and there has been a hearing - why do you stop me for 15 years from transferring it in my name? That is a contradiction.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, that is not what I am saying. They will not even bother going to court. They will put somebody else to buy the property on their behalf and then a year or two later, transfer to these very people. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but for how long do you close these normal transactions? The property has been sold. The one who has sold it is making business.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: No, it is not sold property, Mr Chairman. It is bought by somebody planted.

THE CHAIRMAN: That property when sold is no longer mortgaged property. It ceases to be mortgaged property after it has been sold to Ssekandi or Okello-Okello. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, my point is that the sale is not a normal sale. You send somebody to go and buy it, keep it for one year then transfer it to me. It is not a normal situation of purchase. This is what we should cure by providing for it in this law. Maybe the period of 15 years is long; why don’t we make it 10 years?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, there is a proposal that anyone of those should not buy the property within 10 years after the sale. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.


Clause 34
MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in clause 34 (a), delete the word “vary” from the first line of the first sentence. 

Justification: allowing the courts to change the terms of the mortgage when the borrower has already taken and used the money will be unfair. This would defeat the concept of freedom of contract.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I am very uncomfortable with 34. I see that the powers of the court in this mortgage could make it practically impossible for the security to be realised. If you look at 34(1) (a), it says: “suspend or postpone for such a period as the court considers reasonable.” 

Clause 34(1)(c) is also almost tantamount to re-writing the contract - “substitute a different remedy for the one applied for or proposed by the mortgage or a different time for taking or desisting from taking any action specified by the mortgagee in the notice.”

I wonder whether we could not stand over this so that we rethink it, so that we narrow the powers. If you leave it like this, you are really opening up on litigation and you might not be able to –

THE CHAIRMAN: You want time to see what to do?

MR WACHA: So that some of us could sit with the committee and see whether we could -

THE CHAIRMAN: Dispose of it tomorrow?

MR WACHA: It is alright. We could sit in the morning.

Clause 35 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, under clause 35 replace the word “reopen” with “review” in the head note.

Justification: re-opening the mortgage would imply changing the terms of the mortgage when the borrower has already taken the money. 

We are proposing that we delete clause 35(c).

Justification: it refers to a third party not party to the mortgage transaction. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR BYANDALA: We are proposing that we delete clause 37(5). 

Justification: the clause refers to clause 35(c) (ii) which we proposed to delete above.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, on clause 38 (1)(c) and (2), why don’t we say “two years” and “five years” instead of “24 months” and “60 months”? What is the problem?

MR OMARA ATUBO: I have been told that when you express the punishment in months, the prisons authorities defy. Every time hon. Okello-Okello behaves well in prison, they deduct the number of days that you have behaved well and therefore you have a remission -(Interjection)- No, I am just saying this in case -(Laughter)- but I have been there already and I know. That is the purpose. We better leave it in months.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, under sub-clause (1), insert the expression “in consultation with the Central Bank” between the words “may” and “make” appearing in the first line. 

Justification: the Central Bank is competent in providing professional advice to the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we request for renumbering. We would like to amend the Bill by inserting two new clauses immediately after clause 38. The first one will be clause 39.

The new head note of clause 39 should read: “Extinction of certain rights”. It reads: “(1) Where, upon the application in that behalf, the Registrar is satisfied that the right of action to recover any security under a mortgage, whether the right is granted in that mortgage or otherwise, has become extinguished by the operation of the limitation Act, the Registrar shall, after giving notice of not less than thirty days to the mortgagee, remove the mortgage from the title of the land to which it relates; and the mortgage shall be deemed cancelled with effect from the date of the removal.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-sections (1) and (2), the mortgagee may not later than ninety days from the expiration of the notification under sub-section (1) apply to the court for an order restoring the mortgage and his or her under it. 

(3) Upon application by the mortgagee under sub-section (2) court shall grant the order if the mortgagee satisfies the court -

(a) in the case of the cancellation of a mortgage under sub-section (1) that, during the period of limitation-

(i) The mortgager or his or her successor in title acknowledged the mortgage debt in writing and agreed to pay or settle part of it;

(ii) The mortgager was dead and that either no successor had been appointed or there was no one competent to receive the notice requiring the repayment of the loan either as a personal representative or in some other capacity; or

(iii) The exercise of his or her powers of sale or foreclosure had been denied by the court.

(b) in the case of the cancellation of the mortgage under sub-section (1) that the exercise of his or her powers of sale or foreclosure had been denied by the court.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended agreed to.

Clause 40

MR BYANDALA: The head note to read as follows: “Registrar may issue Special Certificate of Title to Mortgager.”

“(1) Where, upon the expiration of time specified under section 12 (2) for the mortgagee to apply to the court for the mortgage and his or her rights under the mortgage to be restored, the mortgage and the rights have not been so restored and there are no proceedings pending in court in respect of such application, the Registrar shall, by writing under his or her hand, require the mortgagee or his or her transferee within thirty days to surrender to the Registrar any certificate of title in his or her possession relating to the mortgaged land.

(2) Any certificate surrendered to the Registrar pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be returned to the mortgager or his or her transferee. 

(3) Where, upon a request by the Registrar under sub-section (1), the mortgagee or his or her transferee fails to comply within the time specified, the Registrar shall issue to the mortgager or his or her transferee a special certificate of title in place of the certificate in the possession of the mortgagee or his or her transferee, and the provisions of section 71 of the Registration of Titles Act relating to the validity and endorsement of special certificate of title and the entry of particulars of it in the register book shall, mutatis mutadis, apply to the special certificate of title issued under this section.” 

Justification: the Registrar should continue to have the authority to cancel mortgagees that have been extinguished by the operation of the Limitation Act.

Also, renumber all the clauses following clause 39. 

Justification: to enable the insertion of the new clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we stood over clause 2, which is the interpretation clause, in order to be able to fit in any change of interpretation that we have made. We also stood over clauses 5 and 6 on matrimonial home, and then clause 34 which was raised by hon. Ben Wacha. You go and study them so that we can finalise the exercise tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
5.32
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Mortgage Bill, 2007” and passed some of the major clauses without amendments but stood over clauses 2, 5, 6 and 34.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.34
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we approve the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Mortgage Bill, 2007. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I must thank you for the great work you have done today. In a particular way, I must single out hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Alaso who untangled something on clause 7, which had prevented us from moving. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

We are remaining with a few clauses, which I believe with consultations we shall be able to deal with tomorrow. With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 March 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)


