Thursday, 22 March 2012

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, your Excellency the Vice President, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want to inform you that as discussed early in the week, we shall go on a short recess from today until the 10th of April so that we are able to finish arrangements for the Inter Parliamentary Union but also for you to go for Easter. 

Secondly, I want to reassure the Members of Parliament that I have checked with the meteorological station and the weather conditions have improved. There should be some isolated showers and thunderstorms by close of business tomorrow, so you should concentrate on your work. 

We also have in the gallery students from the Kampala International Training School. They have come to observe our proceedings. Thank you.

Yesterday, we worked until very late and we took a decision that members who do not stay up to the end will no longer be allowed to raise matters of national concern. So, I am giving notice that this is the last time we are allowing you. From 10th April, you have no right to raise important matters. 

2.47
MR MICHAEL MARANGA MAWANDA (NRM, Igara East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week, I rose and inquired on the progress of the national security information system. The chairman of the ICT committee said that the honourable minister will come before this House on Tuesday and give us an update in respect to this project. I know that we have been very busy but this project is very important for us as Parliament and the Government. 

I want to seek guidance from you, Madam Speaker; we are now going for recess for one or two weeks. I am wondering when this matter will be brought to the attention of the House so that we can be able to give our input in as far as this project is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, that matter is on the Order Paper. You will get your answers today.

2.27
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2006, the Government of Uganda through UIA called for investors to apply for Kampala Industrial Park at Namanve. The cardinal aim of this initiative was to promote an enabling business environment to provide substantial benefit to the national economy in terms of value addition to our national economy and job creation. To my shock and dismay, the business park earlier given to the genuine citizens is now being fragmented for personal interest. That then alters the initial plan of job creation, value addition and increase on tax base.

Some companies, among the many which I am going to elaborate here, include Global Com Holdings, Nationwide Properties, Cooper Motors, Mada Hotels, Fang Fang, etc. These companies, among others, were given part of the park to put industries but they are being harshly chased away by Uganda Land Commission, which is selling very small portions of land. Recently, one of the mentioned companies wanted to begin its process of developing the said land and sought from the surveyors a survey report. The land report indicated that Uganda Land Commission had allocated the land, about five acres, to different persons.
In these circumstances, we would expect employment of about 700 people. 

I want to know whether Government through Uganda Investment Authority has changed its plan of industrialising Namanve Industrial Park. These investors are being frustrated. When we talk about frustrating investors, it affects us young people, more so those who would be able to get jobs in the said business park. I request that you cause an inquiry into this Namanve saga.

One of the key issues that the investment authority had forwarded was that water, electricity, railway systems as well as waste management would have been extended to the park as a precondition to set up business structures in the park. I beg to lay the following documents on the Table:

1. 	The invitation for expression of interest from UIA.
2. 	Permission to survey the allocated land to one of the companies like Global Com Holding Dotcom in Namanve.
3. 	A survey report, No. 5306, belonging to Global Com Holdings Ltd.

4. 	A land evaluation criteria by the UIA.

Why do I want to lay these documents on the Table? If you look at the survey map, you will find that all the land which was given to this company has been subdivided into plots. What we want to know is, who are these individuals who have bought the plots?

MR TANNA: I would like to inform my colleague and the members in the House that the example he is citing might be for one particular company that has been able to access him or he has been able to access but the problem is quite rampant. There are quite a number of companies out there who have allocations on paper; their land titles have dubiously failed to be processed. They keep on going to the various offices and they are bounced, and the same piece of land has been allocated to multiple people and people have eaten money in the process. That is what I would like to pass on as information.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Tanna for that.

As I conclude, I would like to say that I am taking Namanve as a case study. There are very many individuals who are complaining and have gone to the park to try to plot development in the land government gave them. Unfortunately, there is a problem between Uganda Land Commission and Uganda Investment Authority.

As young people, we are worried because of the unemployment rate in the country. Where are we going to get jobs? Let us talk about another industrial park in Jinja; we are not seeing any development. Talk about one in Mbale, in Soroti –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. Actually, I wrote a paper about the investment parks. The role of Uganda Investment Authority was to prepare Namanve, put infrastructure like water, electricity and put up shells so that when investors come, they can ask for 2,000 square meters and they start producing. However, there is a case before us - members of the Public Accounts Committee - about a company that was given to construct Namanve. Uganda Investment Authority has done a disservice to this country. This is the information I wanted to give you. There are so many people who applied for investment land in there and have never been given titles.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I will seek your indulgence. This is the second time this matter of reckless allocation of land by Uganda Land Commission is coming before Parliament in less than a week. Members were complaining that Uganda Land Commission is mishandling the land they hold in public trust. We can start naming it -Naguru Police Barracks, Nsambya Police Barracks, Namanve; the list is endless. 

I implore you, Madam Speaker, that either you direct a committee of Parliament to investigate all the land dealings that Uganda Land Commission has been involved in so that we put them on a check, or alternatively, we have a comprehensive and detailed statement from the minister about land which is being given by Uganda Land Commission. The problem I see is that in the next ten years when some of us are in power, we will have no land for government, and I do not think some of these investors will be here to stay. So, I implore you, Madam Speaker, that we take this matter with all the seriousness it deserves. Dishing land to investors probably means in future we shall have only police stations as government land, which will be a very big problem.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, my request is that you cause an inquiry on how Namanve Industrial Park land has been allocated and how Uganda Investment Authority has handled the matter. I would like to lay on the Table the documents I have just mentioned for the record of this House. 

I would like to lay on the Table an invitation for expression of interest by Uganda Investment Authority. The second document I would like to lay on the Table is the permission to survey land allocated to Global Com Holdings Ltd. This was given by Uganda Investment Authority. The third document I would like to lay on the Table is a survey report on No. 5,306 belonging to Global Com Holdings Ltd. Last but not least, the land evaluation criterion by the Uganda Investment Authority. I beg to lay.

2.58
MS TETE CHELENGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance. Bukwo District is 70 kilometres away from Kapchorwa where the tarmac road ends. It takes one hour and 15 minutes driving on a normal road to reach Bukwo, but during the rainy season, it takes one week to reach Bukwo. (Laughter) Yes! As we talk, there are signs of rain this month and today is 22 March 2012. I am worried. 

I still remember in August last year, before we broke off for recess, Kapchorwa–Bukwo Road was discussed and it was unanimously agreed that a statement be made on the Floor of this Parliament. I think everybody was here. We agreed that on the second day of our sitting, a statement be brought to the Parliament. The Prime Minister was asked to ensure that a statement be laid on the Table. I have been meeting the Prime Minister and other people and they assure me that the road is going to be tarmacked. I demand for an official communication to Parliament because this is not my road; this is an international road.

Allow me to elaborate briefly so that members can appreciate the need to tarmac this road. In the health sector, when it rains –(Interjections)–  He has all the information; let me finish. When it rains, it becomes very difficult for patients with complications to be referred to Kapchorwa or Mbale for further management.  As a result, the maternal mortality rate is so high in Bukwo District. In November alone, we lost 11 women. It had rained and the doctor was stuck in Kapchorwa and he could not come to Bukwo to rescue women. So we lost the women at that time. Drugs cannot be delivered on time because of inaccessibility and so they expire along the way. That is about health.

Banking facilities; we have none at all. There is no bank in Bukwo but there is one in Kapchorwa. All civil servants access their salaries from Stanbic Bank Kapchorwa.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tete, I think the House supports the need for your road and we just want answers from the minister. All of us support you. I have myself got stuck there in Kapkwata during a rainy season. This House overwhelmingly supports your need for a road. You must get the road. I hope the minister will be able to answer. 

3.02
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Bukwo and Kanungu are in the same situation in regard to tarmac roads. 

The reason I rose is that early last week, a group of petitioners came to your office with a complaint that they had been affected by a directive by the Minister for Water and Environment. I presented their petition here.  The Speaker who was in the chair directed the Committee on Natural Resources to handle the matter expeditiously and report back within one week. Now you have communicated that you are going to adjourn the House, and this matter arose as a result of a directive given by the minister in which she was giving two weeks to the people involved in timber harvesting to stop work. She was basically cancelling their permits, which are lawful. 

Just yesterday, I read a headline in the Daily Monitor where the Minister of State, hon. Flavia Munaba, was quoted saying that the Members of Parliament who are making noise are the same people who have been alleging that their ministry was not doing enough to protect the forests, and the right thinking Members of Parliament are not making noise. Why it may be her view that some of us are not right thinking Members of Parliament is what we would want to know.  

However, what I wanted to know from either the minister or Government is how far they have gone. We are going for a short recess but the directive of the minister takes effect beginning today, since it is about two weeks since she issued the directive. I receive over 50 calls from the timber dealers daily because they were in the gallery when the Speaker gave assurance that it would be resolved within one week. So, I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee how far the matter has gone and the assurance we should give the petitioners who came to this House. I thank you very much. 

3.05
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, Moyo County West, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues. I have come here to raise a matter of national importance and at the same time petition this august House. I am armed with a petition, which I am going to move under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

This humble petition has been brought here by the people of Moyo District, whom I represent in this House. The petition talks about the mistreatment of Ugandan citizens by SPLA soldiers especially farmers and traders resident in Moyo District.

Secondly, it is about land disputes between Ugandan citizens and those of the Republic of Southern Sudan living close to the disputed border line.

Thirdly, interference by SPLA soldiers and local government officials of Kajo Keji County in South Sudan on the progress of developmental projects, especially the stopping of the construction of MTN masts along the border at a place called Afoji and the stopping of the construction of a multimillion dollar road network along the border. We also have some businessmen who have started coming to purchase for themselves large pieces of land deep inside Moyo without following the necessary procedures for acquiring land and this has affected our population. 

There is also the issue of illegal arrests, torture, detention and killing of Ugandans living along the border district of Moyo in Metu and Dufile sub-counties. There is also internal displacement of farmers from their ancestral and traditional farming grounds.

Raping of women has been taking place in Lefori Sub-county. There has also been illegal tree harvesting. We are talking about the preservation of forest land etcetera but there is illegal tree harvesting by these Sudanese. Because the border is so porous, there is also too much smuggling which means that our district cannot get an income.

On a very serious note, there is arms’ trafficking. Recently, some students from Sudan sneaked into the country with pistols and one of them wanted to rape a girl in a lodge at gun point. There is food insecurity, loss of lives and property, disruption of central and local government activities and disruption of programmes of investment. There is insecurity along the border, and each time officials from here go for an on-spot check of these border points, the district must lose money. The officials must be fed, transported and accommodated, which has made Moyo District lose a lot of money meant for development projects. 

Recently, we got a letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the effect that from the second week of March 2012, there will be inter-ministerial committees that will come and start re-surveying the border to make an on-spot assessment but up to now, nobody has been there. What we are hearing is that there is no money for that exercise as we continue to suffer.

I would like to go straight away to our prayers: the Government of the Republic of Uganda in conjunction with the Government of the Republic of Southern Sudan and other relevant international institutions are requested to take up immediate action to address the border crisis. Solutions should be found by clearly demarcating the border line right from Kidepo via Gulu and Moyo up to Koboko, so that our people can have peace. 

We are requesting through the Government of Uganda that all those who come to invest here should follow the properly established procedures. A man called Benny Yengi - 

THE SPEAKER: Please, just read the prayers.

MR ALERO: Those are our prayers - The fast tracking and re-demarcation of the border. At this juncture, I will lay this petition on the Table, and I feel it should be expeditiously worked on. 

I am happy our honourable Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, is around. I wish he could take up this issue so that we and our peasants can rest. At this juncture, I lay this petition on the Table. Thank you very much.

3.13
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising two brief points on UPDF – the UPDF in Somalia and UPDF uniforms. 

We all know that this House sanctioned the deployment of UPDF in Somalia. Under normal circumstances, because they are working abroad they would be paid per diem, but what was eventually agreed was that AU would pay them US$ 1020 per month. What is happening is shocking, and I am happy that the minister has now come. Out of this US$ 1020, Ministry of Defence deducts US$ 200 every month from every soldier. With this deduction, if computed with the number of troops, it now means that every month Ministry of Defence gets US$ 1.8 million and every year they get US$ 21,000,000,000 from deductions of what should actually be per diem.

I think this is an abuse. I do not think that when our minister travels abroad, somebody would even dare to deduct his per diem. So, I am rising to find out from the Minister of Defence where this money is being taken. Is it being reflected as an income? Is it being audited by the Auditor-General? Is it a tax on the sacrifices of our children who are actually doing good work for Africa? Please let us know.

You have been doing this for all this time, and you know what happened recently where a group have actually refused to return home saying “no, pay us our money.” This is my concern on Somalia. I think it is very unfair to deploy our troops, pay them that amount and deduct what should actually be theirs. I think this is really unacceptable. Even as Members of Parliament, if they deducted our per diem I think there would be chaos; the budget would not be passed here. Those people are vulnerable and they have nothing to do because they must listen to orders.

As I close, Madam Speaker, I would like to raise the issue of the use of UPDF uniforms. I have seen people, including some of my colleagues, training in Kyankwanzi with UPDF uniforms labelled “Uganda”. I am wondering whether that training is also part of the budget of Ministry of Defence. I have seen some of my colleagues here in the House opening functions in Busia, Eastern Uganda, in UPDF uniform. So, I am wondering whether we respect that uniform to protect the people of Uganda.

Recently, Uganda wanted civility in its face thus having policemen as escorts for ministers. However, I see some people, like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who was not a soldier, moving with soldiers. He was flying in UPDF helicopters three or four times during the Christmas period to Kanungu and back. I think this is an abuse of UPDF equipment and uniforms, which is unacceptable. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.17
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not in any way usurping the powers of the chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities who left for burial, but this is an urgent matter that the committee felt could not wait.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that you cleared a parliamentary delegation to Malaysia led by hon. Anifa Kawooya, MP Sembabule District; hon. Kenneth Lubogo, MP Bulamogi, and I as a member of the delegation to look into issues of human trafficking. I thank you for the opportunity. We were well received by the Government of Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur from 3rd to 9th and we have the following brief to make.

During our visit, the delegation witnessed heartbreaking situations in Malaysia. Young Ugandan girls are being abused in all forms, some of which are unimaginable. Young girls are enslaved sexually. Prior to their departure to Malaysia, they are given adverts and they respond to job opportunities for further studies and other lucrative businesses yet in actual sense such adverts are cover-ups for human trafficking.

The delegation established that Malaysia does not have stringent immigration rules. There is no requirement for a visa for entry into the country. In this case, many Ugandans have found their way into this country only to find their intentions of travel to be the opposite.

The delegation was reliably informed that there is a racket of chief traffickers of persons, some of whom have collaborative hubs and business centres where they coordinate the trafficking of young girls from Uganda. The cities include Dubai, Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong, Bangkok and Huang Ju.

Shockingly, the delegation was further informed that highly placed personalities in Uganda are actively engaged in this demonic business. Some offices are even engaging their secretaries to do the recruitment. Further still, there are posters all over Kampala streets, and I believe elsewhere in the country, notifying the general public of available jobs and study opportunities in various overseas countries world over. This is believed to be a disguise with the intention of trafficking persons from Uganda.

The delegation was further informed that Malaysia is now host to an estimated 600 Ugandan young girls in their late teens and early 20s who are being used as sex slaves. Worse still, their travel documents are withheld by their so called bosses who demand for daily remittances from these young girls. During the night, these young girls trade their bodies to pay their masters and during the day, they are left to fend for their upkeep.

The purpose of this brief therefore is to put Government of Uganda and the general public on alert, that there is an impending recruitment of young girls under the guise of getting them lucrative jobs or study opportunities in universities in Asian countries and the Far West in the Americas. Over 3,000 young girls are reported to be ready to leave the country in the next one month. That is why we urgently said we should present this so that we put the country on alert and then we are not taken unaware. 

The parliamentary delegation to Malaysia shall present a detailed report on the findings to this House under rule 30. This was just a brief to alert Government of Uganda and the general public. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to task the Government of Uganda on what measures are in place to ensure that its citizens are safe and well protected from such evil business practices. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude in a minute. 

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have the Trafficking in Persons Act which we passed less than two years ago. What is Government’s initiative to address such an activity? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me have the final one from hon. Mpuuga. Just your subject and prayers; do not read the petition.

3.23
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a petition from the traders of Masaka Municipality, seeking for Parliament’s intervention to review the Trade Licence Act Cap. 101 of 1969 and in alternative, without prejudice to that first prayer, review or cause the review of the Trade Licence (Amendment) Schedule, 2011 and probe into the propriety and/or the legality of the trade licence fees levied by Masaka Municipal Council and Masaka local administrative units prior to the enactment of the said instruments.

Madam Speaker, the subject matter of this petition is “The general structure of the trade licence”, which the business community finds quite repressive and retrogressive. These are their three humble prayers:

(1) 	Review of the Trade Licence Act Cap 101 of 1969 and in alternative, without prejudice to that first prayer, review or cause the review of the Trade Licence (Amendment) Schedule, Instrument No. 1&2 of 2011, plus the newly released rates as published in the Uganda Gazette.

(2) 	Probe into the propriety or legality of the trade licence fees levied by Masaka Municipal Council and Masaka local administrative units prior to the enactment of the said instruments.

(3) 	Deal with any matters related to the entire trade licence regime.

My personal prayer is that this matter be handled expeditiously because the whole gist of trade licence fees is to aid local administrative units to have revenue for use. However, as we speak now, they are unable to collect any revenues because the traders have objected to the rates. The earlier this is looked into and Parliament comes up with a position, the better. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, that petition will be sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for study and report back. 

I will also take this opportunity to adjust the Order Paper to enable the Minister for Internal Affairs to make a statement on the murder of AIP Ariong John Michael. In the meantime, we have in the public gallery members of the district council of Moyo; they have come to witness the presentation of their petition. You are welcome. (Applause) We have students and lecturers of Kyambogo University and we also have students from Uganda Martyrs University. You are welcome. (Applause) The final submission will come from the Leader of the Opposition. 

Just for the Prime Minister, the issues that have been raised are the famous road of Bukwo, the issue of Uganda Investment Authority, the Moyo-Sudan border issue - the Minister of Water will answer on the question of the forests - UPDF in Somalia and trafficking of women. Those are the issues that you will have to address after.

3.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 23(3) of our Constitution says, “A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be informed immediately, in a language that the person understands, of the reasons for the arrest, restriction or detention and of his or her right to a lawyer of his or her choice.”

Whether such a person is a criminal or not, he is entitled to a lawyer. A case in point, which we want the Police to explain – (Interjections) – Do not worry; listen.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the case I am trying to bring up – (Interjections) - It is good to listen; tomorrow you might be a victim. Yesterday, the Lord Mayor of Kampala was arrested by the Police alongside Dr Kizza Besigye and Madam Ingrid, among others, including the Mayor of Kawempe and hon. Naggayi. When they were arrested and detained at the police station for six hours, they were not allowed to have access to their lawyers. It took six hours, and even Members of Parliament who went there were not allowed to see them. 

Since we have the Minister for Internal Affairs here, I would like to ask, under what law were these people not allowed to have lawyers, yet the Constitution is very clear about legal representation? They were told to make statements without their lawyers. It is wrong when you have them - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I wish I was given a chance to finish. You will be given time to talk-(Interjections) - We were not allowed to see them -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order that relates to the manner of debate. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear that when a member is submitting on the Floor of the House, the other members have to listen in silence -(Interjections)- and I can still hear others shouting so loud -(Laughter)- as if when the frog is shouting in the river it can stop the cow from drinking water. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Hanifa Kawooya and hon. Ogwang to continue heckling and making noise in Parliament when I am even talking? (Laughter) Are they in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know some of these matters are emotive but please control your tempers. Please conclude so that we can have answers from the ministers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I want you to understand that the death of the policeman, Ariong, is highly regretted and the people -(Interjections)- Please give me a chance. The person who was involved should be brought to book. Nobody is condoning that. He should be brought to book because there are many deaths which have taken place, which is really terrible for us. In fact, our deep condolences to the family of my amuran, Ariong.

Having said that, I want members to understand our history. The reason why we went to the bush -(Laughter)- was to bring the rule of law, good governance and constitutionalism. That is why we went to the bush. If you were not there, I am sorry. I am very sure the Prime Minister knows we were all there as much as he was eating sausages. Dr Kiiza was there. It is very bad that the same Constitution we made is the one we are not respecting. That is why we are saying, please let us not go back to the black days. We need a better Uganda for all of us. It is not necessary for you to make noise because you are not affected but tomorrow you could be affected. 

I would like the minister in charge of the Police, that is, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to explain why they would not allow the Lord Mayor and Dr Kiiza Besigye, among others, to have lawyers of their choice for over six hours and why they blocked entry for Members of Parliament and lawyers. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will request the chair of the Committee on Natural Resources to report to us on how far they have gone with the petition from Kanungu, and the chair of social services to report on the Makerere issue because we had given them one week. Now let us have the Prime Minister on the issues that were raised - the roads and UIA. Minister for Works, where is our road to Bukwo?

3.37
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That road will be worked on. My ministry has got plans for it. We have the immediate ones where I am going to do some work by force account. By June, I intend to have procured a contractor to do some -(Inaudible)- but eventually in the long-run, which may not even be very long, that road will be tarmacked. I have been assuring my sister, hon. Tete, that she should confirm to the people in that area that Government is totally determined and will tarmac that road. 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaijja): Madam Speaker, the question of Uganda Investment Authority is so crucial to the industrialisation of this country because this is a national interest which affects all of us. My prayer to this House is that my colleague who is responsible for this sub-sector is not here, but I take full note. I will move him to come back here to Parliament and give a comprehensive statement on how far we have gone and where we are heading as far as Uganda Investment Authority is concerned and the development of the Namanve Industrial Park. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have clearly heard the issue raised by hon. Reagan Okumu. In fact, I received a letter from hon. Nandala-Mafabi which did not only raise the particular question that hon. Reagan Okumu has raised but five others. This morning, I signed a letter in response to hon. Nandala-Mafabi but since hon. Reagan Okumu has raised it orally here, I will address that particular part and promise to return to the House with documents to back up what I will say.

First, all the money that Government receives in respect to our soldiers in peacekeeping, in this particular case AMISOM, is received and brought to Parliament for appropriation before payment out. That funding is governed by a memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and the African Union. This is also true of other countries which are involved in peacekeeping.

Different countries have some differences in the way they handle these allowances. In some cases, where the soldiers are very well paid, actually the government takes the money into the Treasury and the soldiers just earn their normal salary. In the case of Uganda, the agreement we have does state that Government of Uganda will receive the following payment: 
1.	For each solider, the Government of Uganda will receive US$ 1,028.
2.	For a soldier who dies in service, in action in the peacekeeping mission, Government of Uganda is paid in compensation to that soldier, US$ 50,000
3.	In the case of injury, once the degree of injury is determined, the affected soldier is paid a fraction of US$ 50,000 depending on the gravity of the injury.

Now in regard to the US$ 1028, when Parliament authorised the Commander-in-Chief, the President, to deploy the troops into this mission, it was made clear that there should be no net outflow from the government budget into the operations of AMISOM. By that, we meant that administrative costs related to this mission have to be met from payment from AMISOM. So, in our agreement between Uganda and AU, out of the US$ 1028 the soldier receives US$ 800, as hon. Reagan Okumu said, and then the US$ 200- This is also in the agreement. It is not like a side issue. I will bring the agreement here and lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker, when I next have an opportunity. 

So, the US$ 200 is accounted for. It is used mainly for administrative costs related to the mission. We have situations where commanders have to visit troops in Somalia; we have situations when a soldier dies in Mogadishu – and this is part of the question that hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised - the AU pays no shilling at all. The burial expenses are fully met by the Government of Uganda, and it is part of the US$ 200 that is used for this expense. 

In summary, in respect to that particular question, I confirm that we received – (Mr Reagan Okumu rose_) -If I can just summarise, hon. Reagan Okumu; if you could be patient. I confirm that we receive US$ 1,028 for each soldier in the mission other than the US$ 50,000 or a fraction of it in case of death or injury. Out of the US$ 1,028, by agreement between us and AU US$ 200 is retained by the Government of Uganda to meet administrative expenses related to the mission. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall debate when you bring the full statement because now you are only responding to an issue he raised. Maybe what you have not answered is on the uniform.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, just to help him come up with a good report to Parliament so that we do not throw him back; first of all, what he has given us is payment for individual soldiers, that is, the US$ 1,028 per month. The agreement he is talking about is their agreement of operations and other activities in Somalia.

I want to assure you. We also want to know how much you get from the wear and tear of equipment because AU pays for that. All the tanks you have taken, the guns and all these kinds of things, AU pays for that. We also have documents to that effect. So, if you are paid for wear and tear and other things, why must you go for the US$ 200? Burundi is not doing so. Burundi is paying their soldiers; why Uganda? This is a big concern. Wear and tear is covered by UPDF. 

I want to say that we raised this in good faith as Members of Parliament because we have brothers, friends and other relatives there. Really, the troops in Somalia are ours, so we know the details of what is taking place. What you have answered is very simple. That is like my allowance you pay me, Madam Speaker, as Parliament of Uganda. You cannot sit down and do anything with my personal allowance.

THE SPEAKER: Well, members, he had talked about an agreement which I have not read. I will not adjudicate on matters I have not read. Let us wait for the minister to bring the statement and we debate from a point of knowledge. Other members do not know. We ask the minister that when we return from recess, he brings the statement and all those agreements because I do not know about them. We are returning on the 10th of April.

3.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, obviously the matter raised by hon. Ibi Florence is a very serious one. Government obviously takes this matter very seriously, and I can only undertake now that we will wait for that report and study it. In the meantime, we will start direct investigations on the matter. The ministries concerned will be asked to study the measures that can be immediately taken, even before the investigations have been completed, on the basis of what the team reports to stop the trafficking of girls to Malaysia. 

We will immediately contact the friendly Government of Malaysia to also carry out investigations so that we can fully confront this problem and bring it to an end, if it is indeed happening as they found out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Moyo-Sudan border issue.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I can see hon. Otto speaking–(Interjections) - I have this to say about the border situation in Moyo between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan. I would like to inform this House, in case we had not done so formally, that indeed there is an issue about the boundary. The Heads of State of the two republics have met over it and they have agreed that we set up a team of experts to go and mark the border. So, we are in the process of setting teams of experts chosen by the two sides to do that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that concludes the private members’ business. Let us go to item 3.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure-

THE SPEAKER: Wait; let us hear about the forests.

3.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the issues raised by hon. Baryomunsi with regard to the ban that was imposed on the timber business transactions in this country on the 6th of this month. The committee was tasked to look into this issue and it was given one week effective Friday last week. That means we were supposed to report back to the House on Tuesday next week, but I am meant to understand we are going on recess. So, that means we are caught up and we cannot present the report within the time we were given because even the recess is eating into that time. 

Nevertheless, given the urgency of the case, we invited the Minister of Water and Environment yesterday. As a committee, we wanted to understand the genesis of the public notice which she gave banning timber transactions. The business people across the country were given two weeks to complete everything with regard to verification of their businesses by producing licences and permits. When we considered this as a committee, we thought it was not feasible. 

We also realised in the course of our interface with the minister that there are so many issues which need to be addressed. Regulations, which could have helped the minister, seem not to be in place. The committee supports the minister in regularising and making sure the sector is effectively managed. However, this must be premised on the law and regulations, which regulations are not in place. Also, the timeframe which the business people were given is too short. 

Therefore, our recommendations in the interim are that the minister stays her ban until we sort out the issues of regulations, so that she can effectively manage timber transactions in this country. Most of the people involved in this business have valid licences. Our fear is that even the public notice which was given by the minister could create problems for us or for the government. We have run into problems of compensation as you know. Our fear is that, was this done in accordance with the Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003? We thought there were some doubts. 

In so doing, therefore, Madam Speaker, as a chair I wrote to you requesting for more time to look into this problem, especially after the recess, so that we can have a report presented to the House. This will help the minister address issues in the management of forest resources in this country.

The recommendation is that she stays the action of the ban which was slapped on the business until we provide the report to the House when we come back from the recess. We are committed to ensuring that we support the minister in managing this sector effectively and efficiently. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I will respond to your letter. Let us go to the other issues. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

3.56
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, on several sites in Uganda, accidents have been taking place and unfortunately, some people have lost their lives. The Government of Uganda could not sit idly and do nothing. For that reason, I wish to move that the Building Control Bill, 2012 be read for the first time. I have a certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded. The Bill is committed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutiny and report back. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure under rule 31 which states, “Ministers shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked of them.” Hon. Reagan Okumu raised two questions; one was answered and the other one was not answered. The questions not answered were: One, why is the Prime Minister using the Army to guard him and the Police? Two, why, on several occasions, has he been putting on Army uniform yet he is a civilian like me? Thirdly, why was he using the Army helicopter to move around the country during the Christmas period? 

I thought these are very serious issues to rise on a procedural point. We feel it is prudent that the Minister of Defence gives a comprehensive response to this issue. I do not think we can just gloss over it and ignore it. I think these are serious issues. I seek your procedural indulgence to allow the Minister of Defence give a substantive response on the conduct of the Prime Minister.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government has a way it handles the security of its officials. Depending on the perceived threat against a government official, the government decides how to protect that particular officer. 

In respect to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the decision of security is that he needs enhanced security and should be handled by both the Army and the Police. That is the reason the Rt. hon. Prime Minister –(Interjections)- has that security. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time we are having a Prime Minister in this country. Even under this regime, Prof. Robin Apolo Nsibambi was being protected by Police - (Interjections)- so was the late Cosmas Adyebo. The Speaker of Parliament, number three in this country, is being protected by the Police and so is the Chief Justice. 

This Parliament appropriates money for the Police to buy various equipment and attain different trainings. Is the hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, who is a very decent person heading the defence in this country, in order to insinuate that the only person who is very important and must be guarded by soldiers is hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi and not the previous Prime Ministers we have had before, not even the Speaker of Parliament, not even the Chief Justice? 

THE SPEAKER: You know, you are asking me to make a ruling on issues where I do not work. Let the minister answer. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I said is that government assesses threats against its various officials and it decides how to secure them – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kiyonga, who I hold in very high regard. The functions of the UPDF are spelt out in Article 209 of our Constitution. With your permission, I beg to read:

“The functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are -
a)	to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda;
b)	to cooperate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters;
c)	to foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians; and
d)	to engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, the functions of UPDF are elaborate in this Constitution. The nearest that it goes to in terms of security is in (a) - preserving and defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity. Is my brother, hon. Kiyonga, Minister for Defence, in order to state before this august House that Government has extended the functions of the UPDF without amending the Constitution or amending the Constitution by infection in action? 

THE SPEAKER: I told you earlier that you are asking me to rule over issues which I do not work in. Let him explain how he has moved away from the Constitution. 

DR KIYONGA: The difference between me and hon. Segona or between hon. Segona and the government is interpretation of the roles of UPDF that he has read. In our view, we think that the decision to protect, not only the Rt hon. Prime Minister – there are other government officials protected by UPDF – is in line with the Constitution.

Now, in regard to usage of the UPDF helicopters –(Interjections)- I will respond to that –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I want to thank hon. Kiyonga and I appreciate the work that the Army does for this country. I also want to believe him that Government assesses the level of threat particularly to the person and life of our dear Prime Minister. The clarification I am seeking is whether you did the same assessment for the Rt hon. Apolo Nsibambi when he nearly died in that police helicopter which was not in a good condition. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, on that particular occasion, when the Rt hon. Apolo Nsibambi had that accident in a helicopter, this was really an accident as the honourable member has put it. There had been several occasions when Rt hon. Nsibambi flew in military helicopters going on duty. 

If I may now come to the other two questions; one is about the usage of military helicopters. True, ordinarily, they are used by the military but there are situations, depending on demand and assessment of need, when the usage of the helicopter has been extended not only to ministers but sometimes to honourable colleagues in this House in order to ensure that Government work or individuals are assisted. 

We have had situations when we have airlifted people from different parts of the country with a government helicopter to take them from Arua, from Kasese, from Pader and from Gulu in order to bring them for treatment –(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to give information to this House that the UPDF helicopter has been very helpful. In the North, on two occasions, hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa flew the Leader of the Opposition in the army helicopter to Kalong Hospital.

Secondly, the UPDF one time flew students from Kitgum to Gulu and from Gulu back to Kitgum after the flooding of River Aswa. So I would like to thank the UPDF for its corporate social responsibility. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Not him; I think it was the other Leader of Opposition when he had an accident –(Interjections)– Honourable members, when hon. Latigo had an accident in Gulu, I actually discussed with the Army Commander and I asked him to airlift him to the hospital. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I am surprised today by the choice of examples of people who use the army helicopter. If you remember, during the Bududa landslides –(Interjections – Yes, it is a security situation. Why didn’t you raise it then? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go back to the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I wish to make the following statement in respect to the tragic events that took place yesterday.

On Wednesday 21st March, 2012, at about 10.00 o’clock, a copy of a letter allegedly addressed to the Inspector General of Police by the Lord Mayor, Erias Lukwago, was hand-delivered to the office of the Commander, Kampala Metropolitan Police, Assistant Inspector General of Police, Andrew Kaweesi, who was at that moment not in office.  The letter was dated 19th March, 2012. I would like to lay a copy of the letter on the Table and it is dated 19th March, 2012.

Upon receipt of the letter, the office alerted the Commander Kampala Metropolitan, and informed him of the subject matter. The Lord Mayor had written to the Inspector General of Police informing him of an intended inspection tour of roads and drainage system in the city on 21st March, 2012.

Upon receipt of this information, the Commander Kampala Metropolitan rang the Lord Mayor seeking more information about the intended inspection tour.  The Commander wanted to know who would be involved in the inspection tour, and the route that would be taken by the tour team.  At the same time, the Commander Kampala Metropolitan instructed the DPCs of CPS and Old Kampala to carry out an assessment of the situation.  The two officers immediately went down to Kafumbe Mukasa Road where they found the Lord Mayor in the company of Dr Kiiza Besigye, Ingrid Turinawe, hon. Nabbila and others in a procession heading towards the Central Business District.  The crowd at that moment was estimated to be about 2,000 and was continuing to grow.  

The two officers engaged the Lord Mayor and his team and advised them not to proceed to the Central Business District.  They agreed to move as far as the Mini Price junction.  

On reaching that point, the Lord Mayor and his group decided, contrary to the earlier agreement, not to proceed towards the Central Business District.  Rt Hon. Speaker, let us be very clear on this one; the Lord Mayor was actually dishonest. He misled the Police –(Interjections)- I am elaborating on this issue and I am entitled to it. He misled the Police to undertake a tour to inspect roads and drainages in keeping with his office and yet he was actually being a Red Herring. He invited other Opposition figures to join him and ensured that their supporters were also there. This was really misleading.

The Police, for security reasons, strongly advised against moving to the Central Business District.  The reasons were based on the potential danger of such a huge crowd moving to the Central Business District which would definitely disrupt traffic, business activities and lead to public disorder.  The Lord Mayor and his team then decided to abandon the procession.  The Police offered to call the Lord Mayor’s vehicles and they got into their vehicles and pretended to disperse.  

However, at that moment, some of their supporters in the crowd and some who were on top of the surrounding buildings were hurling stones and rocks at the security forces. Some of these rocks hit AIP Ariong John Michael, who was seated at the back of the Police pick-up that was being used to maintain law and order.  

AIP Ariong was put in another Police vehicle and rushed to Mulago Hospital and was pronounced dead on arrival.  May I request that this House observes a minute of silence in honour of this Police Officer? 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

During the same incident, there were other Policemen who were injured. A Police vehicle and a private Ipsum car were also damaged.

Contrary to their stated pretence to abandon the procession, the Lord Mayor and his group turned round and drove into the Central Business District, being accompanied by a huge group of boda boda riders.  They were intercepted and arrested along Kampala Road opposite Bank of Uganda on their way to Nakasero Market.  Upon arrest, they were taken to various Police stations to assist with Police investigations.

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, this sad incident is a culmination of a series of similar incidents where the same political leaders and their supporters have defied lawful orders issued by the Police.  Like in this incident, their actions have always led to confrontation with the police. The Police have always tried to maintain law and order, avoid disruption of public order and loss of property, et cetera.  

Honourable members, you will recall that on 21st February, 2012 at Katwe, one motor vehicle was damaged and four policemen injured.  On 29th February, 2012 at Namasuba, four policemen were injured and two motor vehicles were damaged.  On 9th March, 2012 at Kajjansi, 20 policemen were injured and two Police vehicles were damaged.  The 21st March, 2012 incident is not an isolated incident, but a continuation of a pattern by the same political players.

Investigations into this incident are continuing and all those found to be responsible will be dealt with in accordance with the law. (Applause) The organisers of this protest should be held personally responsible –(Interjections)- for the death of AIP Ariong. 

The honourable Leader of the Opposition asked a question a while ago, whether Dr Kiiza Besigye and those others arrested had no right to their lawyers. I believe that they have that right and I know Dr Kiiza Besigye and others who have been arrested have always had access to their lawyers. I do not know what happened yesterday. But may I also ask the question; may I ask Dr Besigye, Lord Mayor
Lukwago and others, whether they condemned those who robbed Assistant Inspector Ariong of his eight children, their father and his wife and widow? Will they cooperate with the Police investigation to identify, arrest and prosecute those who were directly responsible for this murder? May I also pose this question: Madam Speaker and Members, in view of the fact that Ariong was murdered in the line of duty, may we propose that Assistant Inspector of Police, Ariong, be honoured by allowing his body to be brought to this Parliament for honourable members to pay their tribute to this slain officer? I beg to move. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement is made under Rule 40. No debate may ensue, except elucidatory questions, but I will allow hon. Amuriat two minutes. 

4.23
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I wish to thank the Minister Of Internal Affairs for bringing this report to the House. There are just two issues that I would like to contribute to. One, I would like to observe that the said AIP Ariong is a homeboy and we, the people of Kumi, have a big sense of loss on the death of a young officer of Uganda whose career was still growing. I would like, however, to ask a question in regard to his death. I know that the Police are well facilitated, but Ariong found himself, an officer of the Police, on the back of a pickup. It is also evident from the statement of the minister that he was pelted with a stone, which landed on his head. I do not know whether the minister would like to say to this Parliament that the late Ariong did not have a helmet despite –(Interjections)- well, this, Madam Speaker, goes for not only Ariong, but all the Police officers in the line of duty. 

I am appealing for the understanding of this House to take what happened to Ariong from Kumi. Tomorrow, it will happen to another person from Bundibugyo. I would not, of all people, wish Ariong dead. How I wish he had been protected so that we would avoid such unnecessary deaths. 

Lastly, what crosses my mind when such a death happens is the widow, the children, and the father as has been demonstrated by the minister. Mr Ariong died in the line of duty and this is very sad. We would like to see positive action. I know it is a good thing to bring his body to this Parliament for us to pay tribute to him if we agree, but beyond just bringing his body here, we would like assurance as the people of Kumi that something beyond the ordinary should be done to the family that the deceased has left. Obviously, I strongly condemn the actions –(Interjections)- just hold on; the submission is mine, my dear friends – to condemn the actions of those who caused death to Ariong and the person who threw a stone at the head of Ariong fatally injuring him and causing death. I would like to encourage Government to pursue investigations intended to bring to book this particular individual who caused the murder. Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

4.27
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja County East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement and I send my condolences to the family and the people of the Republic of Uganda. I rise to support the statement of the minister to a certain extent. Yesterday, I had the benefit of reaching the Police station. I found Police officers, who had no rank, holding pistols and actually, I could not identify who was who in that operation. Actually, you would realise that a junior officer would chase away a Police officer. When you look at this statement of the minister, he has actually talked about people who are beaten, but I was at the Police station and there were people who were beaten up by the Police while at the Police station in the cells. They were bleeding –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, protect me. In this House, we are here to use ideas to contribute. You may be there heckling, but I will give my opinion. 

What I discovered yesterday was that there is a lot of dishonesty in the way we transact business. We are all touched that someone died, but when the minister comes up with a statement of this nature, I expect him as well to include the people who were beaten to hospital level, who are in Police custody. I had the benefit to be among the MPs who were at the Police station talking to Kawesa, the Kampala Metropolitan Police Commander, because there was cooperation. 

When you talk about the death of our brother Ariong, I think this is a matter where we also need a postmortem report because we are in a situation where we are saying that a stone came from above. We actually need to ascertain the actual cause of death so that we stand and say, “So and so threw a stone and it hit so and so.” So, I implore the minister that as I rise to support the statement to a certain extent, we need a postmortem report because we cannot use a motion to solve this situation. We need to get to the root-cause of the death. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.29
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister and the Police of the Republic of Uganda for the work they are doing. Something that strikes me in the statement is, and I would like to read verbatim “Honourable members, you will recall that on 21st February at Katwe, one motor vehicle was damaged and four policemen injured. On 29 February 2012 at Namasuba, four policemen were injured and two motor vehicles were damaged. On 9 March 2012 at Kajjansi, 20 policemen were injured and two Police vehicles damaged. The 21st March incident is not an isolated incident and is a continuation of a pattern by the same political players.” Madam Speaker, we, as leaders in this country, is this the pattern that we want to support? Is this the future that we so desire? I urge honourable colleagues on both sides of this House; we are leaders and when we lead our people to behave in a certain fashion, they go ahead and behave in that way. This is group psychology. If we do not lead responsibly, we are going to descend into anarchy. 

Yesterday, two things happened. One is that the Police smelt blood; one of their colleagues had died and what hon. Mwiru is saying could be a possibility because if I am working and one of my colleagues dies, I am going to be animated. It is natural. What has also happened is that the public has realised that a Policeman can be killed and that horror of invincibility is starting to disappear. What does that mean? It means that in security circles, you can only maintain civil law and order when there is a sense of fear. With the waning of that sense, we are descending into anarchy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge colleagues – and all of us are leaders in our respective capacities - that we must live in the right direction. I think the Police needs to come out with innovations on how to handle this new trend of affairs. They need to.

I would like to seek clarification from you, Madam Speaker – I disagree with the proposal of the honourable minister. When the name reverberated on radio in my car, I felt a sense of personal loss; we had lost somebody from Eastern Uganda who has done 26 years of distinguished service. From my childhood, I have known that the Police - Special Branch of Police is mainly manned by the Iteso. I would like to think that this man must have served diligently to date. But leaving behind eight children and a widow – yes, I know that our Rules of Procedure would not allow this body to be brought here and I would like to support the rules. This is because we have lost so many soldiers in the line of duty, but their bodies have never been brought here. There are also several other policemen who have also died while on duty but without their bodies being brought here. The other time a child was shot by a stray bullet in Kalerwe, but that body was not brought to the House. It is not possible that we can bring all those who die in the line of their duty here.

In the circumstances, I would like to move that this House agrees to a suggestion that Shs 50,000 is deducted from each Member’s account to go as contribution to the family of the late officer. I beg to move.

4.35
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I first of all would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for presenting a report on what happened. However, I would like to say that I have been observing the trends. And I want to say that it is true the Constitution empowers us to associate and enjoy the freedom of the right to assemble. But from what I am observing, as we get to enjoy these rights, we are not allowing the Police to lead us by providing the safety that we need. 

Some Members ask to hold an assembly, but when they cannot control their Members. I want to say that this should be totally discouraged. If you cannot control the people you are going to mobilise then you need the support of the Police. If you cannot and such an incident happens, such leaders should always be held responsible.

However, I have noticed that the way our policemen operate – these policemen were brought to Kampala from the different parts of the country towards the election period without any accommodation arrangements being put in place. They now sleep in tents. They are not getting any extra allowances and they have no protection gear.

As a person trained in First-Aid, I know that as you go to administer First-Aid, you have to ensure you are safe and you are protected. But here are policemen going to quell riots with only few of them wearing protective gear, which puts their lives in danger.

In the circumstances, I would like to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs that before you deploy our brothers and sisters, please, give them the protective wear they need. The late officer left eight children and you know the salary of a policeman; it is very little money. We have been talking about salaries of teachers, but you realise that the policemen are totally underpaid yet they work 24 hours a day. 

The minister has proposed that the body of the late officer be laid in State, but I want to say that it would be fair if the minister commits himself about having his salary being paid to his family until further notice. Madam Speaker, I know this may be a little hard, but I believe that this officer died before having lunch. I am saying this because I have always seen them – I beg to move that before we move to deploy our security forces, we should ensure they have the maximum protection they need because they also need life just like other members of the society. Thank you very much.

4.39
MR JOSHUA ANYWARA (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My point is connected to what hon. Tanna said. Firstly, I would like to say that as much as we have done very well to professionalise the Army, we have worsened the situation by militarising the Police.

Because of that, there is a lot of agitation in the minds of the people. Actually, the public has now lost some of its trust in the Police. This is just an example of what the people are capable of doing because of the agitation in them. Recently, I was at Paidha Town Council, which is hon. Omwona’s constituency in Zombo District, and I saw with my open eyes, boda-boda riders line up to block the Police from arresting their colleague alleged to be a thief. They kept on warning the policemen that they are always arresting and releasing thieves and so, that was not their turn.

I would like to think that the Police cannot work in isolation of the public. And I have always seen a write-up that says, “Help the Police to help you.” The leadership of the Police should work on re-harmonising the Force’s relationship with the civilians. Even women are now fearing to get married to policemen yet before we have seen policemen marry local girls in Nebbi there with the people being very happy. But these days, things are changing.

Two, I would like to say that the Police leadership should also be responsible for the death of AIP Aryong. Why? There is a case in Labour Law that says that it is incumbent upon you, as the employer, to provide not only the working gadgets, but also ensure that those gadgets have been worn by the employees. So, I think they must explain the circumstances under which such a senior officer got deployed without a helmet. I was there when he was being stoned. Actually, I was having lunch around Arua Park –(Interjections)- Yes.

The last one is that I support –(Interruption)

LT COL (Rtd) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I want to inform the Member that when you are on security duty, there are situations that require you to go for full blast engagement and those that are just normal. What I am saying is that the letter inviting the Police was about a tour not about a riot.

Madam Speaker, you can see that up to now, people still do not believe that the situation was riotous. In this House, we do not have policemen to speak for themselves. So, we should be here to speak for them. The Police were invited to protect people doing a tour, but that tour turned out to be riotous. So, you actually blame the people who lied to the Police. (Applause) I think we are basing ourselves not on assumptions but on the report. (Member timed out.)

4.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I would like to record our deep sadness at the death of AIP John Michael Ariong and convey our condolences to the people of Kumi, to his family and the greater family of the people of Uganda. 

In the same vein, I would like us, as a House, to record our condolences for the following people: Gift Namaganda, the baby in Masaka; Augustine Guwatudde, in Namasuba; James Mukibi of Bwaise; Dan Musa Wasanga, Gulu; Anthony Mugisu, Gulu; Charles Odur, Gulu; Julian Nalwanga, Masaka; Semugga Kanabi, Nakivubo; Sam Mufumbiro, Owino; Frank Kizito, Masajja in Rubaga and Wilber Mugalazi of Bweyogerere. 

Madam Speaker, that is what happens when violence takes place. It does not choose the Iteso; it does not choose the activists; it does not choose the Police. The trouble here is that we have a wrong prescription for a different issue. 

In the 1870s, it was recorded in history; a man called Bismarck said that the questions of Europe of the day would be solved by iron and blood; and after that you know that world wars happened. Thousands and thousands of innocent people died. Political questions in Uganda will never be answered by tear gas and bullets. It is about time that Government changes strategy and addresses political questions with political answers and leave bullets for issues that require bullets. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk now, I want to put on record –(Interruption)-
      
MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Alaso to make such statements when the Constitution is very clear in Article 1(4) that, “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed through regular free and fair elections”, and yet she is very much aware that this government, whoever is in place, was fairly elected and people were free and happy with it. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, although all of us have got sides that we support on this issue, I think the important thing is one. We had an election in this country. It was won. It was not contested. So, for anyone to really attempt to contest it afterwards by expressing disorder is wrong. (Applause) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance, but I do not recall talking about elections or the Presidency. So, I am actually at a loss. I respect the ruling of the Chair because it is important, but I am not sure that I heard myself even talk about elections. 

As we talk now, in the Intensive Care Unit of Mulago lies a man called Kakande; badly beaten by the Police, with blood oozing out of his private parts. We need to condemn that; condemn those deaths that I have listed; condemn the death of Ariong as well and condemn the death of every Ugandan –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to condemn this act under which this Police officer was killed. 

The late Ariong was my classmate in Lango College in S.5. We shared one decker. The late Ariong was a very poor guy, a needy boy like me, at that time, although now I have a few coins. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, this is the reason the late Ariong dropped out of school because he could not afford to continue with studies and ended up joining Police to try to make ends meet. Unfortunately, while on official duty trying to maintain law and order in this country, he was murdered in cold blood. I condemn this act in the highest degree. 

Why can’t politicians in Uganda act responsibly? We have been elected by thousands of people. Why do we hold rallies in the heart of town? This is the reason revenue collection in Uganda is declining because Kampala is always on strikes and yet we want salary. Why don’t we take these rallies outside Kampala so that business is carried out? (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order Members!

MR OROMAIT: Please, keep quiet, I am talking. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

4.50
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One day, the American, Martin Luther King Junior, said, “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” We do not have sufficient words to express our sadness at what happened yesterday. Not only because we lost a gallant Police officer, but we lost our own brother and, therefore, our deepest condolences. 

It appears the House is not divided in condemning death. We, therefore, feel very strongly for the family of the late AIP Oromait. (Interjections) I beg your pardon, but I meant Ariong.

MR OROMAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Sseggona to refer to the late Ariong as Oromait when Oromait is still alive and kicking? Does he want to cause problems in Usuk, Katakwi that Oromait has died? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Oromait was a classmate of the late Ariong but Oromait is very much alive and representing Usuk. (Laughter)  

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my sincere apology. It was not intended to pronounce him dead. I meant the gallant Police officer and by an extension, he is not a Police officer. 

I had the opportunity of visiting CPS yesterday. This is a matter where all of us must forget about emotions that we may have. Death occurred terribly yesterday and robbed us of our own son. The feeling we have is that this is a regrettable incident. I agree with the minister that whoever caused this death should be investigated and brought to book. 

Secondly, there have been some factual misrepresentations in the minister’s statement - and with great respect to my honourable colleague. What happened yesterday was that there was no riot. I got this from the commandant; I got this from the DPC, Mr Ruhweza, who was at the scene.  All the parties agreed that the inspection of the roads had ended at Mini Price and the next question was the exit route.
  
There were two routes; one, Kampala Road and the second; Old Taxi Park. They all agreed that both of them were not viable. So, the Police accepted to help these people get their vehicles which had been blocked. At the time they were waiting - actually, if you followed the footage on TV, DPC Ruhweza and the Lord Mayor were standing together when this scuffle ensued. So, someone outside the leadership of the Police and the political leadership at the scene shouted, “Tear gas,” and that is when it all started. So, nobody amongst the leadership started this war.

But again, I was talking to some colleagues this morning and I think this question goes beyond what we are seeing today and what we saw yesterday. Over a period of time, we have seen anger amongst our children and amongst people that we lead and represent, growing against the Police, which is very dangerous.  (Member timed out.)

4.55
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late Ariong, the Uganda Police and the Government of Uganda. I would like to thank the minister for this wonderful statement and raise my support by throwing more light on this statement. On 9th March, 2012 at Kajjansi, 20 policemen were injured and two Police vehicles damaged. The incident of the 21st March is not an isolated one. It is a continuation of a pattern by the same political players.
 
Why do I say this, Madam Speaker? Why do I want to support this position? Just last month, when the Leader of the Opposition brought the issue of one of our colleagues, the Woman MP for Kampala being seriously injured by the Police and  admitted in hospital, on this very Floor, I stood and said that I did watch what exactly transpired on TV. What I did not inform the House about was the statement made by the President of FDC, Dr Kiiza Besigye, calling upon his supporters at the rally to drive into Police stations and take charge of them because of the way the policemen were behaving. (Interjections) Dr Besigye said this and called on his supporters. So, I am not surprised that that policeman has been killed today. (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very surprised and my heart is bleeding. Why do we trivialise a very serious matter? We are talking about a very senior officer in Police who is dead; we are talking about a procession whose subject was to tour the drainage of the city. What was the President of FDC doing in the procession?  (Applause) Was this indeed a procession to tour the drainage of Kampala? Let us not trivialise this issue because it has far reaching consequences and all of us should be here to inform this country as to what we need to do about this occurrence.
 
DR OMONA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is probably what contributes to the dishonesty of some of our leaders, especially when they cause such mayhem in our country. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I came across a copy of the letter written by the Lord Mayor of Kampala indicating that he wanted to tour the channels of Kampala. May I take this opportunity to read it verbatim to show that there was nowhere here, where other important personalities like the President of FDC were supposed to have featured; 

“19th March, 2012
The Inspector General of Police,
Kampala.

Dear Sir,

RE: INSPECTION OF ROADS AND DRAINAGE CHANNELS IN KAMPALA
I would like to inform you that I shall visit various parts of the City to inspect roads and drainage channels with a view of enhancing quality service delivery in the City.
 
The programme will kick off on Wednesday, 21 March, 2012 starting with the Central Business District.

By copy of this letter, all relevant authorities are hereby notified...” And indeed, there is nowhere here where other persons like the President of FDC were included. So, this was probably intended for other purposes other than touring the city as far as service delivery is concerned. Thank you.

MR ISIKO: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I am requesting this honourable House to be very considerate to the feelings of the family of the deceased and of this country, for the loss of a very senior Police officer. (Applause)   Let us not trivialise this issue; let us go down to the core of this very issue. What caused the death of the officer?  (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is now a matter of fact that is no longer in contention that human life has been lost. It is true that one of the fundamental rights of human kind is to have life. In this case, AIP John Michael Ariong is no longer with us, which is a matter of fact. But this transpired in my constituency and it is true that we condemn the act of violence that took place yesterday in this constituency. This is unacceptable and should be condemned by every human being that lives and trusts that we are here to build institutions. If we are here to build institutions, even Police is an institution.

I would think of a situation where Assistant Inspector of Police Ariong was met with a mob that was roughing up or handling hon. Nsereko or hon. Sseggona or the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Because he is someone meant to protect people from being assaulted, he himself is not protected by us the politicians. I think all of us politicians should be united against this. 

Honourable members, this issue of carrying out processions in the city is obsolete and out-dated and it should stop because it has not only caused loss of life for the Police officer, but also our ordinary people who have also been shot at by Police officers.

Therefore, I think, as a measure to express dissatisfaction, this should be taken to gazetted areas and we should all support this. I will not hesitate as area Member of Parliament to attend a rally that is organised by Dr Kiiza Besigye in Kololo; no problem, but a rally organised at Mini Price is definitely going to erupt into violence and I think we should all come out in unison. We do not say that freedom of expression should be undermined, but let us do it in the rightful areas.

As for the Lord Mayor, he should have the right to tour these areas and he should be given protection. I would also like to implore Government not to use funny means in carrying out prosecution with the aim of politically killing people. Also, since there is footage, let the perpetrators of this felony be brought to justice if they murdered the Police officer, because none of us condones murder –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nwoya and on my own behalf, we mourn with the nation the death of our comrade, Ariong.

As leaders, I have been in an area full of emotion for the last 20 years, and it is always very proper for leaders to detach themselves from emotions when providing guidance. This is a very trying moment and the narrations that were given earlier on by Members, should be taken seriously as a government and as a Parliament. Patterns of these events have been falling here since the 12th when our President was being sworn in and visiting heads of state were stoned by Ugandans mobilised by the same group. Police stations were burnt and attacked, and now we are here today speaking about the death of another Police officer.

I wonder whether our comrades in the Opposition would love us to treat them like that in the event that they become the leaders of this country.

Madam Speaker, Parliament under your stewardship is organising the IPU meeting. Our country has been known for a lot of bad history and I wonder, under your leadership, whether our colleagues who are in Parliament and Members of Parliament are going to receive our visitors in this kind of atmosphere -(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. We all visibly recall that the Rt Hon. Speaker, while we were debating the issue about Police mishandling one of our colleagues, hon. Nabilah, put it clear that all Members of Parliament are expected in Parliament when there is a sitting. Some of our colleagues, hon. Nabilah for that matter, has continued to find herself between clashes, thus defying your advice and not attending Parliament sittings for the sake of changing the government.

The Constitution is clear. Other colleagues of ours here are part and parcel of supporting such clashes. We need guidance, Madam Speaker, on how to deal with such Members of Parliament to save more lives. I thank you.

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I have two short points to make. I need to thank the Uganda Police for acting with restraint. Under normal circumstances with such an incident, the rules of engagement would have changed yesterday. I thank them for being a little diplomatic and restraining to this level. But, of course, this is not to say that they might be like that for the next rallies -(Member timed out.)

5.09
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would want to convey my condolences to the bereaved family and also request Government to take into consideration the widow and the orphans left behind, especially the children. Their school fees should be paid until they finish their studies. We must do this.

Some of the activities that are deliberately organised in this city to disorganise citizens are almost tempting me to support the Public Management Bill that I had second thoughts on. Imagine a Police officer who is standing the whole day with his hands up, not even eating and the salary he is getting in a month is Shs 150,000. As a citizen of this country, he has sacrificed to keep law and order to see that there is peace in this country, but still, we continue to organise useless and meaningless activities that lead to killings.

I am very disappointed that we have lost somebody who has been helping us. As a Member of Parliament, if there is a committee meeting in the morning, you are there for only two hours and then you come for the session. If you begin at 2.00 p.m., maybe, it will end at 7.00 p.m. but imagine how much we are paid. Really, you people as Members of Parliament, let us also consider these other people - (Member timed out.)

5.12
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a dark moment for the people of Teso. The late Michael Ariong is my immediate neighbour, who comes from Atutur in Kumi district. I am here to support the Minister’s report because he has categorically stated that the Police officers, after receiving the letters from the Lord Mayor, responded immediately to save the situation. But what happened? It is clearly shown that these people sent a letter while they were already moving to execute their mission. So, I join my colleagues who have condemned the people who caused Mr Ariong’s death, and those are the Opposition leaders. (Applause) I condemn their actions because one of our own has been killed. Those whom hon. Alaso was counting also perished because of the actions by the Opposition leaders. Why do I condemn your actions? I want to quote Article 22 of the Constitution on protection of right of life –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Forum for Democratic Change. Therefore, I am a leader on the Opposition side. We have seen our Police Force firing teargas at university students. Even recently at residents of Kamuli who were demonstrating because of the delay to pave their road. In all these cases, it has been violence initiated by people we pay to keep law and order, not the leaders of the Opposition or at least not me. The other day, someone was murdered at the gate of hon. Amama Mbabazi, who I know is not a member of the Opposition. Is hon. Ekuma, therefore, in order to attribute all the death and mayhem to all of us lumped together?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he was responding to what hon. Alaso said. He was thus saying all those incidents happened when there was a fracas between the Opposition and the Police. (Applause)

MR EKUMA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. (Member timed out.)

5.16
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will represent the MP for Kinkiizi West since I am from Kanungu. (Laughter) I rise to condemn the acts of violence that led to the death of the Police officer. He is a Ugandan, much as he is from Teso and Eastern region. All of us should condemn the acts of violence and whoever was involved in those acts.

As a country, we agreed to go into multiparty politics, but I want to urge Members, particularly leaders of this country, to create an environment for the multiparty democracy to flourish. In a multiparty dispensation, there is contestation for political power and indeed the Constitution defines how one ascends to power. But apparently, the Opposition has chosen to go for street battles to contest for political power. (Applause) And this is resulting in the violence that we see. You might have noticed by now that it is impossible to dislodge the NRM Government -(Applause)– be it through street battles, impeachment processes -(Applause)– and even through the ballot, because all of us here came here through the ballot.

So, the question I want to pose is this: Is there no way the Opposition in this country can engage the government side in a civilised manner? (Applause) And I would want the Leader of the Opposition to give me an answer; outside Parliament, can’t the parties engage in a civilised manner so that each side can make a point without making Ugandans die for nothing? (Member timed out.)

5.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the NRM and its Government, I wish to extend our sincere condolences to the wife and children for the loss of their husband and father. There are no other losses as great as the death of a parent. Therefore, we share with you the loss and you have our full sympathies.

Madam Speaker, as the minister said, investigations are ongoing. It is, therefore, not proper for me to comment. I will wait for the outcome of the investigations before I comment in detail. I will just say to you, honourable colleagues and fellow countrymen that the Government of Uganda is completely determined to ensure that no person who had any role in the slaying of this proud, brave servant and protector of our people will evade justice. (Applause) They will be dealt with to the full extent of the law. (Applause) Responsibility for this crime must also be shared by those who have encouraged public disorder -(Applause)- through their reckless behaviour, refusal to follow the law, and in inciting others to attack officers of the Police Force. As the minister said, let us speak frankly; it is clear that the Lord Mayor was dishonest. He misled the Police by claiming to undertake a tour in keeping with the duties of his office as a ruse to cause an unlawful assembly. He invited other Opposition leaders to join him in his walk and ensure that their supporters were present. Among those was Dr Kiiza Besigye, a man who, as hon. Anifa said a moment ago, was quoted just a short time ago, as encouraging his followers to seize the weapons -(Interjections)- I am sorry, Madam Speaker. As encouraging his followers to seize the weapons of Police officers in a bid to overthrow the democratically elected Government of Uganda - (Interjections)– colleagues in this House, fellow countrymen, it is long past the time when Opposition leaders should have begun to meet their obligations to engage in meaningful representative politics rather than engaging in the type of reckless behaviour which contributed to the murder of AIP Ariongo. (Applause)

As the minister asked the question, I wish to pose two questions to Dr Besigye in particular. Dr Besigye, do you condemn those who robbed AIP Ariongo’s eight children of their father and left his wife a widow? (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is the practice of this House that people who are not able to respond on this Floor - (Interjections)- I am amazed at the level of sycophancy - (Interjections)-  on the other side and intolerance. I am amazed. I cannot even make a statement when the Speaker has given me the opportunity -(Interjections)- yes, you can raise a point of order but I would like to proceed on a point of procedure -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Point of order! 

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the hon. Alaso, a soft spoken, distinguished politician, astute, very clear at putting her point across, the Secretary-General of the FDC, who represents that party in this House and who often speaks for it, in order to stand, and in total disregard of the rules, undermine, ridicule and put distinguished Members of this House into question by calling them sycophants? Madam Speaker, is that in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have said, this afternoon, that despite the emotions involved, please, restrain yourselves from insulting one another. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I had risen on a point of procedure and I was hoping that the House would listen to me and then you guide me. So, the point of procedure - the concern I have is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is addressing Dr Besigye with questions and he is not in this House. At what point can Dr Besigye make a response that will be captured for the purposes of responding to the questions posed by the honourable Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition can speak for Dr Besigye in this House as he did earlier. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are questions posed to him and the others that were involved. The leaders who were involved, will you co-operate with Police investigations to identify, arrest and prosecute those directly responsible for his murder? Unless Dr Besigye and his colleagues respond positively to each of these questions, I must say, I believe them to have blood on their hands.

Let me take this opportunity to salute the Uganda Police Force for the great work it is doing to maintain law and order in this country -(Applause)- and to give a pledge to them that they will be given the same respect, the same treatment as Police forces of the world are accorded. (Applause) In the United States of America or in Britain, nobody can touch the Police - even just merely touching the uniform - and they go home.  Never! But here we have seen cases were the Police has been beaten, disarmed, the Police now -(Technical Interruption)- when they are in line of duty. I want to assure you that this Government from this time -(Technical Interruption)-that conduct against the national -(Technical Interruption)-
Finally the prayer -(Technical Interruption)- in the circumstances in which he was murdered -(Technical Interruption)-be brought to Parliament for the House -(Technical Interruption)-is a reasonable one. (Applause) Therefore, I undertake to take it up with the President and the Cabinet and inform you accordingly. Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us move to the next item.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker -(Technical Interruption)-last week, hon. Oromait -(Technical Interruption)- security in Ongogoja sub-county, Aislam Village, Usuk county in Katakwi, as a matter of national importance and I undertook to give a response this week. I would now like to give this information as per the question they put to the House.

The background to his request is that on 14 October, hon. Oromait raised this serious concern that his people were facing increased suffering from insecurity on account of the Karimojong raiders, and several people as a result have been seriously injured arising from these attacks. The number of incidences was reported as outlined in paragraph 2. The first one was on 4th January where Mr Okao Dan of Kelim village had his four heads of cattle stolen and they were suspected to be stolen by Karimojong warriors.

On the 6th February, another report was made to the police by Ikuret Cyrus, a resident of Amorongora village in Palam Sub-county where three heads of cattle were also reported stolen by suspected unknown Karimojong warriors.

On 10th March, a case of malicious damage to property, in which a hut was destroyed, was also reported at Ongogoja Police Post. Mr Obwalatum Amos, aged 55, was the one who made this report. He alleged that because of land disputes, his house was damaged by three Karimojong from Napak, namely Mr Lokomoi Peter, Mr Angelo John and Mr Moru Charles. 

Following these reports to the Police, Madam Speaker, the Police took the following action: 
In the first incidence of 14th January, intelligence information confirmed the presence of Karimojong warriors in the area. The Anti-Stock Theft Unit deployed night patrols and made ambushes at several points. In an exchange of fire, one cow was killed but the rest of the animals were recovered. The thieves, however, managed to escape. The recovered animals were handed back to the Mr Okao who reported this incident, as earlier reported.

In the second incident, the Police tracked the footprints and the hoof marks of the animals up to the main road where they disappeared; obviously, maybe because of traffic or because these animals were loaded on trucks, these foot marks could not be followed any further. Intelligence information did not indicate any sign of enemy presence in the area. The Police suspected local thieves to have been involved in this theft of Mr Okao’s animals.

In the wake of the incidence of 12th March that involved the burning of a hut, the Police went into action immediately and all the three suspected Karimojong were arrested and their statements recorded. The suspects appeared before the Magistrates Court on the 12th March and were remanded in Katakwi prison.

What are the likely causes of insecurity in the area?

Madam Speaker, one is the issue of boundary conflicts. There have been a number of border conflicts between the communities in Karamoja – Napak now - and Teso sub region, Katakwi especially. The areas of Amuturonyo, Oselem, Okulunyo, Amandera, Amaratoit and Aterai since 2010 have always been in contention.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development arising from this, launched a survey of the Katakwi-Moroto - now Napak District - border on 25 February 2008. This was on the instruction of the then Minister of Lands, hon. Omara Atubo. However, the survey did not proceed up to its conclusion because the delegation from Moroto boycotted this exercise. It was necessary that both sides were present but one side decided to boycott. I am aware that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has embarked upon the exercise of addressing border disputes throughout the country, and I believe this too will be looked into.

The other cause of insecurity is the fact of criminal elements from within. Like any other community, there are individuals from within who are involved in committing crimes including theft of animals, which the Police have investigated and the culprits have been brought to justice. The case of theft of animals is a cause of insecurity for the area. This is being decisively addressed by the Police and the Anti-Stock Theft Unit.

In conclusion, generally there are no mass raids of cattle reported. It is only the above two incidents that have been reported from January up to-date, involving seven heads of cattle out of which one died in crossfire and four were recovered by the Police and handed over to the owner.

The Police Anti-Stock Theft Unit is deployed in all districts of Karamoja sub region with its headquarters at Katakwi District and zonal deployment in all the districts of Karamoja. The main mandate of this unit, among others, is to fight cattle rustling. The unit deploys both motorised and foot patrols in liaison with the local communities. The Police have intensified on intelligence-led operations, which have greatly created positive impact in the fight against cattle theft.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, to strengthen its commitment and resolve to pacify the Karamoja sub region, the police management is shifting the field force unit training wing to Olilim in Katakwi District. In addition, the Police have formed the Re-establishment of Law and Order in Karamoja (RELOKA), which has greatly yielded positive results, as a follow-up to the government programme of disarmament in Karamoja sub region. I thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us just have those three interventions.

5.40
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this elaborate report. All issues raised here are true except a few incidences, for example about criminal elements within; they are not there. The main problem now, as stated, is the boundary conflict; all other things rotate around the border conflict. 

From 2008, what has the government been doing to solve this problem? There must be a reason why it is failing to do this. By the way, I will be recalled if I do not lobby the government to solve the problem of the border by August. Will the minister employ me? By August I will not be having a job. 

Let us solve the border issue by August this year so that we know who is living the other side. If you are living in Teso, I do not mind, so long as you abide by the Teso regulations; and if you are living the other side, no problem. I have been living there for the last 23 years but I acquired the land legally but these people are getting land illegally. 

In August this year, we shall be doing a census and resources will be allocated according to the number of people in a district. How are you going to allocate the resources in Katakwi District where the population has not been counted? These Karimojong people, when it is time for elections they cross the border and they go and elect; after elections, they come back. During census, they will cross over and after census, they will return. How are we going to give such rights to people? 

I want to rest my case by asking the government to kindly let us solve the border issues so that I will also have a job after August. Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA (Mrs Janet Museveni): Madam Speaker, I wanted to give information to my honourable colleague about the border between Napak District and Katakwi. We have agreed in Government - we have agreed with the Ministry of Lands, the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Internal Affairs that before the end of April, we will go to Karamoja and all of us will go to the border with Katakwi and Napak districts’ leaders and discuss this issue. We shall then come back to Kampala and make the decision about the border problem. I hope that before August, that problem will be over. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the assurance.

5.43
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The issue between Karamoja and Teso sub region is a very crucial issue pertaining to land. If I may begin from where the hon. Minister for Karamoja ended; I have been reading some statements and since 2008, this committee has been talking about the border issue between Katakwi and Karamoja. However, since it was constituted, no report has been availed up to this time. That worries us, the people of Katakwi. 

As we speak now - I would have loved the minister to include my constituency in this report - over 30,000 heads of cattle from Karamoja, that is Nakapiripirit, are grazing in my constituency. A number of families from the same place are in my constituency.

Remember, Madam Speaker, some few months ago, on the Floor of this House, I reported to you and honourable colleagues very clearly that the Karimojong had been seriously rustling animals. For me, I call it rustling and not stealing. Over 300 heads of cattle were stolen in Katakwi District immediately after the general elections from the same people from Nakapiripirit. 

This time round -(Mr Lokeris rose_)- Madam Speaker, I will not accept the information from the honourable minister because the same honourable minister – I was coming to him - just less than two weeks ago was in my constituency with the LCV of Nakapiripirit, Mr Lorot. I will not accept the information. The minister was in my constituency with the LCV of Nakapiripirit, Mr Lorot. He threatened the LCI of Angisa Sub-county in Angaro village; that is Lorot. He said that the Angisa land, for which I laid a petition here – over 100 acres of land – is their land, land of Karamoja. 

The minister never informed me that he was in my constituency. As I speak, I am not very happy with this incident because in Teso and in my constituency, the only thing we are remaining with is that land. I am ready to do anything with anybody who comes to tamper with it - (Interjections) - I must be very clear to this House. I will not accept the information.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is a designed programme for the people of Teso to suffer, particularly my constituency and Katakwi District. The people are still living as if they are in camps, as if it is still in the early stages of living. I pray that the government comes up with a very clear policy to address the issues of Katakwi, particularly on land. (Member timed out_)

5.48
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, District Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the august House. I appreciate what the minister has presented, and I am happy that he has brought this issue on page 3 about the border conflict. 

As we sit here as leaders to debate issues, our people have got conflicts over land and the situation is alarming. I see a lot of laxity in the management of this affair. I wonder whether in the management of the border conflicts, the ministry is supposed to identify new boundaries or those boundaries are there. If they are there, why should we take too long to handle issues which have got adverse effects even on our relationships in Parliament as Members of Parliament? I pray the ministry prioritises this issue. Bloodshed is all over; you have indicated this under 4.2. 

Secondly, there is a weakness in this area in relation to the specific petition raised. You said in 2008 the ministry did not succeed because one party boycotted. What measures have you put in place now to make sure people do not boycott? How have you strategized so that even if some people boycott, the exercise will be done? According to my experience, people know the truth about the boundaries. Those who know that they are at fault normally deter Government from doing the right thing by lying, by organising people to become chaotic so that Government does not implement what we expect. So, what strategies have you put in place so that whether rain or sunshine, the issues of the border conflict are resolved without compromise?

On border issues I believe there should be no politics. It must be done technically. If I am an honourable member who has interests, you can leave me out. You have the surveyors; you can go and do the work, bring us the report and we approve it. (Applause) We know that politicians have got vested interests and in the end, the people whom we represent, who are residing in our districts, suffer more than us - (Member timed out.)

5.51
MR NACO ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to be able to share with the honourable House about this issue. I thank the minister for the report.      

Surely, we should be able to know that the security situation in Karamoja has really improved. However, there may be some isolated cases of theft. Naturally, theft cannot be stopped totally; some one or two people can go and steal from others. However, Government has done quite well to bring peace in Karamoja and I believe that even the other cases will be dealt with.

On the issue Katakwi and Napak, it is about the border. This issue has taken quite long. There is a report, which was sent to the former Minister of Lands. I talked to him and he said the report was ready. So I do not believe that the report is not there. I talked to Omara Atubo and he said the report is ready. As to why it has not come here, I do not know.  

I beg this honourable House to get the chance of making an aerial view of Karamoja-Teso border beginning from Mountain Atuke up to the lake. That will solve the conflicts in all those districts. 

There is another point, Madam Speaker, which I was about to forget. There is an issue of lack of water now in Karamoja. Karamoja is so dry now that even the cows do not have water. As our cows advance to Teso where there is water, there are some unfriendly people from there who are saying the cows from Karamoja should not be brought to drink water in this area. So I also ask Government to talk to those people to allow cows from Karamoja to drink some water from there. Thank you.

5.55
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for coming up with this report to the House.

Madam Speaker, Bukedea being a neighbour to Katakwi, Karamoja and other parts of the region, I know in Teso that the Karimojong disarmament process has helped a lot to relieve the situation from what it used to be. I have seen the Karimojong live in harmony with the Iteso. They are even marrying each other now. The only problem we have now is the issue of boundaries as some people have already said. So I call upon the leaders of Karamoja and Teso to come together and harmonise our positions, so that the people of Teso and Karamoja can engage in economic activities.

My word to Government is that they promised a security road. If you had put that security road in place, cutting across all these districts, we would have trading going on and security personnel would handle pockets of insecurity and cattle rustlers. I believe these people are very few in our communities. I urge my colleagues not to antagonise our own people. We the leaders must come together and determine the destiny of Teso region. We should develop Karamoja and Teso.

Madam Speaker, I want to call the attention of the minister of lands to the fact that he can be a solution to these wrangles by defining our boundaries clearly. We had the old boundaries in that region; if we can define the boundaries clearly, we would not be having these problems. Karamoja is a dry place; these people need water. The leaders of Karamoja and the leaders of Teso should come together and maybe find a way for the Karimojong to come to Teso for water. We must agree with one another so that the people of Teso are also protected and their crops are protected. That is all we need in Teso, other than continuous antagonism. We are fighting in the House but the other people are busy marrying each other. 

Right now in Teso, I have a problem with Bulambuli, Sironko, Sebei and Bududa over that land that is in Bukedea District. All these other places are claiming the same land. Karamoja is also claiming the same land, saying that it is in Napak District. We are saying that the minister in charge of lands should come to the place so that we meet as leaders in the region and sort out that problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to correct my brother-in-law, amuran, that Bududa, Manafwa are not near the place you are talking about. You should mention Bulambuli and Sironko.

When I mentioned amuran, I meant my brother-in-law; I want to put that record clear. Also, I want to say this, because I never had the opportunity, that we are very sorry for the loss of my brother-in-law. For eight children to become orphans suddenly and the lady becoming a widow is very saddening. I pass on our condolences to you, and I want to tell the public that Dr Kiiza Besigye does not agree with the killing of the policeman. He clearly says that he is always non-violent, and I want to emphasise that. 

Having said that, I want to correct the Prime Minister; on page 3 of the report, point 5.1, the minister says, “One cow was killed because of crossfire”. That means both sides had guns. These people brought guns but they never went to the Police to grab guns. I do not think Dr Kiiza could tell people to go to the Police and get guns. These people with guns never got them from the Police. They must have gotten them from somewhere else. The guns are available, but the Opposition is saying that they are not going to use guns. They have the capacity to get guns, but they are not going to get them. That is the correction I want to make.

Madam Speaker, we have lost people and we have lost cows, which is wealth. It is important that we get a lasting solution to all border conflicts. In fact, the minister is wrong to talk about cows because we have had deaths in these areas. I do not know why he never talked about those deaths. People have killed one another; for example, at the border between Bugisu and Bugwere –(Interjections)- We cannot say Budaka but Bugwere. We want to talk about the original places because these others are just villages. People have killed one another because of border issues. It looks like Government is easy to act on non-violent people who are walking in town other than dealing with the issue where people are killing one another. 

What is wrong or hard for us to do a survey of this land? We really respect the Karimojong, but what is the problem? Why are they coming to raid? If they need more cows, we can get some from Kisozi and take to them and they keep quiet – (Interjections) - Yes, because these ones in Kisozi are our government cows, other than going to Teso - 

MS NAMOE: Madam Speaker, is the Leader of the Opposition in order to mention that there are still cattle raids in Karamoja when actually they have just disarmed the Karimojong? This is unfair. You are trying to incite and cause chaos like you have done in Kampala. For us, the people of Karamoja, we are peaceful and no longer raiding. Those thugs will be dealt with and there will be peace. Even now, there is total peace in Karamoja. I urge the neighbours to really appreciate the peace that we have attained. We need to consolidate this peace, not to lose it. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you know that the matter that you are touching is really very explosive. Concentrate on the theft of cattle as reported by the minister and do not incite the Karimojong or their neighbours. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank you very much. If you read page 1 – I am not the one who wrote the report – point 2.1, he reported the theft of four heads of cattle by suspected Karimojong warriors. Also, under point 2.2 –

MR AMODOI: Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give to the Leader of the Opposition is that much as there was large scale raiding, it is now curtailed. But the thefts that are still there are a problem to my people and to the neighbours. It must not be taken for granted but addressed, so that we remain brothers and sisters and we see who again will point at the other. That is the information I want to give. Otherwise, this matter is a very crucial matter that can cause emotions here. We need to stand against it. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On 2.2, the last sentence talks of “unknown Karimojong warriors”. On page 2, if you read 3.1, bullet 2, it says, “The thieves, however, managed to escape but there was crossfire in which one cow was killed.” Who crosses fire? I am sure the Police never shot one another; the Police was shooting there and the warriors were shooting this way. 

This statement is by the minister. It is true that they have disarmed, but they still seem to have some arms and people are affected. If the Iteso are affected, that is where I marry from and so I am affected. In Bulambuli and Sironko where I come from, I am affected. We believe that it is important that our brothers from Karamoja, even if they are few, should stop raiding and we live in harmony. If you want grass, we have a lot of land to give in Sironko, so long as you come without guns. We shall even give you free water. 

Having said that, I think the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should urgently open up boundaries. I agree with members who have said that this issue should not be politicised and I will be very grateful if that is done.

MR AMURAIT: I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for yielding the Floor. It is true that this matter came up in the last Parliaments. In fact in the Seventh Parliament, at the time I was the leader of the Teso Parliamentary Group, we had so many meetings including going into Karamoja and meeting with our uncles in Moroto and a return visit by our uncles to Katakwi. We held very good meetings and resolved that the issue should be resolved scientifically.

I led a delegation of my group to State House in Nakasero at the invitation of the President, and again this issue of the land dispute between Moroto and Katakwi at the time came up. The President was resolute and said it was something that could be resolved scientifically. He said we should not bother or even waste our energy talking about it because it will be resolved. This, I will tell you, honourable colleagues, is a meeting that took place nearly four years ago. To date, we are still clamouring about land. 

We have a ministry of lands that deployed surveyors but they did not conclude the exercise of surveying. I think we are really being let down by government. This is the information I wanted to give. We are being let down by government and government needs to stand or rise up to the occasion and do something, otherwise you are causing us little quarrels and you seem to be enjoying these quarrels here. I think this is unfair and we, as the Iteso people, are not prepared to tolerate any further delay. Resolve this matter yesterday! 

THE SPEAKER: There is information from the Minister for Karamoja.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can allow hon. Janet Museveni to give me information. (Laughter)

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, let me just clarify this once more because I had just done that a while ago. When this process started in 2008, unfortunately I was not in that ministry at the time and so I cannot speak confidently about what happened then.

I am speaking about now, and I have said that we have agreed with the Ministry of Lands – my colleague is right here – the Ministry of Local Government and we are all going to work round this problem with the people in Napak and Katakwi. We will end this problem. I have given you this word and if it does not work, then you ask me at that time.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude; we have another matter. We have taken that assurance and I know that hon. Odonga-Otto is here and he has picked up the assurance for the second time this afternoon on the issue of the boundaries. Please conclude. [HON. MEMBER: “Can she give a time frame?”] - She has given it and it is April –(Interjections)- No, she said April. Please conclude; we have another matter. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, these are issues which affect all of us who border Karamoja. I want to tell you, members who do not know what the Karimojong do when they come to an area, that they kill even human beings, they raid animals, they destroy crops, they destroy houses and they rape. It is a very terrible thing. Anybody who borders our colleagues from Karamoja has experienced this. I am happy that the minister is talking about the need to strengthen the Anti-Stock Theft Police – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, please conclude. We have got other matters on the Order Paper.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that it is important that we should not only talk of strengthening the anti-stock theft police but we should also strengthen all the police. We should provide for and pay our policemen very well, not only those who are protecting us at the boundaries with Karamoja. The entire police force needs to be facilitated to do their work. It is very important that we provide resources for them, both in cash as an increment in their welfare like salaries and also buildings to stay in. Otherwise, if we leave them like this, they will have no morale. They could easily join the people who are stealing the cows and they could even harm us. 

When I was at law school, they said the Police need to be community based. They must talk to the people, they must be friendly and if they are not friendly, then people will rise against them. I am calling on the leadership of the Police that it is important to be friendly to the public and not to be violent towards the public. In that line, they will be better people in the country and they will be able to be helped to keep law and order. 

We in the Opposition do not undermine the Police. They are our friends. We cannot kill the Police; we cannot even touch their uniforms. If you get them being touched on the uniform, then they have brought their hand to be touched but we cannot do it. In fact, we respect it. The people who may not respect the Police may be those like the Prime Minister because instead of using the Police to guard him, he is using the Army because he does not like the Police. 

Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table two documents, which will be helpful to us. Since I never had the opportunity, I want to lay the document here which the minister laid, where the Lord Mayor was asking for authority to hold the meeting. It is dated 19th March, with all the stamps in place. It is here. I also want to lay the one addressed to the Inspector General of Police. These are very important, and I want to tell you that as the Opposition we support the investigations going on and we shall support you maximally. However, we do not encourage this issue of pointing fingers at individuals before investigations are done. 

When I heard the Prime Minister talk, I lost some respect for him because he had agreed there would be investigations and eventually, he was standing to point fingers at people. Please, we in the Opposition are going to cooperate in everything and we need the Police to investigate this matter up to the end. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the minister wish to say anything or should we close? 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I did not want to contribute to this issue but recently, we went to Karamoja region as a Committee on Government Assurances. I have been there several times and we have a formal report coming to this House, but I want to state that the permanent solution to this problem is really coming from the interventions the Minister for Karamoja Affairs is making in that area.

We were so surprised to see massive dams constructed to conclusion. We even went up to a community village where they are settling the displaced children. So, I really wanted to be on record to say that the permanent solution to these problems in Karamoja would be in the efforts the First Lady is putting in that area. (Applause) Actually, as a committee, we were overwhelmed. We stood in front of a valley dam called Kakyerere, and we could see a huge amount of water tapped in that area which can even stay like for five to 10 years, contrary to the no valley dams of the former Vice-President, Wandira Kazibwe. 

So, I just wanted to state that to stop the Karimojong from moving and wandering around, the efforts being put to institutionalise the operation of the water dams, of teaching Karimojong how to dig or build community villages must really be supported by all Members of Parliament. I wanted to be on record. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I am glad I gave way to hon. Odonga-Otto for the positive information he has given and for complementing the First Lady for the good job she is doing there as First Lady and Minister in charge of Karamoja. You know, behind every successful woman, there is a man. (Laughter) So, I hope we can also stop the impeachment against her husband. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I think the Minister for Karamoja and First Lady has given us the way. I think we all agree here that the problem is the border issue and the First Lady says by April, we shall all go there and talk to the communities. 

I would like to appeal to hon. Ababiku that we should not leave out the political leaders because they are a source of the problem. Let us engage them in the discussions and see that we convince them that this is the right way to go in addressing the border issues. Even if they are divisive, that is the time when we can correct them together. So, I would like to appeal to you, honourable Woman Member of Parliament for Adjumani, that let us involve the political leaders in these border issues because I believe that way we can reach lasting solutions. 

Secondly, I want to complement the Leader of the Opposition for his support to the Police, that the Police should be strengthened and even greatly facilitated so that their welfare and accommodation can be provided for. I hope when we bring the Police proposals by way of budgets, we can only give it the necessary support and approval from this House. 

However, in order to stop all this, let us stop these violent demonstrations. Let us demonstrate within the law. The law allows demonstrations but the law does not allow violent demonstrations. So long as there are violent demonstrations, the Constitution empowers the Police to control those sectors. So, I thank you for your support and I want to thank hon. Oromait for raising that issue. I hope we have satisfactorily answered your question and the First Lady and Minister for Karamoja Affairs has given us the way of addressing the core issue of the border. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Honourable members, I want to propose that we defer items 5,6,7 and 8 of the Order Paper and go to item 9, which we had already started considering, and we shall come back to them at the end. Let us go to item No. 9. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Speaker, when I look at this Order Paper, I realise that under No.4 there are two parts, but he has only handled one part. He has not handled part two under the security information systems. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, yes minister.

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, this issue raised by hon. Michael Mawanda, the MP for Igara East. It is on how far the national identity cards project has gone. This is what I would like to explain. I hope every member has got a copy of this presentation. Kindly allow me to continue with the presentation as copies are being distributed. 

The Government of Uganda launched the National Security Information System Project on 19 March 2012 to establish a biometric national identity register upon which the issuance of identity cards and numbers would be based.

The objectives of the National Security Information System were: 

(i) 	To establish an efficient and convenient system for providing an identity to each domicile and citizenship; 

(ii) 	To mobilise the national vital registration system, for example, births, marriages and deaths; and 

(iii) 	To eliminate duplication, overlaps and gaps to optimize resource utilisation in the activation and use of identity management technologies to pave way for e-government service in order to enhance social-economic and social services delivery.

The benefits of this project are: 

•	To secure national borders and curb illegal immigrants so that only those entitled can live and work in Uganda. 

•	To compile, with ease, an accurate electoral register in real time. 

•	To prevent identity fraud and other crimes by making it more difficult to forge or lie about personal details.

•	To expand the tax base as a result of being able to trace transactions and incomes of identified residents; 

•	To promote orderly movement of people across the East African Community borders and streamlining passports and other document issuing system.

•	The other benefits are to improve e-governance, social-economic and financial services delivery.

The legal basis for this project is derived from Article 16 of the 1995 Constitution, which establishes the national citizenship and immigration board. This board is mandated to register citizens and aliens living in the country for purposes of issuing national identity card numbers and to create a national identity register. The Article was operationalised in the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Part IV of Cap 66. It requires us to register citizens, issue national identification numbers and national identity cards. So, what this immigration department is doing is based on the law and is catered for in the Constitution.

Scope and Deliverables

The contract for this project was signed on 19 March 2010 with Mühlbauer High Technology International, a Germany Company, and was for the setting up of the national information system for the biometric registration of people, data processing, cleaning up of the electoral register and issuing identity cards and national identification numbers. 

This project has been carried out in phases. The first phase was to deliver an updated clean voters’ register and to provide equipment and consumables for the data and personalization centre. This first phase has been successfully carried out.

The second phase, in which we are now, is the mass enrolment for all citizens and aliens resident in Uganda. We are also supposed to do, under this phase, issuance of 15 million national identity cards, personalized and distributed. 

The third phase will deliver integration and linkage of the national identity register to other databases to create the national population databank and additional uses, for example, the replacement of lost, stolen or damaged identity cards; birth, death or marriage certificates; passports, visas and so forth.

The national population databank will be an aggregation of databases belonging to other government entities but managed by the competent agency, the National Information technology Agency, commonly known as NITA-U. This will help us to have a single databank to only authorized levels of Government.

Achievements

•	We have achieved an updated voters’ register for the Electoral Commission. This was delivered.

•	A biometric national identity register with 5.2 million citizens and non-citizens was captured. 

•	The identity cards personalisation centre for the Ministry of Internal Affairs has, however, not been established. As a result, the expected national identity cards and numbers of the estimated 3.5 million were not issued. Nonetheless, a pilot cards’ production facility was set up in which 409 cards were printed in order to test the cards issuance system and processes. The results were very positive and feedback collected from those to whom the cards were issued is helping to improve on the systems and process designs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to point out that obviously, there were some errors in this pilot project. Hon. Winnie Kizza, for example, came to us and complained about the wrong data that had been entered into the system. We apologised to her. Hon. Kassiano Wadri also came to us about his card to which we apologised. The same complaint was also registered from hon. Mulindwa. We had to inform them that this was just a pilot project and so we were bound to have mistakes. We promised to make corrections as we go along; however, it is in this first pilot project where we issued 409 identity cards.

Madam Speaker, I would like to report that we have faced some delayed milestones, which I would like to inform members about. The project in its second phase has had the following not delivered as expected: 

•	We have not carried out the mass enrolment of all citizens and alien residents, about 31 million people, as we are expected to do. 

•	We have not carried out the establishment of the data processing and personalisation centre. 

•	We have not carried out the training, production and maintenance of support for the information technology hardware and other equipment. 

•	Apart from the pilot of 409 cards which we have issued, we have largely not issued the national identity cards. 

Although the equipment for the identity cards’ printing facility were all delivered, and they are in Entebbe at Uganda Printing and Publishing warehouse, they are yet to be installed, tested, and commissioned. This has mainly been due to insufficient funds and delays in obtaining the following clearances: 

•	We need clearance for a tenancy agreement with the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation-(Interjection) - They own the premises and the immigration department has to enter a tenancy agreement to use their property. You do not just walk into somebody’s property. 

•	We need a contract for the refurbishment of the data processing and personalisation centre. We need to clear that contract with the Solicitor General. 

•	We also need to clear the contract for clearing services for all the equipment and the blank national identity cards that have been delivered. 

If we do not do those things, what risk do we face? 

1.	The continued delays in implementation could lead to lack of a national voters’ register by December 2014, and it could also lead to a delay in the system of issuing national identity cards. The Electoral Commission needs the same for organising the 2016 elections.

2.	Secondly, several public and private sector organisations might be compelled to start or even run their own identification systems and yet this project is supposed to address that.  

3.	The requisite knowledge and skills transfer through training by Mühlbauer, the suppliers of the equipment, might not be effected for sustainability. 

4.	The warranties on the equipment might expire as the contract period is running out.

How do we put back this project on course? 
In order to stem further delays and put implementation back on course, priority has been placed on the critical milestones below: 

We are seriously undertaking refurbishing, equipment installation, testing and commissioning the data processing and personalisation centre. 

Processing the available 5.2 million datasets and printing national ID cards. The citizenship verification process has already been specified and the mechanism to ensure that only nationals are issued identity cards have been put in place. The five million datasets captured during the election included people who are not nationals. We need to verify this so that only citizens have it. 

Once we start issuing the cards, we need to distribute them. 

Mass enrolment, printing and issuing of the identity cards and effective implementation of the project management plan. 

The processing of the available datasets, the 5.2 million, which was captured by the Electoral Commission before printing the national ID cards, has already been specified. Emphasis has been placed on the need to verify citizenship before issuance, as I explained earlier. 

The Project Management 

An interim project manager has been appointed to work with the national registration secretariat as established by Section 31 of caption 66 of the Immigration Act, in order to enhance the project implementation activities. 

This team is working with Mühlbauer on the detailed implementation plan bearing in mind the already mentioned priority areas we want to undertake. The new implementation timelines will be communicated after due consultation with key stakeholders that are involved in this project. 

The technical staff from the Electoral Commission, NITA-U, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the executive structures in the local and central government will also be made use of in this new management structure. Representatives from these agencies are already part of the planning team constituted in what we call a steering committee. 

Financing of the Project 

The total project sum was and is € 64,231,371.49. The amount so far paid through the normal budget process allocation is €59,100,000. This was carried out as follows: 

In the MTEF allocation of 2010/2011, we paid Shs 85,932,427,436 as part of contractual obligations. We were also availed Shs 600,457,000 for operations funds, where we put up the pilot project for issuing those cards and so forth. 

In MTEF allocation of this financial year, another Shs 87,614,900,001 was allocated. Out of this, we paid contractual obligations of Shs 85,932,427,436. We are left with a balance for operations of Shs 1,682,472,436. We have paid URA withholding tax of Shs 25,041,775,479. The outstanding amount on the contractual obligations is €5,131,371.49. 

I wish to further inform the House that the Ministry of Finance has committed to allocate another Shs 87,416,000,000 during this coming financial year. This modest resource will be spent on identified priorities already mentioned above for rolling out and operationalising this equipment. 

Finally, we also undertake to carry out, through the Media Centre, a public awareness and sensitisation programme. The Media Centre is working with the project team to develop an effective public awareness strategy and all stakeholders are expected to be brought on board to make this campaign a success. 

Madam Speaker, the main issue here is that whereas the equipment was delivered, we could not move as fast as we expected because the operation funds for rolling it out were not available through the budget. Now that we have a firm indication, we hope to begin rolling it out this coming financial year. 

With the Shs 1.6 billion available now, we can embark on establishing the personalisation centre in Entebbe, if we can get the clearances through the Solicitor General and PPDA, for us to begin work immediately. 

The timeframe for doing this – It  will be hoped that by end of July we should begin to issue Ugandans with national identity cards and begin rolling it out in full swing before 2013. Thank you very much. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the budget process, we tasked the committee handling defence and internal affairs to investigate this matter. Now it is coming to nine months ever since and we have not got the report. When you look at the figures that the minister is giving on page 6, there is URA withholding tax of Shs 25 billion. If you calculate using any method, it cannot come to even Shs 10 billion, but they are saying they paid withholding tax of Shs 25 billion. I have given the maximum but you cannot even come to Shs 10 billion. 

So, the procedural issue I am asking is for the whereabouts of our report. Would it really be procedurally right for us to go ahead without the report of the investigation team, given the fact that there are so many factual errors in the report of the minister? 

THE SPEAKER: The vice chairperson of defence, can you give us an update on where we stand? 

6.46
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee embarked on investigation into this project in February and the exercise is ongoing. I would not like to say so much on this. However, the areas of interest include the entire origin of this project - the way the project was awarded to the contractor, the issue of scheduling of this project, the values involved, the lack of clear schedule of implementation of the project, the monies involved; all these are highly questionable. 

Also, given the importance of this project in terms of national and regional politics, the fact that there is no fund provided by the Ministry of Finance to implement the ID programme is also questionable. So, all these are things that we are investigating and I would like to assure the House that very soon we shall come to table the report. 

However, I would also like to agree with the minister about some of these delays, like lack of funding and so forth; for example, it was so disappointing that to-date the Ministry of Finance has just given an indication of providing some money in the next financial year. These are disturbing and disappointing events, but I should not say much until maybe when we have concrete findings.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, how much time do you want us to give you because we assigned you that task and we want a report? How much more time do you want? We may debate this and anticipate your report. 

MR MULONGO: We need about four weeks to finalise. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. I also thank the honourable minister. I would like to use this opportunity you have given me, Madam Speaker, to express my dissatisfaction in the way the committee has handled this matter.   

I would also like to seek clarification from the chair of the committee; this issue that the minister has perused through only refers to €64 million. However, the process of creating a national identification databank started way back in 2001. I have researched and found that this House sat and hon. Aggrey Awori at that time raised a question on the Floor of this Parliament and hon. Nandala-Mafabi also contributed, and the contract was awarded under similar circumstances to Face Technologies. 

The samples that were provided to this House were with an electronic chip. Five years ago, I went and got a digital driving permit. Apparently when that Parliament passed it, a driving permit was supposed to have been like an ATM card but I was given a laminated ID card and told that there was a magnetic strip. When I went to renew it recently, they said that they wanted to take my data afresh, which meant that the data that was there before got lost or is nonexistent.  

Thereafter, this same Parliament released money in the pretext that it was going for the national ID databank. They released money to the Electoral Commission for biometric registration of citizens. We bought cameras, laptops, computers and servers and had all the equipment there, but Ugandans have again paid €64 million without going through PPDA. This money has been paid without approval. 

I, would, therefore, like to seek clarification. We have released money to the Electoral Commission for creating a national identity databank and we are again releasing money. If at all this contract is like what the honourable chair has told us, I am confused by his submission. That is why I am standing here for clarification. In his opening remarks, he said that the contract leaves a lot to be desired because of the way it was awarded. The timeframes were not there, the scope of duty was not there, and he is concluding by asking why the Ministry of Finance is not releasing more money. 

Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification from the chair whether they have entered the amount of loss ever since Face Technologies started work. Up to today, Face Technologies is charging us Shs 27,500 for every driving permit. We are paying and yet all that was in the name of the national databank. Now they want us to pay for IDs. 

We went and stood for our voter cards, which never came out. I read here with shame when the minister says that the contract signed - project scope and deliverables – under phase one delivered for Electoral Commission an updated clean voters’ register. We never received that voters’ register. In my constituency we had people from outside coming to vote –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. While I appreciate the very beautiful arguments that are being advanced by my brother Sanjay Tanna, I think he is debating outside this report by the minister. Therefore, I would like to find out whether it would not be procedurally right for this House to wait for the committee report. 

The chairperson of the committee has made a commitment here, on behalf of the committee, to deliver their report in four weeks. We could then be able to debate the statement of the minister alongside the report. The beauty with having a report that is all inclusive and comprehensive is that it brings on board every Member of Parliament who will be able to know where this story begun, where we are and where we intend to go and the challenges that we face.

So I do not know whether it would not be procedurally okay for you, Madam Speaker, to guide us on this so that we not only debate the tip of the iceberg but debate to a fair amount of detail, this very important matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have received some information, but it is this House that tasked the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to do this work. Hon. Chair, really, September 2011 and then you start in February and you still need another four weeks? Can we require you to do your work expeditiously and report when we come back from the recess so that we can debate from a point of knowledge?

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, much obliged. We have made some progress and I assure the House that within the time specified, which I requested - Really, the three to four weeks I requested for is paramount to be exhaustive and -(Interruption)

MR BAKA MUGABI: Madam Speaker, the chairman is making a statement and I do not know whether to believe this. You talk of three to four weeks but we are going on recess today, after that we shall be going into MTEF, and I know your committee will be very busy since you have very many sectors to handle; are you being realistic? How far have you gone with the investigation? Have you met the witnesses? You need to give us timelines, which are realistic and not just to please us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Simon Mulongo; he comes from Bugisu, and for your information, he is a very intelligent person and he has been intelligent for quite a good time. I am very sure he has all the information but he just does not want to work. If you give him one week, he will be able to produce this information. I want to plead with him; do not spoil our name. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is saying there is going to be another provision of money for this project in the MTEF. So your work has a bearing on the budget and what we are going to appropriate in the next budget, and time is really of essence.

MR MICHAEL MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other information I would like to give this House is that the agreement Government signed with the supplier is almost expiring in either May or June. So, the earlier we handle this project as Parliament, the better for this country.

Secondly, the information that has been given by the minister is really inadequate. Without wasting much of your time, he has not informed us that some of the equipment that was imported and paid for has already been stolen; for example, 746 cameras have gone missing, 30 laptops have been stolen, ten signature cards have been stolen and one finger print scanner is also missing. 

Worst of all, for all the equipment that they imported, most of this equipment has not been given warranty. Even where they are storing this equipment is being mismanaged. This is why we have been fighting to ensure that this report comes before this Parliament and we discuss it wholesomely. This is an inadequate report that cannot cause Parliament to discuss. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not get into the discussion. We want this report as soon as we return because we must deal with the MTEF and it will be coming to a year. Please take the concerns of this House very seriously.

MR MULONGO: Most obliged.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE FUNDING FOR ARBITRATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND HERITAGE OIL AND GAS LIMITED

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had generally debated this and there was a small matter of the quantum - the difference between your report and the request for the supplementary, the Shs 2 billion.

7.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (MR FRED RUHINDI): Madam Speaker, we are working as a team - the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and I. I also consulted with the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties) with a view to making this clarification.

The uncertainty was only in one respect because after the necessary adjustments in the budget, the committee came to the figure of Shs 8,719,744,475. However, as we may recall, what was contested was an allocation in the first supplementary release of Shs 11,942,283,906, because this money of the Shs 11.9 billion when it was frozen, it  brought some challenges to the Ministry in going ahead with a case in London. The Ministry sought an additional supplementary of Shs 6,785,417,000 – that is the only discrepancy – so, all we are seeking is that what has been adjusted by the committee of Shs 8.7 billion be approved and after necessary adjustment and reconciliation, we are requesting that in the Supplementary Schedule II the excess amount above Shs 8.7 billion be applied. And that we actually come in Supplementary Schedule II to the following: We have challenges in verification of costs for compensations in the Northern part of Uganda, in Acholi, Teso and Karamoja sub-regions, which totals up to Shs 508,264,800. We seek that in the next – that one be obtained from the balance after adjustments in the next supplementary budget. And also –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am rising on is this: The Ministry of Justice came to seek for money for arbitration. We said the money was excessive and so the committee should investigate. When the committee came up with the exact amount of money, the ministry is now saying, “If there is excess, we shall come up and take it to another unit.” And yet that is already budgeted for – because we always budget for compensation. If they need money under that unit, they will also come here with a supplementary for it. How can we use money for a specific unit and transfer it elsewhere? Is it procedurally right for the minister to convince us to give them the money now and if there is excess they will transfer it somewhere else, yet we have a budget line for that item and we have already passed it?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I was giving my colleague constructive notice that certainly we shall be coming back in those very deserving areas and if this money – but we have talked with the Ministry of Finance. Anyway, I move together with the committee chairperson that the Shs 8,719,744,475 be approved for the arbitration case in London.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to confirm that when we left Parliament last time, as per your instructions, we had further meetings with the Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Finance, and we agreed that the Shs 8,719,744,475 be approved for arbitration of the case in London. We also agreed that later, when Supplementary Schedule II comes up, the balances of the money should be committed to settling out matters, including what he has mentioned – verification of compensations from Teso, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, originally the request was for Shs 11 billion which our committee examined and reduced to Shs 8.0 billion. Isn’t it? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are adopting the report; are we going recommendation by recommendation?

THE SPEAKER: Did you have an interest in any particular area?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Madam Speaker, the PPDA Act, 2003, Section 2 says, “The Act shall apply to all public procurement and disposal activities and in particular shall apply to all public finances originating from the Consolidated Fund.” And here, the Ministry of Justice is saying that it used another law in order to use the PPDA money. But the recommendation of the committee is not putting punitive action on the people who were involved because they violated the Act. So, my proposal is that as much we are going to allow the supplementary, the people who broke the law should be held liable. And it is very clear here in the PPDA Act. I propose that we agree to approve the report, but the Attorney-General should be held liable for not following the PPDA Act as prescribed in the Ugandan laws. If we do not do that, the Justice ministry people will go back to use other laws in order to circumvent and cheat us. So, I propose that he or she is held personally liable for this crime of flouting the law.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a committee, we also made a finding on this matter and we did not agree with the interpretation of the Attorney-General. And to that extent, we did not agree with them and we have taken the course that we have taken. I do not think it will be necessary; they should just take note of this position. It is not yet justified at this stage to impose punitive sanctions on the Attorney-General’s Office. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time such a thing is happening. You remember when they again got lawyers to deal with advertising Uganda abroad in 2006. When that happened, they came and apologised and we said that one was okay. Now, there was another case. This is the fourth. It has become a habit. So, unless we become strong and put sanctions, the Attorney-General, who is our lawyer, will continue to go and do wrong things saying, “I am the lawyer, I will change the law to suit my interests.” This is a Government department using public funds. You are even mentioning it that any person following deals with public funds under 4 should follow the PPDA Act. Why don’t we put sanctions now for having committed a crime at least four times?

MR STEPHEN BAKA: Madam Speaker, this issue is not very clear because the Attorney-General came to the committee and gave us a position. When we called the PPDA, they gave us a position which was in agreement with the Attorney-General’s. As a committee, we also gave our own position, which was contrary to the two positions. Now, the other day the Prime Minister asked, “How do we handle a situation where the chief government legal advisor gives a position and the committee disagrees?” So, it is not very clear on who is on the right course.

I would suggest that instead of going for sanctions, we would rather examine this issue further because the chief legal government advisor gave a position and the committee disagreed with it. So, how do we proceed? The authority which is the custodian of that law gave us a position similar to the one of the Attorney-General. So, I would suggest that the House goes for a further examination of the issue and not give sanctions at this moment.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think as the House, we cannot proceed to take a decision now when the Attorney-General, the PPDA and the committee are in disagreement. We do not have enough information for us to make a decision as to how to condemn or to sanction the Attorney-General. I think it is incumbent upon the committee now to say that they will proceed with some further investigation and clarification so that they give us an investigated position such that we make a decision. Otherwise, we cannot say the Attorney-General is wrong or the committee is wrong. Let them go and consult further.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do, to a great extent, agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the issue of sanctions, on the condition that if we are to give sanctions, we should not look at mass punishment. We should be able to single out who is responsible for what. This is because if we give sanctions en masse, it will mean we shall cripple service delivery and all activities of the department, and hence the whole state. So, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi was strict; but all he says is, “He or she” and it becomes vague. Who is “he or she”? We should have been able earlier on to testify who we are imposing sanctions against so that now we move on to sanctions. But we cannot give sanctions against the entire chambers of the Attorney-General. So, in that respect, let us go on to examine the issue further until such a time when we get a particular person responsible for the mess. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Actually, we are looking at the spirit. What is the spirit of this? When you look at the recommendation it is that the Attorney-General should always follow the procurement procedure laid out in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act. The Attorney-General is the chief legal advisor of Government. He knows that he has a duty to follow the law. What we are looking out for in this is that, what is the sanction for someone who does not actually do what he is supposed to do? So, it is not that it is targeting an individual, but we are looking at such acts because we have ever even procured legal services at one time to prosecute Dr Besigye and Shs 2.5 billion went to Kampala Associated Advocates. The Attorney-General by then had the discretion to choose to outsource, which legal firm he would use. So, we want to put a stop on such so that whoever intends to act in this direction knows the repercussions of such. That is the spirit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agree with hon. Biraaro that we are passing judgement against everybody unlike in the other two reports where PAC fingered the chain from the start to the finish. They identified who started what and who headed what and they came out clearly. But here now we are - why don’t we ask one of our committees to follow it up and report to us?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I agree with you. Why I said “he or she” in this respect is because it is the accounting officer who is responsible. So, we do not know who the accounting officer was at that time; whether it was a woman or a man. That is why I said “he or she”. The committee should be able to identify who really signed the contract at that time because the person should have followed the rules.

Madam Speaker, this PPDA is very clear. It says “...shall...” It has never said the Attorney-General will be exempted. Never! And there is a reason for this. Even if you are going to do procurement which is specialised, there is a procedure. So, I want to agree with you, Madam Speaker, that we task the committee again to go and identify who this person is who never followed the rules of the game and then he/she will be dealt with.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to state that we had a very long debate on this matter when we were debating the report of the committee, and I remember I categorically stated that whatever may be said in terms of the law, there is still a grey area as far as procurement of specialised services is concerned. I even made an example where one is sick and he wants to get a doctor, and you want to go through a procurement system. You can imagine what you would go through. 

There are services where you do not necessarily look at the money component, but the quality of the service in order to achieve an objective, and this is one of them. So, yes, the committee, in my view, should not necessarily really be mandated to go and look for a person to penalise, but it should be given a duty and responsibility to call the relevant stakeholders to see how we can actually come out with a clear position on the procurement of specialised services.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we are asking them to go and witch-hunt. We are asking them to do more research and find out what really happened, because we have not been told how it happened. No, I think we need to end this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is very clear under (c): “Procurement or disposal of works, services, supplies or any combination whatsoever”. “Legal” is a service; “Accounting” is a service. So, they have not said here in the PPDA that except the legal part. No! We want to request you Attorney-General to be a very good Attorney-General and not a political one because you have seen the thing is on you and you want to say no for this one. Instead say, “I have committed a crime, but I am going to make good. You cane me sparingly.” But if you insist and we get you, we shall cane you heavily. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, with the amendment that the committee reviews this report further, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE
NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if the Chairperson of Budget is not here, let us go to the Companies’ Bill.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2009

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we stood over clauses 2, 40, 51, 132, 133, 136, and 218, and the Second Schedule.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in respect of those clauses that we stood over, in terms of clause 2, the request was that we take clauses 5 and 6 to the interpretation section although I had thought that even that one had been cleared, but clauses 5 and 6 explain what has been outlined in clause 4 sub-clause (3) paragraph (d), in terms of the categories of companies that may be formed. In order to properly explain clause 4, sub-clause (3) paragraph (d), it makes the law easier to read if immediately after - the law clearly spells out what a private and public company is without having to first revert to the interpretation section. In a sense, it is good drafting not to refer the user of the law unnecessarily always to the interpretation clause.

Lawyer colleagues will always know that sometimes you even say, “For the purposes of this section” so that you do not have to go always to the interpretation clause. So, in my opinion and after some necessary consultations, we believe that clauses 5 and 6 can stay where they are.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think the position as stated by the learned Attorney-General was even my position yesterday and I support this position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we had agreed that for the information of the public, it is important that these areas are set out as they are. I think we agreed on that. So, let us go to clause 40 because the other one is interpretation.

Clause 40

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, there was a question as to how we can appeal from decisions of the registrar. If the amendment proposed by the committee is adopted, we could look at clause 289 of the Bill, which provides for the registrar not to exercise the powers granted to him or her under the Act adversely, without giving a person affected by that power a right to be heard. Once the registrar makes a decision, the decision is an administrative decision subject to review by the court under Article 42 of the Constitution. This is a matter that is administrative and that is why the committee is removing it from the minister and giving the power to the registrar. Appeal is not appropriate even in this case as it lengthens decision-making. However, should it be preferred, then judicial review, which is already guaranteed by Article 42, is a better and faster option as the paper work involved is simpler and maybe disposed off in chambers of court. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there still objection?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the intention of this was to make sure that nobody is treated unfairly. Now, here, the registrar has taken a decision; the minister has agreed; where does the person appeal? I think the best thing is for us to include clause 7 here. In case there is a disagreement, somebody should go to the High Court for an appeal and I do not see any problem with that because the registrar could have convinced his minister. The only person who can really help now is the High Court because those are impartial, but the minister is the supervisor of the registrar and you can connive to do anything. Here it is given, but we need to put it here as clause 7, so that in case the above fails, the person should go to court. At least the High Court should be the one to decide.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the Companies Act outside the jurisdiction of the High Court? No, it is not. You can go even straight away. It is not outside the jurisdiction of the High Court. Actually, that is why we have a Commercial Court.

So, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR RUHINDI: This was a proposal by the committee to delete the provision and we note that that clause 51 was intended as a special provision relating only to single member companies, when the original clause 4 separated a single member company from other private companies. However, since clause 4 has been amended to make a single member company like any other private company, then this clause is redundant. So, we agree with the committee for its deletion and, Madam Chair, most of the stand-alone clauses in the Bill in respect of single member companies were even deleted and this certainly should have been consequential because everything is clear now under Section 4, that we take it as a private company.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I think if you read the thing very well, a single member company is different from a more than one person company. Basically, this should come here. He is saying we want to separate the owner from the company. In this case, if you read sub-section (1), “Subject to sub-section (2) where a private limited company by shares or by guarantee having only one member enters into a contract with a single member of the company, who is a director of the company, the company shall, unless the contract is in writing, ensure that the terms of the contract are set out in a written memorandum.” The purpose here is that even if it is my own company and I am a single person, there must be a real written – this is the purpose of separating these two people. Failure to do that, it will be a problem. It is one-to-one; the same thing. That is why sub-section (2) comes up. It says they exempt those who are in normal business. Suppose your company deals in tomatoes and you as an individual have grown your tomatoes; you can sell your tomatoes to the company. 

But in this first one, it is dealing with the separation and we want to avoid the case of Salomon v Salomon. Clause 51 is very vital despite the fact that you removed the one – here you defined it; you said a company is single or more than one person. But in this case, it is coming specifically to deal with a single-man company and it is very important. 

MR RUHINDI: But hon. Nandala-Mafabi, why don’t you also read Clause 50, which is a general provision for contracts. What does it say? “A company may make a contract by execution under its common seal or on behalf of the company by a person acting under its authority express implied.” Read all of it and even look at (3); “A contract made according to this section shall be effectual in law and shall bind the company and its successors and all other parties to it.” The element of your writing and whatever -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have read 50. Basically, 50 is showing where there is more than one shareholder. I want you to read it very carefully, Attorney-General. You will see that it means more than one; but if you go to 52, it is the one where there is only one person as the owner of the company. It does no harm to have this thing here. Why do you want to delete it? Do you want to form a company and you also do the same, because if you delete this; anything can happen.

THE CHARPERSON: But honourable members, look at the head note. It says, “Contract with single member of the company.” Someone contracting with one of the members who is a director in the company.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That means a one-member company. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have a company and you have directors; then hon. Wamanga-Wamai enters into a contract with me, one of the directors. That is what it is addressing.

MR RUHINDI: Let me clarify further by also making a reference to clause 4. It will guide us better. This clause was starting as: “Any two or more persons,” okay? We amended it to, “Any one or more persons” and we deleted sub-clause (3) of clause 5, which was specific. For purposes of this section, a single-member company shall be taken to be a private company. Because of that arrangement before, we went separating single-member companies from companies, which is no longer the case. Actually, we have substantially deleted most of the clauses dealing with single-member companies because of the amendment in clause 4. This amendment was preferred by the committee. They can speak for it. It was a consequential amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if the Attorney-General does not want to listen, this is my last submission. It says, “Contracts with a single member of the company.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not a single-member company; with one of the members of the company.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: A single member of the company; “Where a private company limited by shares having only one member, enters into a contract with a single member of a company who is a director of the company, the company, unless a contract is in writing, will ensure that the terms of the contract are set out in a written memorandum.”

Here we have a single-member company wherever you want it. This one exists. Here it is. The reason this is coming up is to safeguard a one-member company entering into a contract with himself. That is the purpose of this clause. You understand it? I am talking like this because I went and downloaded a law of the UK and I saw a similar thing. I am sure you copied this from the UK law because when I left here, I was not understanding this issue of the single-member company; so, I had to take off time to go and read and I saw this clause in that law. 

MR MWIRU: When you look at the marginal note of the section, somehow it tends to contradict with the substance of the section. Whereas the marginal note talks about contracts with a single member of the company; it envisages a situation where a third party is contracting with one of directors of the company. We know that for one to contract with a company, someone must have authority to act on behalf of the company. But here, it says with, “a single member of the company who is a director.” It is as if it a single member of the company contracting with a single member –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what it is.

MR MWIRU: Actually, that is what makes it redundant because if it was the way it is in the marginal note that it is about a contract by a single director trying to bind a company - but here it creates a conflict. That is why they are saying we remove it because it is redundant. Though the argument is that 51 takes care of it; 50 does not seem to be explicit covering contracts by a single director of a company binding a company. Maybe that is where the Attorney-General must come out very clearly. I agree that it is not clear; that is why it seems to be a little bit redundant.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, it is good hon. Paul Mwiru has talked about it. The heading is the problem. It should be, “Contracts with single-member companies.” You remove the word, “of” because if you go ahead, “Where a company limited by shares or guaranteed having only one member,” If you look at that, it means a single-member company. That is why I want us to put, “contracts with single-member company.” I want to delete the words, “of the.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we discussed this matter at length yesterday. I now put the question that clause 51 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 132

MR RUHINDI: Clauses 132 and 133; I take them jointly. These clauses allow a company to establish branches in Commonwealth countries. Once a company has established a branch outside Uganda, then the company may transfer the shares of that company in Uganda to another person in or outside Uganda, and that transaction shall be recognised as a transfer of property in Uganda since shares are property. A transfer does not have to be carried out in Uganda. 

The transfer shall, therefore, be regulated by the laws of the country where the branch is located. The provision refers to Commonwealth countries since most of the Commonwealth countries have similar provisions. For most of them, their companies law is based on the 1948 Companies Act of UK, and the regulation of companies is done according to Common Law principles. So, it is that commonality that is referred to as facilitating this cross-border transaction. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to give an example. I may go to Bermuda and register a company there of Shs 10 billion and I do not pay stamp duty. I can then open up a branch in Kampala and transfer the shares without paying stamp duty because Bermuda is a member of the Commonwealth. Uganda is going to lose money. 

The only way to deal with this is to be exempted from stamp duty chargeable in Uganda unless they have double taxation agreements which exist between Uganda and that country. Currently, we do not have a double taxation agreement with many of the Commonwealth countries and people will play about with that. So, I want to propose that they should not be exempted from tax unless they have double taxation agreements with Uganda. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will give us a bit more revenue. Okay, I put the question that clause 132 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 132, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 133 agreed to.

Clause 136

MR RUHINDI: In clause 136, the proposal by the committee to de-register a company which has not filed returns is in proposal 17 of their report. The proposal of the committee should not be adopted since it is already covered in the proposal the committee seeks to make in respect of dormant companies. 

Instead, the proposal of the committee should be re-drafted as follows: 

1.	Where a company is dormant, the directors shall notify the registrar within 15 working days from the date of the resolution for dormancy and the company shall be exempted from filing returns for 12 months; that is the grace period.

2.	If after the expiry of three years” – I was trying as much as possible to accommodate hon. Nandala’s concerns – “from the date specified in sub-section (1), the company has not filed any annual returns the registrar shall require the company to file a statement of solvency and show cause why a company should not be struck off the register.

3.	Where the company does not show cause why it should not be struck off the register in accordance with sub-section (2), the registrar shall strike the company off the register and publish in the gazette and newspaper of wide national circulation a notice of the striking off of that company from the registrar.” 

I have consulted with the chair of the committee and he is in agreement with this proposal.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the Attorney-General should have noted that he is adopting the proposals of the committee with the small amendment to accommodate the concerns of hon. Mafabi. So, we agree with the amendment because it reflects the thinking of the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, that is okay; it is in good spirit. But two issues arise; if you look at clause 2, it states that a company is liable to a fine if it does not comply with this section; a fine of 25 currency points. This is very good; it helps every company to file a return. But also it is very dangerous. Twenty five currency points is half a million. If you default for three years, that is Shs 1.5 million. So, somebody might default and open up another company.

So, I propose that these currency points be reduced so that people can return and use their old companies instead of opening up new ones. I propose that this lowers to 10 currency points, which is Shs 200,000. If somebody defaults for five years, he would have to pay Shs 1 million instead of being told to pay Shs 5 million.

Now, on the dormancy period, I think three years are too small. You can lack business for three years and in the fourth year you get business. I think to be fair, the normal period should be five years. That is the time when files are taken to archives. So, for dormancy, let us give it five years as we do for taking files from the shelves to the archive. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a cost to leaving these files around; does it cost the registrar anything to keep these dormant files around? 

MR TASHOBYA: I have no problem, Madam Chair, to extending the time from three to five years as proposed by hon. Nandala. But I think the filing of returns is an important matter and responsibility on the part of the people running companies. We are saying 25 currency points is half a million shillings. This is a punitive provision for those that do not follow the law. The filing of returns is important to the company and the people dealing with the company. 

So, the people running the company owe responsibility to the company and also to the people who deal with the company. I think half a million shillings is not too much not to be afforded and it is also meaningful. A fine should also be meaningful to the people paying it. They should suffer – people must have fear. I really think that 25 currency points is reasonable and affordable. It also imposes a responsibility to the people managing companies.

MR RUHINDI: Let me clarify that it is actually not three. You see that in one, there is a period of grace of 12 months. So, if after that, you do not show cause within three years – it is four years actually –(Interjections)- so you would want to improve on the period of grace to two?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think we had agreed on the period, but it was the currency point where we were saying that it is too punitive and the chairman is saying no, that you must be responsible if you float companies. It should not be just for mukolo. If you have incorporated a company, you should do the needful and that is what the chairman is saying.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much. I really have no challenge to put to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal, but I would love him to help me share with him what I am going to say. I am a great believer in the law of equity. Someone or some people incorporate a company with a certain share capital; some Shs 1 million, others Shs 100,000 or Shs 3 billion, and so much.  Now, when we come to a time when they have defaulted and we are not sure whether it is deliberate or because of other surrounding reasons, we then pick a uniform currency point as a penalty. I feel there would be no equity and that is why we need to be assisted. Why don’t we put it in certain proportions so that people: (i) with the arrival of the company and its share capital; and (ii) the turnover of the business at the time of defaulting, so that when we are penalising, the penalty really first sounds equitable because you imagine a company with say, Shs 1 million as share capital with a turnover of Shs 200,000 per annum. We are now going to fine them for defaulting 20 or three currency points.

Then there is another company that has had problems or reasons to default or even to cheat like in our associations. Someone just sort of puts a company in dormancy and does other things behind him. Now when they also come, you tell them five currency points which is a walk-over. It is just like a cup of tea to them. So, I am looking at how we can formulate something equitable to the size and operations of the company at the time of going under or something like that. We need to be helped by those ones in the masterly of company management.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you cannot use turnover. I will give you an example of the simplest business; these people who run petrol stations can have a turnover of Shs 100 billion, but his profit is about Shs 10 million. So, if you go by the turnover of that company, you will penalise a dying person. 

Secondly, this one is not necessary and the law is even saying that the company and every officer. Incidentally, the director who is an employee may refuse to make a return and they will charge the company. So, who suffers in the company? It is the shareholders. You cannot unless you make the law saying that the penalty goes to the officer who was responsible for filing the return and not to the company. Now, supposing you fired the officer two years ago, what happens? Those are administrative things. 

What we are trying to do is – the registrar should not sit in the office waiting for the returns. He should have a mechanism to even prompt companies by sending a Demand Note that you have not even written a return. 

The problem we are now having in the country is that the registrar does not even know the number of companies he has and does not even know that he should always prompt them to say that they have not filed a return. With this modern technology, you should be able to send either an email or advertise that so and so has not filed a return like URA is doing since they are going to be a one man and one woman company and somebody will file. 

We do not want people to make a law which will make officers lazy; we should make officers active. In fact, the penalty you are putting is for the time the officer will take while working to demand the return from you, but not for him to sit and get money, and that is why I am saying 10 currency points –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I was asking honourable members, what does it cost the registrar to maintain and monitor that dormancy? No, if you are going to have someone issuing notices throughout the country and checking every month, there is a cost.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why we are saying that Shs 200,000 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Shs 200,000?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just Shs 200,000.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a cost.

MR RUHINDI: But perpetual dormancy is also - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If we have given five years, really – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Five years, yes –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have agreed on the five years.

MR BAKA: Madam Chair, before you take a decision on the five years, the period of dormancy – I think five years, in my opinion, would be too much because you were wondering what it costs the registrar to keep the files around. But you see, we have people who register companies and keep them. We have investors who may want to use certain names, which convey a certain message, but these names have already been used and they cannot use them, because they are business names which convey a certain message, but people rush, register companies and they keep them and they are dormant for five years. It kills investment and the initiative of other people who may want to use those companies –(Laughter)- yes, it does.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I thought we had settled the issue of the five years. We are now dealing with the currency points – I think you said that you have no problem with five years. Now, let us deal with the currency points. We maintain the 25 currency points – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Chair, we are pushing out the small business people if we make it so high. Actually, we are even at a threat because most of the businesses have been taken over by foreigners. So, if we make it so high, we are pushing our people out of business. 

MR RUHINDI: We are telling them not to commit irregularities.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No. But 25 is too much. We just make 10 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, let us be consistent. Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition said he wants people to have annual general meetings and he was very consistent on that one. So, you call the annual general meetings and you file your returns –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You refused –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You refused –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we did not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You refused it, Madam Chair. If you –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no. The returns must be filed. You said you can call a general meeting even if you are alone; sit by yourself and file your returns. You were very insistent on that one. So, if we have the –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, did we win that? Did you accept on that? Of private companies having - the chairperson was saying that it is not mandatory and for me, I was saying that they should do it at a sitting. Did we pass that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. But honourable members, I think we are trying to bring up our business community. Really, we should also teach them that when you float a company, there are obligations. Yes, five years of dormancy and you say – the oath of obligation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are about to adjust even the currency points because the 20,000 has been there for many years and I think the Minister of Finance is about – yes, by the time we came in 2001 as first years here, the currency point was 20,000. In the Sixth Parliament, it was 20,000. The Ministry of Finance is in the process of reviewing the currency points. The moment it takes it to 60,000 or 100,000 as they are proposing and you put that 25 currency points, I can tell you that you will have a problem with the 2.5 million. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But it is the currency point defined in this Act. 

MR TASHOBYA: What my colleague is raising may have merit and at some point the minister may revise it, but can we really legislate in anticipation of the changes that may take place in the Ministry of Finance?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have agreed on the five years. We have moved from three years to five years, but I think we will retain the currency points. I put the question that clause 136 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 218

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, on clause 218, there was a debate; I don’t even know whether there was any specific proposed amendment, that we make a ceiling or a provision to say that salaries and emoluments of directors be approved in a general meeting of a company. We are of the view that this is a matter that this law cannot address since it is an internal matter for the management of the company. In any case, the directors may be removed and disqualified from acting as directors under the proposal inserted by the committee on the qualifications and disqualifications of directors. We cannot begin micro-managing companies in this kind of legislation and I can see Paul nodding. That is very good. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what brought up this issue was, for example, the case of Enron in America and here in Uganda we have the case of Umeme where the directors are drawing huge sums of money at the expense of Ugandans and they mention many of them. In America, they came up with a law on how directors should be determined and it is not bad for us here in our laws to set our fees or the emoluments of our directors and that is why we had a proposal that for the public companies, the annual general meeting should be the one to determine and approve the directors’ emoluments. For a government company, the government should be the one to determine them. Where Government has interests - and this is for purposes of making the owners of a company be involved – it should be involved in determining the emoluments of the directors. Otherwise, if you leave it to the directors themselves, they can put any amount for themselves. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 218 be amended as proposed – but who sits in the AGM of Umeme?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, do we have anything in Umeme? We have I think 49 percent shares. The government has left Umeme to kill us, otherwise it should have been the government which should have determined the emoluments for those directors. What we are trying to say is that it brings a problem. If we don’t have people to take interest like the owners of the company, or where the government has an interest - like Umeme which is more or less running a government business - Why shouldn’t Government get interested? 

MR OROMAIT: There is that company called ESKOM in Jinja. While we were on tour as a Committee on Government Assurances, I raised that issue of discrimination in payment. You will find that the expatriates are paid three times more than the locals. So, this is the clause to address this. I am in support of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, this is a matter which is normally internal to the companies and in the case of Umeme, which is really the extreme, and which we are discussing, it is supposed to be handled by the regulator because the business plan is presented, the figures are stated by the regulator and if the regulator does not endorse, Umeme cannot go ahead with those figures; otherwise we are trying to go into internal – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to suggest that I don’t think we have done enough research to make this proposal. I think we would take a global view of different companies. You know, we are micro-managing by law. I am not comfortable.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, first of all, by the structure of the company, the directors are at the top in terms of the management of the company and I don’t think by determining their emoluments, it means you are micro-managing, because you are not going below them. Why should they be left at liberty to determine their own emoluments? We have seen cases where they have abused this by allotting themselves hefty emoluments and all these go unabated. It is important that the shareholders, the owners, have a say as to the emoluments. I agree with hon. Nandala–Mafabi because hon. Ruhindi hasn’t really convinced us that by looking into the emoluments of directors, it is micro-management as such. We are going deeper than that. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to re-echo what hon. Migereko pointed out and what you, Madam Chairperson, were trying to guide us on. Matters of remuneration of directors are an internal matter of the company and besides, that is why you also have a general meeting. If these people are just fleecing the company, the owners of the company will bring them to book or they will dismiss them. So, it is not an open cheque. I beg that my colleague drops that proposal.

MR SEWUNGU: Madam Chair, I would like to go by your guidance. You know that this is a very important matter. Yes, I am not a lawyer, but I have experience in this field. Let me give you an example. Mr Sudhir Ruparelia owns Kampala Parents Primary School and there is this other school called Kabojja Junior School. But when you go to these schools, you realise that the headteachers employed there cannot determine the salaries of the directors and other employees. In those schools, you find that each teacher does not know how much their colleague earns. That is very true. 

In the circumstances and like you have guided, I would like to move that we do more research on this matter. This is an area of contention. Even when you go to these private companies – okay, I am talking about schools because I have experience in them, but also, it is one of the sectors where complaints of this nature are too many. You know, someone will open up a school and earns say, Shs 1 billion in a term, but you find that he only pays Shs 100 million in salaries. And you are not going to ask him why he is doing that because that is a private company. So, why not do more research on this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to propose that we do more research and if it becomes necessary and we are satisfied, we can come up with an amendment later.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chair, since these are private companies, can we qualify to say, “Where Government has interests” - otherwise, we cannot legislate for private businesses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I am saying that we have not done enough research on this subject. We should really study it by looking at the private companies and those of Government to see how they operate before we come back with an amendment from an informed position. Otherwise, for now, let us leave it as it is.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 218 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule

MR RUHINDI: There was a proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in Table F, about the composition of the audit committee that will be specific that a certain number should come from outside the company. But we are advising that the provision as it stands requires the committee to be composed of independent directors. And the code in paragraph 4.3(c) on page 312 of the Bill already defines an independent director as a person outside the control and management of the company. So, I think that takes care of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concerns.

MR NADALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what the internal auditor does forms part of the decisions of the board members. I have looked at 312 – the person we are talking about is a board member. But supposing this member has been involved in a decision-making process, which the internal auditor is going to look at and after which that auditor appears before the same person, will that person perform? Actually, the internal auditor might be sacked for auditing the boss.

Yesterday, Madam Chair, you reminded us of 17(1) on international financial reporting and standards. If you go by that, you will realise that the current standards say that the audit committee consists of persons outside the company. And since we adopted this not for the private companies, then we should know that this is meant for the public companies. And I think you recall the amendment we moved for the public companies.

I gave you an example yesterday about the fact that currently, ministries have audit committees, but why are they not using the permanent secretaries or some of the staff as members of these audit committees? You realise that they are using people from outside such as retired civil servants, lawyers, accountants and so on to be on these audit committees. I see no reason for you to talk about good governance when you want to allow the members of the board who are part of the company be members of the audit committee. This is supposed to be a serious committee among all committees.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t you satisfied with the provisions of 4(3)(c)? It talks about an independent director who is, “Non-executive; does not represent or is not nominated by the major shareholder; is not employed by the company in the last three years; is not an immediate family member; is not a professional advisor; is not a significant supplier for or customer of the group; has no significant contractual relationship with the group; is free from any business or other relations, which could interfere...” doesn’t it cover that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if you look at it that way, you should be able to realise that it says that this should not be part of the board. So, for us to be clear, we should say that the audit committee should consist of a chairperson and at least three other persons of reputable integrity, but coming from outside the board. Instead of using the word “independent” we should be clearer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that the Second Schedule be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Companies Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and that of the Members.  I want to recommit clause 173, which talks about disqualification of appointment as an auditor. In 73, it defines who is supposed to be the auditor of the company. If you look at 1(a), one or more of the professional bodies specified in the Company’s Act – because you can specify even a lawyer. I want to recommit that this should read as: “One or more of the professional accounting bodies recognised by ICPU”. 

We have a lot of professional bodies. We have ACCA, ICA, CPA (Kenya), CPA (America), mention it, but the body that recognises them in Uganda is the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda (ICPAU). The purpose of this is to make sure that we don’t get quack accountants coming in the country to audit companies. For example, I can register my company in Bermuda, and I come with an auditor and say this is the person who should audit my company. So, this is why I want to recommit this and say, “A professional accounting body recognised by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would want to discourage that. We have been having a battle with the lawyers. Those who have studied in other jurisdictions, other than in Uganda, cannot get into LDC. So, if you say only ICPA-Uganda, our children have gone to Israel, Australia, America and studied from there, so you will be locking them out.

MR MAWANDA: I would like to inform you that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is currently handling the Accountants Bill and all these matters hon. Nandala is raising are catered for. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what we are trying to say is that most of the people who are accountants, including myself, never did CPA-Uganda. What is happening is that the moment you get a qualification in Accountancy that is recognised in the Commonwealth, it is clear that you will be registered by the institute. Even in America, if it follows international financial reporting standards, they will register you.

If you do this, and allow it - I will give you an example; there are many people who go to Nkrumah Road and come back with papers from Ireland, among other places, and say they have qualifications in Accounting. If you allow this, such people will say they are professional accountants, from say Israel. The reason why I am putting this is as a safeguard so that we have real professional accountants. There is no reason as to why anyone who comes from outside will be left out.

THE SPEAKER: What does the Attorney-General say?
 
MR RUHINDI: I would like to agree with hon. Mawanda that since they are doing a thorough and scientific study on this matter, let them handle it. In any case, if that law comes out, it can have some cross references in some of the pertinent legislation, like the one we are actually considering. (Applause)

BILLS 
THIRD READING 

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2009

8.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that that Bill entitled, “The Companies Bill, 2009” be read for a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE COMPANIES ACT, 2012”

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, I am just about to retire to the back bench. I want to thank you for taking us through this process of passing this important legislation. And as I retire, I want to thank my colleagues, Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, some of whom I can see across and those behind. I want to say once again that we have other four reports, and at an appropriate time, we are ready to present them. 

I would like to thank the learned Attorney-General for the support and the one across for his very good input that enriched the work we did. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday, I was opening the JLOS Sector Meeting and one of the things the Chief Justice said was that we were delaying his work by not enacting this law. I told him that this week we shall deliver the Companies Bill. So, just tell him that we have done the needful. (Applause)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I too would like to thank you for your continued stamina in shepherding this House. (Laughter and Applause) While many of us can opt to get out and take a cup of water and do a few things – by the way, we thank also your Deputy Speaker, who is also emulating your example. (Applause)

Let this Bill be your Easter gift. Go and do business. Let me remind each one of us that the world is moving at a supersonic speed. If we do not get serious with these matters which concern our welfare, we come in the House and we begin debating motions on “Walk-to-Work” everyday and we relegate this very serious business into the doldrums, we shall find ourselves in big problems.

Let me tell you one thing; when brothers fight to death, strangers will come and inherit their father’s estate. We are brothers and sisters in this country. If we continue fighting to death, those multinationals for whom we are enacting this legislation to compete against, will take us over. Therefore, let us put more emphasis and focus on the relevant business of this House. We can only do that if we agree to live with each other in harmony and in friendship. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much, especially the paralegals, for making our work very interesting and very informative. 

We have procured some diaries for you and you can pick them up from the Sergeant-at-Arms. Secondly, as part of the IPU preparations, we have also procured a Conference Bag for each Member of Parliament to commemorate the Golden Jubilee, which will include your invitations and a T-shirt. Stay around for a few days so that you can get them.

Otherwise, we adjourn to the 10th April. Happy Easter, honourable members! Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 8.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
