Wednesday, 29 March 2006

Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome, honourable members. As communicated earlier, we have a lot of work to clear this month and next month. Therefore, I appeal to you to come so that we clear our table.  Your mandate is still on.

BILLS
FIRST READING

ANIMAL DISEASES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Agriculture is not here. Let us skip it.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: He is not here. Let us skip it too.  
                    
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR UNIONS BILL, 2005

10.26
THE MINISTER OF GENDER LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Unions Bill, 2005” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Well, it is okay. Proceed, please.

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr Speaker, I wish to place before the House, “The Labour Unions Bill, 2005”. This bill like the other three bills I have presented in this House in the last two days is a culmination of a long process of our labour law reform. 

Honourable Members of Parliament are aware that there are provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which directly relate to this Bill and they include, Article 29 (e) which says: “Every person shall have the right to- freedom of association which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organisations.” 
Article 40 (3)(a) reads: “Every worker has a right- to form or join a trade union of his or her choice for the promotion and protection of his or her economic and social interests; (b) to collective bargaining and representation; and (c) to withdraw his or her labour according to the law.”

The existing law, which is the Trade Unions Act Cap. 223 of the laws of Uganda is meant to operationalise and give effect to the above cited articles of the Constitution which was enacted in 1976 well before the coming into force of the Constitution of 1995.  This law is very much outdated and it is a source of frustration for all the stakeholders. It does not give proper and adequate effect to the Constitution. In fact in many cases, the current provisions outrightly contradict our Constitution.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the Labour Unions Bill, 2005, which I am laying before you seeks to give correct and adequate effect as well as meet international labour standards which are very critical in international trade in this globalised world. 

The purpose of the Labour Unions Bill, 2005 is to usher in the freedom of association as spelt out in the Constitution. It liberalises the labour union field; it removes the legal monopoly of the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) and enables formation and regulation of other national labour union centres.

It provides for the formation by workers of independent labour unions and branch unions of their choice. This law permits labour union organisation to operate at the establishment. Employees have the right to organise themselves in any labour union of their choice and assist in running it and bargain collectively through it using representatives of their choice.  

The Labour Unions Bill, 2005 does not allow employers to interfere with this freedom of association. The Bill seeks to operationalise as I said earlier, Article 29(e) and 43 of the Constitution. It repeals the current Union Act Cap. 223. It also removes restrictive numbers associated with formation of unions. I want to call for the urgent consideration and approval of this Bill by the House. The stakeholders have waited very long in frustration for this- and yet the security of our external market depends on the passing an enactment of this law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. minister.  

10.31
THE AG CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Labour Unions Bill, 2005. The Bill is one of the four Labour Bills that was presented for the first reading in this august House on the 27 October 2005 by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Bill was referred to the Committee on Social Services for scrutiny. 

The Labour Unions Bill, 2005 ushers in freedom of association as spelt out in the Constitution and thus operationalises the trade unions. The rationale behind this Bill is to liberalise the trade unions, which gives permission to the different centres of existing trade unions such as Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU) and National Organisation Trade Unions (NOTU). The Bill spells out the functions of a trade centre and further requires trade unions to register and develop a Constitution.

Background: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the labour legislation review has been a long process involving extensive consultations with the various stakeholders. The Labour Unions Bill, 2005 is one of the Bills that are a result of a long process of dialogue between the Government and institutions like Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions and Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions, among others.

The existing legislations do not conform to the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, which recognise and uphold workers’ and employers’ rights and obligations. The specific articles that relate to work and the work place or working environment include articles: 25, 29, 34, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44. 

The existing laws are archaic and restrictive and do not address the challenges and needs of the new work environment and modern labour market. Therefore, there was need for a legislative framework that responds to these challenges and needs.

Uganda is a signatory to a number of international conventions that relate to labour, the labour market and work environment, among others. Harmonisation of our domestic laws with the international labour conventions is long over due.

The security of Ugandan’s current and future external market is dependent on the reforms in our labour environment and reforms are a necessary ingredient for Uganda’s survival in the global market.

There has been a global development of new concepts in the labour environment.  This has created a need to restructure our labour laws to be in line with the new labour developments and labour concepts.

Methodology: The committee met with various stakeholders who included: The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, The Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, the Members of Parliament representing workers, the Federation of Uganda Employers, the National Organisation of Trade Unions and Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions. The committee also scrutinised and took into account submissions by the various NGOs’ like Platform for Labour Action, and other interested individuals.

Observations and recommendations: Inclusion of Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions in the law. The committee observed that the Constitutional Court ruled on 24 June 2005 on the freedom of association and section (2) (1) of the Trade Unions Act was nullified, because it was inconsistent with Article 29(e) and 40 (3) of the Constitution. As a result, COFTU that had been established as a federation by a number of trade unions was brought on board as a new development in the labour movement. The committee, therefore, recommends that all relevant clauses in the Labour Bills be amended to cater for COFTU.

Minimum numbers for registration of Labour Unions: The committee received various submissions on the minimum number of members required to register a Labour Union.  This ranged from 1,000 to no limit.   Mr Speaker, in our discussion with the ministry, the committee of course had a view of having a minimum to 300 but eventually the committee and the ministry agreed that we should not have any limitation.

Conclusion: The committee is in full support of the motion for second reading of the Labour Union’s Bill, 2005. Some amendments have been proposed to address the concerns raised in this report. At an appropriate time the relevant clauses will be amended. Hon. Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for the report. Now the debate is open for discussion.  

10.38
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers’ Representative): Hon. Speaker, I once again thank the committee for bringing this Bill. You are aware that we have been having a lot of problems particularly in the condition of Trade Unions in this country. Many employers usually resort to use the President’s name in solving labour matters other than recognising trade unions so that they can peacefully resolve labour disputes. I think after the enactment of this law, the employers will be able to recognise trade unions so that they can solve labour matters.

The second problem has been that the unions are not free to set. The law was too much interfering in the other areas of operation of trade unions towards making the freedom of association not operating very well. I am happy that today is the celebration of the workers to belong to trade unions of their choice.  I think the formation of trade and labour unions should take into consideration that we should not have many unions in one place, which will again make the trade unions, weak; they will not be able to represent workers effectively and they will continue to fight amongst themselves.

I am sure that when we say, “Labour Unions”, we should understand the difference between Labour Unions and branch unions; it is very difficult to differentiate the two. But I would like to say that in one industry we should have one union and then the unions can operate under that Labour Union, which we call now “national unions” so that we have the people freely presenting their problems and be able to run their organisations with minimum interference from the Government.

The other issue, which I would like to comment on, is the saying that our international market depends on the good labour laws. I hope this trade unions law is not for attracting the internationals. Now we have rectified and enacted the law, but then the implementation of the law is not there. As we talked yesterday, these laws cannot be laws for helping the workers only, but also it should not be for entertaining the internationals because America wants the law to be enacted so that we can have access to market.    

Labour department, the labour organisations, the workers and the employers should strengthen themselves so that we make the law for the benefit of the people and workers of this country. I am, therefore, appealing to the Government, particularly the Ministry of Labour –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the member holding the floor for giving way.  I would like to know whether the country called Uganda could exist in isolation of other countries.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my brother.  What you are saying is exactly what I am saying. I agree that we have to work, but Uganda should not only enact the law because the international body wants us to be there so that when we have the law, they give us the market, but at home we do nothing.  

This is what I am emphasizing that the activities of the labour movement and the labour union should be recognised by the employers. At least where you are employing five people allow them to go and negotiate with you. Why do you refuse to recognise trade unions? These are some of the things, which I am trying to say that need strengthening of the employers’ organisation, the workers’ organisation and also strengthen the Government, particularly the Ministry of Labour so that they are able to supervise and make this law beneficial to everybody.  

I thank you for giving me time and I am hopeful that the ministry will be able to come with regulations to operationalise this law so that we minimise the wrangles among the workers and the trade union organisations. 

 Finally, I also want to thank our brothers from the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions who have been recognised by the law.  But as trade unions, we now have freedom to sit down – you may be surprised that we are going to have one very big union without interference. I think we are going to follow the international way of behaving and this will encourage us to have understanding among ourselves other than to be forced. Thank you very much.  

10.44
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the job well done and to thank the ministry for coming up with this Bill. For the record, I want to appreciate the consistency and effort of the representatives of workers in Parliament for the attention they have given labour related matters. This one should go on record because merit should be given where it is due.

I want to restrict my submission to paragraph two on page 3 of the report regarding the minimum number of members who can register a labour union. From the committee’s report, they argued that a number of submissions were received from various stakeholders who appeared before the committee and the submissions received suggested that the minimum number of persons to register a Labour Union should be 1,000. 

I looked through clause 16 of the Bill, which really talked of just a mere 20 members.  But I want to agree with the committee that when we have so many small unions, we can actually end up having a lot of confusion. The committee went ahead to suggest a minimum number of 300 as requisite for registration of a labour union. I also want to observe that –(Interjection)- let me develop it and then –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report of the committee states that the provision is to be deleted so that there is no provision for any number that honourable member is trying to talk about. The 300 was one of the views that came up, it ranged from 1,000 in the old law then it came to 50 in the Bill, which is being proposed, then later on the committee suggested 300. In the modified version in the final report, the chairman is talking of no numbers. 

The other information I want to give is that it arises out of the ILO Convention 87, which has been ratified by this country and it provides for the freedom for workers to form unions without any limitation. The issue of numbers was contentious, and therefore it was deemed that it is better not to talk about numbers so that a culture develops within unions themselves to make sure that they must be viable on their own to have bigger numbers than again putting it in the law. That is the information I wanted to give, Mr Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for your information. But then that gives me the impression that the committee might be shooting on its own report because what I am quoting is paragraph two of the observations and recommendations. In sentence three of that same paragraph it says: “It is the committee’s considered view that the number be fixed at 300.”  So, I was actually reacting to the committee’s own report.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, let me clarify on that. There was a typing error and in the committee’s amendment, we actually intend to delete that from the Bill.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of this committee and the last time we considered this matter, we agreed that there should be a number, and indeed we agreed on a minimum of 300. But it appears there was no consequential amendment of the draft report with regard to the amendments and that is why this confusion does appear.

THE SPEAKER: But what is the confusion? It seems you thought that the minimum number is 300 and what follows is to explain why you think the minimum number is 300. In your report, it reads; “The employer can easily take advantage of their size to weaken them through divide and rule policy.  A reasonable number is required to have a strong union, which will ably represent the interests of the workers.”  In the view of the committee, the minimum number is 300 and what follows is to explain why they maintain a number of 300.  

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is exactly what I am trying to find out. What was the rationale of agreeing on 300 as the minimum number? I am still of the view that numbers should be put in the law because I would not expect two workers to go to the registrar and say, “We have come to register as a labour union”. I think the issue of numbers is very pertinent. [Mrs Bakoru: “Point of information”] Let me get information from the minister.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Speaker, the problem we have had in this country is that even if you have two workers who are interested in joining a bigger union or even five or ten, the employers have not given them that opportunity because the law has been restrictive. The law set numbers that this must be the minimum number for a workplace to be able to unionise and, therefore, many of our workers end up suffering and unable to join a union and fight for their rights. So, we are not going to be sitting here and yet the International Labour Organisation Convention we have signed says we should have no restrictions just like other countries do not have restrictions. 

There was a long debate on this in the committee. We decided together with the committee, the Federation of Employers and the Labour Unions that we would delete this section because it is restricting on our workers. It means now we are putting a restriction and we are going to leave out a big chuck of workers who cannot be able to fight for their rights because they will not be entitled to join a union. 

Mr Speaker, most of our work places have two, three or five workers and the employers deliberately use this so that they would not give these workers an opportunity to exercise their rights. So, I really appeal to my colleagues that we should delete it and allow workers even if it is one worker who is a domestic worker. This worker does not form a union of his/her own but he is entitled to join other unions and be able to fight for her rights. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I think we are talking of two different things. We are talking about registration of a labour union and not restrictions on joining any other union. For one to join any other union he/she is free, but I will draw your attention to the proposed amendments of the committee. I am sorry that I may be going far.  The proposed amendment No. 3 in the report is talking about –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Now, why don’t we leave this until we come to the committee stage because that is where we shall be actualising what we think is a good policy? 

DR EPETAIT: Most obliged and I rest my case.

10.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to support the motion and the Bill in totality and also express my appreciation to my colleagues for quickening the process of bringing this important Bill to this House. 

This world is becoming a global village and whatever we do is what our neighbours are doing. If our colleagues are already having these labour unions and we are not having them and yet we exchange labour, it becomes a problem to us. I think it is high time that our laws were put in conformity with the international regulations. 

Mr Speaker, you very much well know that of recent we passed a law on exportation of labour and there is no way we can take our labour to countries which are already recognising the existence of labour Bills or provisions of the labour Bills when ours are not exposed to that. I am very happy that this has come at the right time when we are intending to export a lot of labour to other countries where laws concerning labour are already being recognised.   

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have been complaining so much that the investors are playing around with the employees and they have been using an excuse of saying, “We do not have any case to answer because your laws are archaic and there is no provision that instructs us to do a, b, or c.” Now that all these laws have come at a time when we are calling for so many investors to come to this country, I stand to support in totality this Labour Unions Bill and the motion moved. I thank you very much.

10.56
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a small clarification from the committee, which I thank very much for the report. I am concerned about the inclusion of COFTU in the law because I do not see the reason why we should specifically mention that COFTU is there when we were enacting a law, which allows all those unions that would like to federate to do so. Does it mean, Mr Chairman of the committee, that every time there is a federation formed the law will be changed and that federation is being incorporated in the law? What if the COFTU as it stands now does not comply with the provisions of this law; does it mean that this law is just recognising COFTU simply because it was there before we enact it? It is my considered view that COTFU is free to register because the court ruled and the law is in place. Not only COFTU, but other unions will also be free to incorporate and register as they wish.  Therefore –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The inclusion of the various organisations is in the transitional provision because what has been happening even in other countries like Tanzania and others is that when these new laws come and they are talking about new organisations and registrations, you do not create a gap where the organisers have been operating. Now this provision, which seeks to include that organisation, is because the other organisations NOTU is being saved and the national unions too are being saved. 

But the problem is that when we were drafting this law we had not had the Constitutional Court ruling. So, what the law is trying to do is to recognise the players that have been operating by the time this law came in effect.  Then the new players that will come on the scene will follow the normal process because the other players have already followed the normal process. So, that is what the law is talking about. 

But the law also provides for other national unions and federations which are to come up following – if you look at provision 9 and then starting from 14 to 19, they talk about the process of registration, certification and gazetting. That is the procedure because these have already been there and, therefore, you have to save them. If you do not save them, you are going to create a lacuna and then there will be a problem.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much. In addition to that, if you read the Bill and the relevant recommendations, you find that it is regarding NOTU to have been deemed in existence. Similarly, NOTU is being affiliated to other national labour unions, and of course COFTU has got also other labour unions, which are affiliated to it. Even in the exercise of elections, both COFTU and NOTU were being regarded. So, for that purpose we are deeming to say before the existence of this law the two apexes are already in existence if it is for purposes of bringing it on board.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you for the information, but it seems here as it is put, COFTU was not registered under the old law and yet other unions were already –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this can be solved under the transition provision which is clause 63 by simply saying, “All existing union at the time of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be existing under the Act” It is a question of formulation which can be really solved under this clause 63.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, mine is a unique situation. I am a member of the committee, but I just feel it is time for me to say goodbye. This could be my last time –(Laughter) I would like to use this opportunity to thank the honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for tabling these Bills and also thank Members of Parliament for the commitment they have demonstrated in supporting workers.

However, I would like to say that however good a law may be, it is not self-enforcing. We are making very excellent pieces of legislation, but if the non-implementation continues, all this will come to pass and the workers will never actualise the rights that we encode in these laws. I am, therefore, asking the minister and Parliament to make sure that in the next budget adequate funding is provided for labour law enforcement.

Mr Speaker, once again I would like to thank you for giving me this special opportunity and I wish you the very best in the next Parliament –(Laughter)

11.03
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many of the labour problems and the rest, which we have experienced in the country, are largely due to union leaders abdicating their roles in linking the worker with the management. This arises because management more often than not co-opt union leaders to sit in management meetings. When these union leaders get acclimatised to the comforts of top management, they begin to forget the reasons why members elected them. And so, urgent matters of workers are not appropriately addressed. 

I would like the minister to allay my fears that a sharp line will be drawn between representation of union leaders in management decisions and in board matters so that union members have got faith in their leaders that they are not being compromised. I thank you.

11.05
MS OLIVE WONEKA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister and the committee for bringing these laws to Parliament. For a long time, there has been exploitation of workers for lack of collective bargaining power and they have been taken advantage of by investors and employers just because there is never shortage of labour. We have so much unemployment in this country. 

I would also like to add my voice, Mr Speaker, to those who are asking the Government and Parliament to give assurance to whoever will be in charge of the ministry that there will be allocation of resources to enable the ministry actualise these beautiful laws that we are making. 

I would like also to plead with the Workers’ Members of Parliament not to be here today just because the Bills that concern their constituencies are here, but that they will be here, as per your plea earlier on, to make sure that we complete the business that is before us. Mr Speaker, I hope you did not accept the goodbye from hon. Wandera because we still have business to transact before the 8th Parliament. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Ekanya.

11.06
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much honourable Speaker. The committee said in its report that Uganda is a signatory to a number of international conventions that relate to the labour market and working environment, among others. I would like the Minister of Trade and even the Minister in charge of Labour to clarify to me how this law is going to help Ugandans or the Government of Uganda to maximise the human resource to ensure that the labour market for Ugandans abroad is not exploited the way it is being exploited currently. We have several Ugandans who are working in other countries, but they earn meagre salaries out of their output. 

In the definition clause the law leaves out members of Uganda People’s Defence Forces. It assumes that it allows members of other military organisations like Police, and Prisons. I need some guidance. Doesn’t this contravene the Constitution in regard to the right and freedom to associate? If a member of UPDF sought for constitutional interpretation, will we not be caught off guard? Can we not allow the members of UPDF to organise themselves but their conduct to be regulated? (Laughter) 

Currently, I am aware that within the UPDF, the Government has encouraged formation of cooperative union so that these members save their money. Some of the members of UPDF have raised me personally that their salaries were being deducted to construct houses and they have no forum to raise this. When they raise some of these issues, they are considered to be indisciplined and contravening the UPDF Act and other regulations -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that the issue of unionising armed forces is contentious internationally because a strike in the armed force is called a mutiny. They have always been left out to avoid bringing certain problems to the labour movement. Internationally, most countries do not unionise armed forces and –(Interruption)- so, the clarification I wanted to give is that as far as organising them is concerned you will have to consider special provisions to cater for cases where strike action takes place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 210 provides as follows: “Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, and in particular, providing- (a) the organ and structures of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces; recruitment, appointment, promotion, discipline and removal of the members of the Uganda Peoples Forces and ensuring that the members of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces are recruited from every district of Uganda;(c) in terms and conditions of service of members of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.” There is a special provision in the Constitution to deal with matters of UPDF.

MR PAJOBO: He is talking of it not being internationally accepted. I wanted to make it absolutely clear that Police and Prisons are unionised all over the world. But the army itself as you have said correctly, is very rare and unusual. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, if Police is allowed and we are aware of the unique management of the Police institution in this country, where an Army-General is the one heading Police, where several UPDF officers are within Police -(Honourable members: Are you sure?) Yes, I am aware of several, the Inspector-General of Police is one. So, how is Police going to? –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO:  If those people are in the Police either they are seconded –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, why really do you labour on this? Take this Bill which you are debating, the Labour Unions Bill, 2005, and you look at clause 2, which defines an employee as, “Any person who has entered into a contract of service or contract of apprecentship as defined in Labour Settlement and Arbitration Act and includes a person who is employed by or for Government of Uganda, including the Public Service, any local authority or any parastatal organisation, but does not include a member of the People Defence Force.”

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I agree with your guidance. I was just seeking clarification to see whether this contradicted or contravened the Constitution. I hope the minister will clarify because I do not have the law that we passed yesterday regarding labour disputes settlement and arbitration. We have a situation where some organisations and some employers do not give written contracts.  For most of these investors in hotels, you find somebody has worked for them for a long period of time and has no written contract and when disputes arise the employer says, “Bring a document to prove that you are employed.” I hope the minister will clarify that this caters for that as I assume.

MRS BAKORU: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the honourable member that we dealt with this when we were talking about the Employment Bill and so, this particular Bill we are debating now is different.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Finally, Mr Speaker, we are now going to start the budget process and I hope the Government will take it very serious to provide finance for these pieces of legislation. I hope Parliament will stand very firm, because for every piece of legislation that comes to this House, the Government issues certification of financial implication. I hope that during the budget process we shall use the certificate issued against this Bill to ensure that the money is provided. We do not want to spend time here, earn salary, make a piece of legislation to only fulfil international requirements and at the end of the day it is kept in the shelf.  

I want to use this opportunity since we are talking of labour and market issues to ask the Minister of Trade to come to this House and also clarify the challenge manufacturers are facing. Most of the manufacturers I have interacted with say that they cannot motivate workers effectively because the tax regime in Uganda discourages them from exporting goods.  They say the tax regime in Rwanda, Burundi and Kenya is now at zero-rate and, therefore, if they manufacture goods - for example, Mukwano cannot export soap and compete with a manufacturer in Rwanda. Mukwano soap now has almost no market because the soap manufactured in Rwanda is cheap basing on the tax regime there. 

A manufacturer of sugar here, because the tax regime is high, cannot export the same sugar to Burundi and this has affected most of the manufacturers. Some of them are laying off workers and this endangers the right of most of Ugandans who are earning a living through this employment.  Maybe at an appropriate time the Minister of Trade will come to this House to explain why the Government has delayed to sign the free trade area agreement with COMESA.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude? Let us not mix these debates; the other one is in trade and we are on unions.

MRS BAKORU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for your guidance. Issues of tax are also with the Ministry of Finance and so we can labour today on issues of the labour sector and the labour union. I want to thank honourable Members of Parliament for the support they have given in debating and enacting these four labour laws. 

As I said earlier, this has taken a long process and I want to allay the fears of Members of Parliament that the participation of this Parliament is leaving a legacy in enacting labour laws, which have been in this process of review and reform for the last 20 years. So, you are actually leaving a legacy as a Parliament in enacting these four labour laws (Applause)

I want to thank the members of Parliament representing workers because they have worked closely with us, with the Trade Union and the Federation of Employers, the Tri-partite and bipartite relationship which has evolved in the last five years to enable us today to finalise these labour laws something that is amazing. Mr Speaker, particularly for you as the person who has the mandate of leading this Parliament, it is also a long and big achievement and legacy for you.

Mr Pajobo talked about employers who have been using government and the name of the President to stop workers of this country from uniting. I want to say that the President of this country supports the process of enacting these labour laws and that is why we are at the end of the road enacting these laws today.  

These people have been using the name of government, but it was in vain because that was not the intention of the Government neither was it the intention of the President. Can Labour Unions avoid fragmentation within unions? Yes, they can that is the essence of this law that labour unions are going to work as a team. 

I was happy when hon. Pajobo and hon. Lyomoki stood up to say that there are going to be stronger labour unions in this country, because it is the unions that will stand the test of ensuring that the workers are properly represented and that their rights are recognized, not only by their employers and government, but also by workers knowing their own rights. So, the challenge is in their coats as leaders to ensure that the workers of this country enjoy the rights that other workers enjoy in the world.  

Are we legislating these laws to please foreigners? No, we are legislating these laws to improve the economy of our country, ultimately what is going to happen is that there will be good quality places of work; there will be harmony between the employers and workers; there will be empowerment of workers to be able to negotiate for their rights and this process means that we will have high productivity and the quality of what we produce will sell more in the external market. No other person from out there is going to say again that your labour is so cheap, so your quality of things are poor or that your safety is very poor, so we are not going to take your product. 

So enacting these laws is going to improve the economy of this country, because the labour force is going to improve; the employers will come and invest here. We also know that Tanzania’s investment and economy went up three times after their labour laws were reformed. So, we are looking for a future, which is going to be brighter for this country and the tripartite process as I said is going to help us.

On the issue of minimum numbers, it is the core of this Labour Union Bill, which we are going to enact. We can no longer afford to discriminate workers because of their numbers.  These workers should be entitled to be able to join unions and to be able to ensure that their rights are not abused by employers who are going to use their numbers to fight against them. Parliament should leave that open, we do have Section 19(3), which we can be able to apply in regulation to see how we can stabilize the labour union. 

It is also the Labour Unions, which are going to work together to ensure that they are destabilized. Finally, I am humbled by what the members are saying, since these laws are passed, I hope that the Budget will also be increased for the labour sector so that we can achieve what we have been looking for in these several years to ensure that we pass these labour laws. I thank you, Mr Speaker

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The motion before us is that the Bill entitled, “Labour Union Bill, 2005” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

The Labour Unions Bill, 2005

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 2

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. For clause 2, we would like to amend that we insert a new definition for (COFTU) Central Organization of Free Trade Unions. In the same clause, we would like to amend that we rephrase the word, “strike,” to mean “to go slow” and “the sit down by a body of persons employed and acting in combination or consulted refusal under common understanding of number of persons employed to continue to work for an employer in consequence of a dispute done as a means of compelling the employer, or to aid the other employees to accept or not to accept terms or conditions affecting the employer or employment.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard clearly what he wants to say.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am opposing the definition of COFTU to be included in the law, because clause 63 of the Bill has a saving provision for all those labour unions, which this law will find registered. So, COFTU is already saved there; I do not see the need to define it under the definition clause.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, COFTU appears in other sections and if you look at the definition clause on page 6, you have the definition of National Organisation of Trade Unions. So what the definition is only doing is to define concepts that are going to appear in the clause. So if you do not define it, there will be a problem.  

I think that definition does not have a problem as long as those concepts appear within the law. It is just a definition and other organizations appear and what happens is that by the time the law was being made that organization had not yet appeared. So, if you do not remove it, then you will say that other organization should be removed and it will have a lot of implication on the Bill because the others are already appearing anyway.  You cannot leave out one and yet you defined the others. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: What we are trying to do is to accommodate these sentiments so that if you have done it in this diplomatic way of handling the two unions then there is no loss. I think let us take it. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we would like to amend clause 6 as follows: in clause 6(2) insert the word “is” between the words, “it” and “satisfied.” The justification is to correct a typing error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: But these typing errors; all the four Bills we have handled have had this common feature, what is the problem?  

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, there was a lot of pressure at the time these Bills were typed by the First Parliamentary Council and Ministry of Justice. So I really think we should excuse them; we do as we said. This has been a common feature because there were only three days between the time when the Bills were prepared and taken to the government printery - just three days - in fact they did a lot of work considering the time that was available to them.

Clause 6

DR EPETAIT: Clause 6, sub-clause (1), the last line –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not finish this and you bring that later? I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Clause 6, sub-clause (1), I beg to amend that in the last line, instead of the words “may bring on action,” you put “may bring an action.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In clause 9, section 2, I would like to add that: “The function of the union is to mainstream gender concerns in terms of management training,” and also let us add (ii) to say: “Monitor gender responsive activities.”  

Mr Chairman, quite often when it comes to the labour unions women are left out and their issues are not considered. So, I would like Mary Amajo to read for me the exact wording; what I want to add is to mainstream gender concerns in terms of management and so on; that should be put there.

MS AMAJO: We request that this should be added in order to take care of gender concerns, insert in section 9(2) as follows: “Mainstream gender concerns in management and activities of labour unions.” 

Another sub-section: “Monitor the implementation of gender responsive provisions on the promotion of equal remuneration, training and capacity building opportunities and treatment in labour unions.” Then in another sub-section: “Monitor the applications of gender issues in the management and activities of labour unions.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, clause 11 talks of the most representative registered organization for the purpose; to me that is too general and it is going to cause conflict, because how do you decide that this is the most representative of the unions when all the unions have been registered?

THE CHAIRMAN: When you raise such a defect, what is your remedy?  

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I wanted a clarification because if you just say “most representative” and you put that in the law, it is likely to cause conflict.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee actually considered that amendment; it was an oversight. In the meeting that provision was supposed to read as follows: “a representative of a labour union designated for appointment to the labour advisory board shall be appointed by the registered organizations of labour unions for the purpose as designated by the registrar.” So, the issue of “most representative” had actually been dropped and I thank the honourable member because in the meeting, we agreed that it should be amended.

MR PAJOBO: The issue of “most representative” is amended but as far as other representations are concerned, the most representative of the trade unions is in existence, it is alive, because we have been talking about amending these laws according to ILO conventions. The most representative organization will be known. 

Let me give an example: NOTU may have about 1,500 members, COFTU may have 200 members; in this example COFTU is not the most representative. Therefore, NOTU is the most representative of the workers’ organisations. Therefore, the most representative is usually used in labour terms referring to the trade union, which has got more members than the others to represent the issues of the minority as well. That is why we talk of the most representative. 

For example, we hear that the Ministry of Labour may require one worker’s representative to go to Geneva in the June conference they will not take two, but one person from the most representative organisation at that particular time. That is the organisation having more members than the others. That is why the words “most representative” should be there. Thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think that here we need to be more careful for purposes of the House to understand some of these terminologies. “Most representative” does not mean number; “most representative” means character. What do I mean? For instance, if you take a labour union like for beverage production, it has people from Pepsi-Cola, diary, Coca-Cola, breweries, and what have you. That is what we call character, variety of representatives from different sectors, and in most cases, when we say “most representative”, I may be having say 500 members but coming from different units of about 20 and somebody is having 600 members but coming from the same discipline - the most representative in this case is 500. We need to be careful about this so that members can understand it well.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with this provision? Is there any amendment that you want to effect to make it clearer, or we take it as it is; because I called clause 11.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, there is an amendment because of the problem of defining, “most representative”. The amendment is: “A representative of labour unions, designated for appointment to the labour advisory board shall be appointed by the federation of labour unions.”

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, in the other three labour laws we have passed we agreed to delete the wording, “most representative.” So if we are going to harmonise all the four labour laws, I think this should apply in this Bill as well. So I plead with the Members of Parliament representing workers that we should have harmony, otherwise this is the only Bill which will have “most representative,” because it was deleted from the other three Bills.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, move the motion then. Are you moving an amendment?

MRS BAKORU: Mr Chairman, we agreed that we should delete “most representative” in 11, and agreed that we should say that “a representative of labour unions designated for appointment to the labour advisory board shall be appointed by the registered organisation of labour unions for the purpose as designated by the registrar.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members you have heard the proposed amendment, which is to delete “most representative,” and have the formulation as read by the minister. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, in clause 13 all the sub-clauses are talking about appointment of the registrar and assistant registrars. I would, therefore, want to amend the title of clause 13 and let us be explicit and put it as: “Appointment of the registrar and assistant registrars,” that is amendment one.  

Amendment two –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Where do you put that?

DR EPETAIT: No, that is just the title of 13. It should be: “Appointment of registrars and assistant registrars.” Other than just leaving it as registrar and yet the whole clause is talking of the appointment of the registrars and assistant registrars. 

Then, sub-clause (4) is very irrelevant -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: When you say registrar, does it not include assistant registrars?

DR EPETAIT: Okay, if that is the case, let us put it as appointment of registrars. That is the first amendment. Then, sub-clause (4), I do not comprehend how it comes into this clause because it is talking of something completely different and I would see no harm in deleting it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you want to say: “the appointment of the registrars,” but clause 13 is not only dealing with the appointment but it deals also with other matters. For instance when you look at (4) it says: “… Shall be laid against any official,” this has nothing to do with the appointment but it deals with the cover that the official gets. So do you not think that this clause talks many things other than just the registrar? So you want to leave it to be accommodative as it is rather than only talking about the appointment when actually you are talking about immunity? I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we would like to amend clause 16. We would like to delete the whole of clause 16. The justification is to be in conformity with the Constitution and the International Labour Organization Convention. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?  

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you explain further?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, in the other report we said that there was a lot of controversy with regard to the minimum or maximum number of trade unions, and having consulted the committee and the ministry, we agreed that we should not limit the number of people intending to form trade unions. 

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the explanation, which was given that even five people have a right to form one and, therefore, if you restrict it to 20 then you will be invading the rights of the small numbers of five or three. I think that was the explanation that the minister gave and that is why they are deleting the limitation of this minimum number of 20. Is it clear?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I do not know how to put it. I still refer to page 3 of the committees’ report. I thank the committee for having made an effort to consult various stakeholders and from the committee’s report the various submissions received proposed certain numbers, but the numbers that were proposed were much higher than what the committee proposed. In my opinion, it is healthy to have a certain minimum standard. For example, if you have to be nominated as a Member of Parliament, you must be above a certain age and you must have people to nominate you.  

Now here is a situation where we do not have any numbers and I still have the question that how can we accept two workers, just because the minimum number of workers is not specified? Even one person can go ahead and make his constitution and register as a labour union! I think it is not very good; I wish we could have a corrigenda or some addendum to support the argument.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it is a question of convenience and a constitutional right. In this world where people are so litigious and demanding of their constitutional rights, how do you say, “Well, because we attended …” we cannot enjoy our constitutional right that way. So it is a question of balancing between convenience and the constitutional rights. Once they are constitutional; if you agree that it is a constitutional right for one or two or three, then you should not invade this right by putting a legal restriction, because the Constitution is supreme. I think this may be the argument, I do not know.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that this matter has been a subject of litigation before the Constitutional Court, and the Constitutional Court actually held that the requirement of 1,000 members that exists in the current law is constitutional. The argument of the Constitutional Court is that the freedom of an association is not just an end in itself when it comes to trade unions. It is for the purpose of making sure that they are strong trade unions through which workers can protect themselves.  

If it is a question of people going to court, people have already been there on that matter and the court upheld what the law provides. In our committee we said that 1,000 may be on the higher side and that is why we brought it down to 300. People have been talking about Convention 87 of the ILO on freedom of association. That convention has an exceptional clause, which gives countries the opportunity to take into account their own social and economic conditions when they are trying to domesticate the ILO conventions. So I submit that in the meeting that I attended, we agreed on 300. The acting chairperson of the committee has not brought corrigenda. I would like to invite this House to support the provision that there should be a minimum of 300. I submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. If the situation, which we are dealing with, has been subjected to a constitutional interpretation, then we should be guided by that guidance so that we can competently put a number in the law.

DR LYOMOKI: That matter of the Constitutional Court, the Constitutional Court ruled that 1,000 is not unconstitutional because we had challenged the number 1,000 in the old law. But the Constitutional Court also ruled that even if you did not put any numbers, it has no problem. So the issue of putting numbers now became a political decision, there have been a lot of debates. 

One time, we had the pilots; they wanted to form a union and pilots in Uganda are about five or six and a pilot’s union can be very strong even if you have only five people, you cannot join pilots in other countries. So the matter of numbers became an issue of political decision, and there have been a lot of discussions at the level of ILO, and the ministry. 

Yesterday I had a discussion with other groups and it was agreed that numbers should not be limited because it infringes on the freedom of association. So this issue has been the most contentious; it is the one, which has brought a lot of international pressure and other sorts of interests. Therefore, we thought that to avoid such contentions we should be silent on numbers, employers could use even this number of 300, and claim that is a small number.  

For instance, you are talking about medical workers union, which has 18,000. If you say an employer will use 300, 300 is a small number because this 300, when you go to Mulago, you find 2,000 workers. The issue of numbers has a lot of implications and, therefore, remaining silent would be better so that we can sort it out in our cultures and resolutions. Otherwise, if you put it in here, it will cause a lot of problems for us because of the various interests that are involved in this matter. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am still picking on the argument that came from the Chair. It is true that the Constitution is the supreme law, but I am also aware that Parliament has the authority to enact laws to operationalise the provisions of the Constitution. These laws that we enact must be good in quality and should not to contravene the provisions of the Constitution. 

For example, the issue of election of the President, one of the standards that we put there was that somebody should be above 35 years, which the Parliament has rightly put in the Presidential Elections Act. Then we have also talked about numbers; people to nominate from at least a certain number of districts. 

I am aware that on the presidential nomination days some presidential candidates were turned away because they did not fulfil that requirement. I really do not see any harm for us to go by the recommendation of the committee on page 3; I do not see it as something that would contravene or step on the people’s rights. We are enacting a law to operationalise the provisions of the Constitution. I would still insist that the committee accepts its own recommendations on page 3, unless they table a corrigendum to the contrary.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I see that you are well intentioned in suggesting numbers, in the sense that you want these unions to be viable; you want them to be strong to be respected. That is why you think that certain numbers should measures to your expectations. But at the same time, don’t you think that this will help to grant the unions to exercise good judgement; judgement in the sense that they will inquire that if we are five, will it have an impact? Why don’t you give them the benefit of doubt that they will be able to decide on this, and be more open? When you put 300, you restrict them but when you leave it to good judgement, they will decide it themselves. That has no harm.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, why am I in support of deleting of this provision? First of all, let us understand the labour unions that we are talking about. We are not talking about a union in a working place that is a trade union; we are talking about several groups joining together to form a labour union that will be registered. Similarly, as you have said, before one meets another group, to go to the Labour Commission, there must be a certain considerable figure, which can be interpreted or exposed in the regulation rather than the body of the law. So, in order not to contradict the international regulations and the Constitution, let us delete it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that we delete the reference to numbers.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we are making an amendment to clause 19 to insert a new sub-clause as follows: “The process of registration shall be within 90 days from the date of submission of the application.” The justification is to act as a system of checks and balances.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, there is an amendment I would like to introduce to clause 20, insert the words, “or a political party,” at the end of the provision. The justification is to avoid politicising of trade unions.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, clause 22(1) is rephrased to read as follows: “A labour union aggrieved by the decision of the registrar refusing, delaying or cancelling of registration may within one month after the date of the order for refusal, delaying or cancellation of registration, appeal to the Industrial Court.” 
The justification is to broaden the grounds of appeals and to correct the typing errors in the Bill.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am a little bit disturbed by this proposed amendment because if the process for registration is 90 days, and before 90 days expire, should one appeal to the Industrial Court for the delay - because 30 days or within a month after the order of refusal or delay. But if the process is taking 90 days to process the registration, should somebody appeal within one month for the delay?  

THE CHAIRMAN: It does not mean that. If you are given 90 days, we expect things to be done within 90 days. But you get an answer within the first 30 days. The 90 days, is the maximum you should wait, therefore, if you get it before or at the expiry of 90 days it is still ok. This is what they are referring to. They are not referring you to a date before the expiry of the initial period. I wonder whether that is clear?  
MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, if they are –(Interruption)  

THE CHAIRMAN: A decision is taken after, 70, 30 or 90 days. They are telling you the period within which to make an appeal. That is the intention. So I put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, clause 46(1) is amended as follows: 

In clause 46(1)(a) delete the word “and” appearing on the last line. 

Then in 46(1)(b) you delete the full stop appearing immediately after “investment” and insert “and” immediately after investment. This means that we shall insert a new sub-clause (c) to read as follows: “Donations”.

The justification is to correct typing errors and to widen the scope of the provision. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to amend clause 63 to insert new sub-clauses (3) and (4) to read as follows: 

“(3) The Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU) existing at the commencement of this Act shall continue to be in existence and shall be deemed to be a registered federation of Labour Unions under this Act.

(4) The provision of sub-section (2) shall apply to an affiliate of the Central Organisation of Free trade Unions.”

The justification is that because COFTU has been in existence since the Constitutional Court ruling in the case of Dr Sam Lyomoki and five others, the Constitution petition No. 8 of 2004, where it was held that labour unions are free to form federations. 

Mr Chairman, I would also like to amend that we insert a new clause in the Bill immediately after clause 63 to read as I will read after this amendment. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to include another clause and this is going to be clause 64 to read as follows:
 
1.	“Laws that are applicable for registration should appear as the head-note.

2.	The Trade Unions Act shall be applicable.
 
3.	For avoidance of doubt the Company’s Act and the Cooperative Societies Act shall not apply to the National Organisation of Trade Unions and Federation of Labour Unions or any labour unions and the registration of any labour union under either or those Acts shall be void.”

The justification is to avoid multiplicity of registration under different laws. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the committee’s proposal to insert a new clause 64 as per the terms read out by the chairperson -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I think according to the numbering it is going to remain 63 because we amended 16. So it is a matter of the numbering so it is likely to remain 63 because we have deleted 16.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean you are adding a sub-clause?

MR KUBEKETERYA: No, another clause, but according to the numbering - since we deleted 16 - we removed one clause so if they were 60 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, for our purposes - are we now trying to change.

MR KUBEKETERYA: No, we are not changing, but just adding on.

THE CHAIRMAN: Some other person will do the numbering.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Most obliged.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have the intention of recommitting the Bill in order to introduce an amendment to clause 3.

THE CHAIRMAN: What type of amendment?

MR EKANYA: Yes, clause 3(1); I want to introduce an amendment to read that every worker without distinction whatsoever has a right to representation, to form or to join a labour union of his or her choice for the promotion and protection of his or her economic and social interest. 

The justification is that Articles 29 and 40 of the Constitution guarantee freedom of association and protection of the rights to organise. Uganda has also ratified the Convention of 1948, No. 87, which too talks about discrimination.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you miss when you – I know the procedure will come, but can’t you achieve what you want under this particular one? Isn’t it a big enough umbrella to accommodate your wishes? It is not necessary.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I take your guidance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.15
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.16
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Labour Unions Bill, 2005 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.17
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LABOUR UNIONS BILL, 2005

12.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Labour Unions Bill, 2005 be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE LABOUR UNIONS ACT, 2006”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill has been passed and this concludes the four important Bills, which we were told to pass. Thank you very much. (Applause) Now I think the workers are happy; they are going to organise themselves. And I want to congratulate the members representing workers in the House for having achieved this for your electorate.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE WAREHOUSE RECEIPT SYSTEMS BILL, 2005

12.19
THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us work for about 40 minutes and then we decide whether to suspend or not. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Mr Nasani Igeme Nabeta): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Warehouse Receipt Systems Bill, 2005 be read for the Second Time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, seconded. Justify.

MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of the Bill is to provide for licensing of warehouses and warehouse keepers to provide for a national system of warehouse bonding for protection of depositors, to provide for warehouse receipts and other related matters.

The Bill provides for establishment of the Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority that will regulate the business of warehousing in this country. Among others the authority is empowered to inspect and classify warehouses, prescribe duties of warehouse keepers and to provide storage guidelines. 

The Bill seeks to delegate the functions of the authority to the Uganda Commodities Exchange or any other legal entity that the minister may by statutory instrument prescribe until such a time when Government can fully fund the authority.

Basically the authority would derive its funds from the fees it levies for inspection of warehouses, sales of warehouse receipt books and licensing both the warehouse keepers and the warehouses. Parliament shall from time to time appropriate money to the authority. The Board shall cause to be prepared in each financial year and not later than three months after the close of a financial year, a statement of accounts, which shall be audited by the Auditor General or an auditor appointed by the Auditor General.

The Bill provides for licensing of the warehouse keepers and warehouses generally. A person is not allowed to operate a warehouse without a valid license issued by the authority. The procedure of applying for the license and the conditions of the license are clearly stated.

The Bill seeks to provide for a warehouse receipt that offers security to the depositors and can be easily negotiated. This will enable easy access to credit from financial institutions thus providing confidence in the market while attaching a necessary level of credibility.

Also the Bill provides for the establishment of a central registry that will maintain a register book, which will contain in chronological order all transactions that have been carried out by the central registry of warehouses.  Receipts issued in any negotiation will be registered within the specific time stipulated by this Bill. A certificate of registration signed by the registrar shall be conclusive evidence of the issuance of registration of a warehouse receipt.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that you consider the Bill and do pass it into law. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you honourable minister. Do we have a report of the committee?

12.22
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to present the report on the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Warehouse Receipt Systems Bill, 2005. 

The Warehouse Receipt Systems Bill, 2005 was read for the first time on 24 June 2005 and thereafter referred to the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for consideration. The committee scrutinised the Bill and now wishes to report its findings: 

Commodity trade is the backbone of Uganda’s economy and contributes over 75 percent to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Agricultural products dominate commodity trade in Uganda. Agricultural products usually supplied by smallholder farmers that are characterised by low input/output technologies. 

Prior to the liberalisation of the marketing process of these commodities, the State controlled the marketing chain from the farmer (producer) through the processing stage up to export level. Government fixed prices and margins for all these in the marketing chain. Although the fixed prices were sometimes below market prices, Government was insulating the market chain especially farmers, against price fluctuations. Price fluctuations are a common phenomenon in commodity trade. Government was responsible for ensuring availability of trade finance for commodities that were exportable especially coffee and cotton.

Honourable members, after liberalisation, agricultural markets remained under developed. There are inadequate basic storage facilities and other market infrastructure especially in the rural areas. Trade finance and production credit are not easily accessible by small traders and rural producers. They depend most of the time on their savings and expensive credit.  

Access to commodity finance is limited and rural areas are not very liquid because financial institutions perceive agriculture as a high risk. Quality of the products is not well developed except at export level where quality satisfaction makes it difficult for disadvantaged rural traders to develop. Generally, markets in Uganda lack a transparent system of price discovery and there are no instruments used to mitigate risks in the commodity trade. The establishment of a warehouse system is, therefore, aimed at addressing some of these constraints encountered in commodity trade.

The committee used the following approach and methodology:

Some members of the committee visited Dar-es-Salaam and Arusha in Tanzania where the Warehouse Receipt System is operational and were able to witness its functionality on a first hand basis.

The committee also held two-detailed workshops with the Minister of State for Trade and various stakeholders. The Bill was discussed at length, observations and recommendations made and amendments were proposed.   

The object of the Bill is as follows:

1.	To provide for the licensing of warehouses and warehouse keepers.
2.	To provide for a national system of warehousing and bonding for the protection of depositors.
3.	To provide for the issuance warehouse receipts.
4.	To provide for other related matters.

Honourable members, the committee made the following observations:

1.	Although the warehousing system is already operational in Uganda, it has been handicapped by lack of an enabling policy and supportive legislation to ensure fair play.

2.	Warehouse receipt financing is one of the effective means in the process of easing access to commodity financing.  The Warehouse Receipt System is normally operated through centralised and certified commodity areas normally referred to as field warehouses or at the point of export as terminal warehouses.

3.	Government is at the moment funding a commodity exchange programme, which will later be funded by the European Union starting February 2006.  It is awaiting the Warehouse Receipt System Bill to be fully operational.

4.	The system specifically allows the producers and traders to obtain cash for commodities deposited in warehouses and still retain ownership of the commodity until they decide to whom and when the market conditions are conducive to sell.

5.	The warehouse receipts enable stakeholders easy and equitable access to finance and facilitates market access to producers and brings them closer to end users.

6.	It is noted that there are three essential parties to the Warehouse Receipt System and these are: the depositors, financial institutions and warehouse operators.  For the system to be successful each of these parties has a vital role to play.  Further, the warehouse operator should be credible, reliable and financially sound.

7.	The establishment of a Warehouse Receipt System in Uganda is envisaged as an improvement on farmers’ earnings and liquidity in commodity trade.  This will be done through reducing transaction costs and increasing market efficiency and transparency.

8.	Further, the system will reduce seasonal price variability especially for food crops.  Availability of storage, financing, effective and a reliable market information system will enable producers to sell when they still would benefit most in terms of price.

9.	The committee noted that the Bill will help farmers to compete on the global market since most of them are price takers and do not have control of the commodity. 

The committee made the following recommendations:

1.	The proposed Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority should be located under Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for at least five years.

2.	The Secretary of the Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority should act as the Registrar of the Central Registry.

3.	Government should support and strengthen the establishment of the warehouse infrastructure in different parts of the country.

4.	Warehouse receipts should include both negotiable and non-negotiable receipts in order to ease transactions.

Conclusion:

The Warehouse Receipt System has been operational although lacking in the legal framework. Attached herewith are some extracts from the media that show the importance of having the law governing the warehousing system in place. They are labelled, appendixes 1 to 10. I beg you honourable members to support the committee’s report and the Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and thank you members of the committee. Honourable members, I think to be fair, the report has been read to you and you even got copies a few minutes ago. I suggest that we suspend the proceedings, and you study the report, prepare your comments or speeches so that we can start the debate on this report at 2.30 p.m. That will be sufficient time for you to formulate your views. So, the proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m. this afternoon.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.35 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.55 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to introduce to you our visitors, senior Rotarians - elders in the Rotary Movement seated in the strangers’ gallery. We have in the middle, Rotarian Neville Hackerd, Member of the British Empire (MBE), and he is the Director and past President of British Rotary Club. Accompanying him are senior Rotarians in Uganda, past Governors Sam and Henry who are very well known to you. Fortunately, today is Rotarian Neville’s birthday. He was born on 29 March 1925 and this is his sixth time to visit Uganda on Rotary business. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, this morning we received a report from the committee on the Bill, which is at its second reading. Now the report is open for discussion.

2.58
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Trade, and my age mate, hon. Nabeta for coming up with this very important Bill that is timely and which will address the problems being faced by farmers. I urge members to strongly support it because it is going to address the problems of price fluctuations and storage. Most of the produce gets wasted during storage, which negatively impacts on quality, prices and our exports.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the third world has continued to negotiate and get concessions in terms of removal of subsidies from the developed world. This Bill puts a burden on us and Government to ensure that there is a constant supply of the necessary tools and pesticides that the farmers need so that production is constant and quality is maintained. Otherwise, it would be very dangerous for investors in the Warehouse Receipt System to have empty warehouses because the farmers cannot either store their goods or bring in poor quality produce.  

You are aware that investors in this sector are going to meet costs of power, water and other related costs. So, in order to encourage investment in this sector, government needs to inject more money in agriculture to support farmers so that the warehouses can be fully operational all over the country. 
 
My only difficulty with this Bill is in the memorandum but I do not remember the clause. The Bill tends to create monopoly of the players in the sector. It states that before the law is fully operationalised, before the warehouse authority is fully in place and functional, the authority shall delegate its function to the Uganda Commodities Exchange or any other legally established organisation. But when you use the word “shall” and then you say “any other legally established organisation,” first of all you will have made it mandatory that the Uganda Commodities Exchange should be taken as a priority. That is against the policy, which government is using, following the liberalisation. I know we can do both: liberalise, and control – have mixed policies - but that will discourage other players.

Secondly, I do not remember whether we have got any audit report regarding the function, legality and operations of the Uganda Commodity Exchange. For us to provide it in the law as mandatory and then other players come - the Uganda Commodities Exchange may claim to have invested a lot of money and therefore need to monopolise, which problem, we are faced with in the power sector. 

We made a law to remove monopoly, but at the end of the day Eskom and UMEME of South Africa took over the sector and because they wanted to generate money, they opened the water so as to generate more power. Little did they know that they would not be able to generate adequate power. Therefore, by creating a monopoly, we shall discourage other investors. 

I submit that at an appropriate time, during the Committee Stage, I will propose a deletion so that we leave it open to say: “The authority may delegate its functions to any organisation upon statutory instrument issued by the minister.” This will enable the minister to have power to assess the organisation with the board that is going to be delegated the role of supervising the authority. I beg to support the Bill. Thank you very much.

3.01
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this Bill in that it supports the farmer. Some of us are about to join the category of farmers so it is in support of us going to join the club. I also want to thank the minister and the chairperson for introducing this Bill because when I was in Busembatya I found an Indian making a lot of money out of buying maize, hoarding it for a few months and selling it to Kenya. He is making substantial profit out it.  

This Bill has been long overdue considering our food security. If we do not have warehouses and goods storages, the country stands to suffer and may even end up to importing foodstuffs, which would have been stored. I am not really sure in terms of price fluctuations, if the prices go down and the farmer has already put his products, cereals, like rice in the warehouse, who pays the difference? Will there be some subsidies so that the farmer is covered?  This Bill could be multi-sectoral because if zoning is practiced, we shall be able to know that different warehouses specialise in storage of particular products like rice, maize and other cereal that last long.

Another matter that needs attention is sorting because if some of the products stored in warehouses are to be exported, they need sorting.  For instance, if we are going to export beans, we cannot do it without proper sorting and grading.  

I also agree with hon. Ekanya on the issue of the private sector. I do not know whether the monopoly will be fully government’s or the private sector will also participate in the warehouses? Has the minister already identified people who can take the tender of providing warehouses because if some warehouses have solar panels, the products can last longer than being those stored in simple structures?

I also have a question on the depositor. Who is this depositor? Is it an investor, any businessman in this country or is it government, which becomes a depositor? Some of us have interest in becoming depositors if possible.  

How is this quality control going to be done? Will anything qualify to be in the warehouses or not, and who determines whether hygiene standards have been met? As you know, Mr Speaker, some of our people want to have additional weight by putting some stones, dust or sand so that they can have some extra kilos. Who is going to determine quality control?

This could be real pride to our farmers and encouragement. People say that our farmers are lazy, people do not want to work but when there is a promise that they can have a difference, values and realistic prices, they can grow all these things in big quantities. All that we need is assurance from the ministry that this is not another project that stands to fail. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.09
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill seeks to have a warehouse, but we have warehouses, which are managed by customs, what is the difference between the two?  Customs according to the 1992 Statute has got its own standards; that when goods are going to be exported, there are some functions and things, which are done within that bonded warehouse. Is it going to be the same? How is it compatible with that law?

As this committee report is saying, the warehouse system pilot project yields some money. If this Bill seeks that the authority is going to generate some money, why does it not submit it to the Treasury so that when Parliament is appropriating, it knows the budget of the authority. It is a bit contradictory because we have only one collecting body of revenue, and when you say in this Bill on page 1 that, Parliament shall also from time to time appropriate money to the authority, it becomes difficult.  

So, I would like to seek clarification as to whether we are removing powers from URA. It should be clear in this Bill that nobody, apart from this Bill, in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, even importers and the business community will get licenses in the structure of government, which is not clear in this Bill.

Mr Speaker, in this report they say that the economy has been liberalised, it is only demand and supply that dictates the trends of the day and the environment. The moment you say that you are going to dictate how the markets are going to be done when I access my license, it becomes difficult to operationalise the private sector. That is why I think government avoided the overhead and said, “No, we do not have any link to private sector.” But when government comes in again within a liberalised sector and say they must dictate some functions and obligations, it becomes a problem.  

For instance, on page 10 number six they say, “The authority, notwithstanding anything in this Act for such a period from commencement of this Act, shall be prescribed by a statutory instrument. The functions of the authority under this Act shall be carried out by the Uganda Commodity Exchange or any other legal entity that the ministry by statutory instrument will prescribe.” So, if I establish my company going to deal in this business, how should it be mandatory by the ministry that I should do a, b, c, d? Even if there are standards as the honourable colleague is saying, the business should have been left to the private sector so that the demand and market trend take the day. Thank you very much.

3.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, honourable minister and the committee for the work well done. Special thanks go to the ministry, for having come up with an idea to extend the warehouse receipt system for agricultural goods. As my colleague, hon. Kakooza, has said, it has only been limited to the Uganda Revenue Authority where the warehousing system has mainly been used for import and export of manufactured goods. So, this is a very much welcome idea that is going to help the farmers in this country, who have been cheated all a long.  

Last year, we had a problem here with the Cotton Development Organisation about setting the minimum prices, and when the prices go up, the farmers do not benefit. So, the warehouse receipt system will go along way to help the cotton farmers. They will deposit their cotton in warehouses and be sure that it will be distributed all over the country. I do not see how the Cotton Development Organisation is going to cheat the cotton farmers because there is already a report, which is pending - in fact, we are about to ask you, Mr Speaker, to table it in the House because the cotton farmers are eagerly waiting for it. They cannot sell their cotton. Cotton Development Organisation has had problems in Apac District. I give credit to the honourable minister for extending this facility to the agricultural sector.

This system is going to work as a security for farmers while accessing loans. It is going to be a clear collateral for the farmers to get credit from the banks without fear of losing their bicycles, and land titles due to failure to pay back. There is an insurance inbuilt in the system to enable them access loans. So, that is one of the reasons why I support this Bill.

Quality is what has been killing our products on the international market. This law, which we are going to enact, will enable our farmers to ensure that they have quality products because even the warehouse proprietors will not allow to store sub standard products in the warehouses. They are going to put in mechanisms of weighing and testing, for example, moisture content, do grading and packing in case of coffee, such that high quality is maintained. So, it will go a long way in settling the problems of quality that we have been facing and ease trade for the business community doing export trade. So, that is why I support this Bill.

I must also thank banks like Stanbic, Allied, Standard Chartered and Centenary that have come forward even before the establishment of this law to help the farmers, and my appeal to other banks is to join and spread throughout the country so that they can help the farmers in this country.

I share the same concerns with hon. Kakooza on the issue of the money that is going to be paid. If it is not going to the Treasury, as it is stated in the draft Bill, then there is a problem. All the money collected must go to the Treasury, but when we come to the clauses during the committee stage, we shall be able to make the necessary amendments especially for those of us who have worked in this warehouse system. But it is a welcome idea; we fully support it, and I ask the House to support this law in order to help our farmers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am standing to support this Bill basically because it is re-introducing storage facilities, which are lacking in this country.  

Mr Speaker, I have a few areas of concern: One, when we look at the Bill and the report of the committee, they paint a rosy picture that it is going to be very easy for any small farmer in our rural areas to be able to access these facilities.  But when I look at my constituency, there are likely to be very many probleMs This makes me wonder, who is going to benefit from the warehouse receipt system? Is it the small rural farmers, traders, the government or investors? So, as it will most likely turn out to be, it is the investors and traders who will benefit. So, we need to build safeguards to ensure that our rural people benefit from these warehouses.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am glad that this Bill is coming from the ministry in charge of trade and industry and cooperatives. If our rural farmers are to benefit from this arrangement, we better move very fast to vitalise the cooperatives. If these farmers can get organised in cooperatives then they are likely to benefit. But if they are going to remain on their own, small as they are, they are going to be cheated. So, we better move very fast and vitalise the cooperative sector otherwise, the small farmers will not benefit. 
 
I would like to know where the warehouses are going to be located.  Are they going to be located in sub counties, in Kampala to serve the entire nation or in our constituencies? This is something, which government is very silent about. We would like to know where they are going to be located, because the problem of lack of storage facilities is countrywide and if you could have these warehouses nearer the people, then they will serve them better. If we could have warehouses in our sub-counties then those cotton farmers we have been talking about will be able to benefit. Otherwise, if the warehouses are very far away, then the farmers will not benefit at all.

Mr Speaker, the other issue I would like to raise is, could you also consider value addition during storage so that what has been stored can appreciate value during storage. As we know, agricultural prices fluctuate, but if there is value addition during processing, then we are likely to get more money out of it.  

Another thing, which the Ministry of Trade could do, is to liaise with the Ministry of Agriculture about what to store because we may be imagining that there is so much in the countryside to be stored, only to find that much as we have got so many trainings where a lot of money has been spent on PMA, training farmers, there is nothing to store. It is a question of what to store because you may think that there is so much in the country, which needs to be stored, only to realize that almost all the money was spent on training. Therefore, we should appreciate our farmers’ effort for they are able to produce. Their produce will be available for storage in these warehouses. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

3.21
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some of us are beginning to misunderstand the idea of warehousing commodities and marketing. We are mixing up warehousing of imports and exports. This is purely marketing for the farmers. In other countries, it is the laws of supply and demand, which control the prices of produce. 

Take cotton, rice, maize, coffee, for example. Throughout the year, the prices differ and if we grow at the time when the prices are low and there is a middleman, there is always a danger and I think there has always been a danger of middlemen taking advantage of farmers. Like the Cotton Marketing Authority, they are middlemen. 

By storing our goods, warehouses owners have been promised in this Bill to look for a market for us throughout the year. What happens in commodity markets, the commodities are sold per every three months of December, March and June. When you produce now, you take your produce to the warehouse. The advantage here is that they will give you some money to pay for school fees. You will not have to wait, say, for three months before you get your money. The warehouse will advance you some money so that you can take care of the school fees. But at the same time, you can wait for the three months when there is not too much production from Egypt, when the Egyptian cotton will have been sold and there will be a strong demand for Ugandan cotton. It is then that the prices will go up because there will be world demand. That is what the Bill is introducing. 

We are trying to regulate that and government is putting in some money to spread out the warehouses in different parts of the country, so that the farmers can collectively store in any of these warehouses to avoid rotting and any other storage challenges. They will have to use chemicals to preserve maize or cotton and keep the right temperature. We are bringing in the idea of increasing the prices by processing, which is a totally different thing. This is simple straightforward marketing of commodities. We have been participating in commodity markets without knowing.

The people in Liverpool, who buy our cotton, first of all, speculate in the world commodity exchange and they know that by the time Ugandan cotton gets there, they will sell it from their warehouses in such and such a month for such and such a price, and they are given a minimum price. If you go to Liverpool, all you see is nothing but warehouses where people buy cotton. Therefore, this is a great advantage for the farmer. 

I would like to warn people in commodity trade about the possibility of either making money or losing it. It is just demand and supply. If for, instance, there is overproduction of sim sim from Brazil, that might affect the price of sim sim in the world and it will go down. If the climate in Brazil is bad and coffee does not do well, then there will be demand of coffee in the world and Uganda benefits that way. 

You remember when Amin was President, the price of coffee shot up and that was because there was frost in the South American countries. There was great demand for coffee at that time and Uganda took advantage of that. That is the time we built our Embassy in Manhattan, in New York and a number of other embassies, having made a lot of money from coffee.  We took advantage of what happened in the world to increase the demand for coffee. (Interruption) 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like my colleague to educate me on who will construct these warehouses. Storage is always at a cost. In commerce it is called a “demurrage”. Who will shoulder the storage cost? You have mentioned a product called, cotton. In Madi we grow it. Cotton attracts moisture when stored for a long period. Storage for long periods eventually makes the cotton fiber brown. Then it starts degenerating in quality.  Who is going to bear the cost of this? Perhaps what you noticed in Liverpool may not apply to my people in Madi, because the storage conditions are different.  

DR MALLINGA: There are investors who are coming to build warehouses.  Most likely they have warehouses all over the world, handling say maize or handling cotton, as you say. They have the experience; they know what temperature is necessary to maintain cotton inside the warehouse -(Interruption)

MR KITYO MUTEBI: Mr Speaker, allow me to give the House some information so that they get an idea of what we are talking about.  The warehouse system we are debating here is basically for our local consumption, although they could also be international avenues. Who is going to build the warehouses is a private business. The whole warehouse system is a private business and we are putting this law in place to regulate that private business. Anybody who can build a warehouse or a store, with the conditions approved by the authority, will manage a warehouse. The key players in the warehouse are the warehouse manager and the farmer who will put the commodity in the warehouse.  

Normally you add value to a produce by storing it and also by solving the basic problems of the producer, because I can produce my maize in December and I have pressing needs. Therefore, the warehouse with the bank and insurance, as other players, will be able to pay the farmer the first price as he brings in his commodity. When the prices are better later on, he will come back and get another pay. However, he will have to pay for what my colleague called a “demurrage”, the storage charges. Basically, this is one of the marketing systems, which are very good for Ugandan farmers, where the farmers can put their commodities in the store, get the first payment, go and solve their problems and come back later when the prices are good. 

The manager of the warehouse will make money because I pay for the storage and continue to pay for the storage, as long as the crop is there.  However, because I get a better price later on, the price I get will make me pay the store manager and be able to meet the costs. That is how it is going to work. It is another way of providing employment to Ugandans because whoever is a manager of a warehouse will be employing other people to keep quality and grade the crops.  

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, perhaps that is the longest information we have ever had in this House. (Laughter)  However, I would like to thank the honourable member for the information. I was a commodity speculator for about 10 years and I participated in the commodity exchange without ever seeing any of the goods. I was buying Arabica coffee from West Africa, and after three or six months, I would sell it when the prices were better. 

It is a speculation for the prices might either go up while you are waiting or they could go down. Therefore, we have to set out knowing that when you store your coffee in the warehouse, in three months as you are waiting to sell, the prices might go down.

MR OKUPA: I should allay your concerns. In the warehouse business systems, we have insurance corporations participating as one of the stakeholders. The insurance companies are there to take care of such eventualities. If there is a very high drop in the prices, the insurance comes in, if there are damages during storage, the insurance company still comes in. Therefore, that should not really worry you; maybe your concerns would have been the premiuMs

DR MALLINGA: I think the honourable member misunderstood the whole thing. There is insurance for the damage to the commodity while it is in charge of the owner of the warehouse. However, controlling supply and demand is different. [Mr Okupa: “Information”]. I am not taking any more information from you.

MR OKUPA: Insurance is not only limited to that. It is comparable to life insurance, which naturally you do not have control over.

DR MALLINGA: Please protect me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you need more time to study this Bill because as I see, we are describing how an elephant is by touching this and the other side, whereas it is necessary for you to meaningfully debate this. It is necessary that you read the memorandum that forwarded the Bill so that when we debate, we are able to see the purpose rather than describing the elephant in different ways. For this reason, I think you need this evening to study the Bill and continue with the debate tomorrow.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I thank you for looking at the way the debate was going.  However, the ministers on the front bench may also wish to appreciate that sometimes certain Bills are really of a technical nature. I am aware of two or three cases, where the Minister of Local Government was good enough even to hold a few hours seminar in a good hotel with Members. (Laughter) It would be useful and this is not the first time. To me, this is a Bill of a technical nature, and really I would have been glad if the concerned ministry had come out to educate us. It is important that when we pass a law, we have something reasonable to tell our constituencies. 

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform you that we had a seminar for two days for Members on the Committee of Agriculture, which was in Jinja.

THE SPEAKER: The seminar you are talking about was for the Members of the committee.  However, I think what he is talking about is for Parliament to understand the purpose so that when they come to deal with it, they know exactly what it is.

MR ATUBO: I am putting this point across because in most cases when we pass a Bill here, our voters expect us to go and explain to them what we have passed. This Bill affects an ordinary producer and when you go back they will surely ask you, pressmen will ask you or even a radio station may invite you for a discussion and say, “What have you passed in the House?” Yet you are not technically competent to explain to your people. I appreciate that the relevant committee had the advantage of a useful seminar.  However, I think like the Ministry of Local Government, a day’s seminar on this matter could have been very useful. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: I am intending to adjourn so that you study the Bill and understand it. (Mr Nabeta rose_) No, but we are intending to adjourn so that you study and understand the Bill.

MR NABETA: Mr Speaker, we have had more than four workshops. We have called various Members, the Finance committee, the Agriculture Committee and many others. I cannot say that many Members who are concerned never attended these workshops. Maybe, if possible, we could take the information because some of the Members have valid issues that we could benefit from, regarding the principles behind the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you realise from the debate that people had different understanding of the purpose of this Bill. I take it that a farmer will be able to take his produce to the warehouse and it becomes a collateral. He will take the receipt to somebody and show that he has certain things in store, and this will help him to acquire the services he needs. However, others have got different concepts. Therefore, because of this, I think we should adjourn.  Please, go and study this Bill and we shall continue with this debate tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

MR NABETA: Mr Speaker, I beg that instead of tomorrow, if we could push it on to Monday because due to some other commitments the Chairman and I may not make it. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister thinks that you need more time. Honourable members, is it okay with you?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  Even if we adjourned to tomorrow or two days without the information we require, it will not help us. I strongly feel that the Committee on Trade has not done enough. It has not given us enough information and even when you look at the observations –(Interjections)- could you protect me Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I am protecting you.

MRS BABA DIRI: There are only four observations, there is no background information and they just went straight away to recommendations. The report is actually dry. We do not have information. Please, give us more information so that we can decide from an informed position. Thank you.

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a clarification about involvement of Members of other committees.  In all the workshops we have held, Members of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Members of the Committee on Economy, Members of the Committee on Finance and Members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, were invited. In Jinja, we invited more than 100 people and the workshop in Hotel Africana was open. There was also another workshop in Paraa. So, effort has been made to bring Members on board and I am sure it is only a few who are mixing up terms, yet these are even well defined in the Bill here. 

You are in order to say people maybe need more time to acquaint themselves with the Bill. People are mixing up bonded warehouses with the warehouses we are talking about in this Bill. You can see the problem is not because you are not involved but because you have not had time to read through the Bill itself.  Therefore, the minister is right to ask for time maybe up to Monday. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, having listened –(Interruption)

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I get the impression that the warehousing here only concerns agricultural produce, but agriculture extends to animals as well, how do we warehouse the animals? (Laughter) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is in our interest to get to know the law we are going to pass. My assessment from the debate is that you need more commitment to read and internalise the provisions of this Bill. The minister, who is the owner of the Bill, thinks you need more time. Therefore, we are adjourning as far as this matter is concerned so that we get back to it on Monday. With that we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. We will use our generator. 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, it looks like you are adjourning the House but we have item number 11 on the Order Paper and we are ready for it.

THE SPEAKER: We will deal with it tomorrow. Are you talking about that repeal law?

MR ODIT: This is a very small piece of legislation that involves just repealing the Tea Growers Corporation.

MEMBERS: Tomorrow is graduation day.

THE SPEAKER: You think you will not be able to come tomorrow because of graduation? 

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I also had the advantage of looking at this Uganda Tea Growers. We are aware time is against us. We are lucky today that we have Jinja power on the line and we can go on and finish this tea growers thing. On Thursday we have ministerial statements which I am sure will involve very hot debates. These will take us a bit of time. Therefore, I would like Members to spare another 30 minutes so that we finish this report. 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the report?

MR OMARA ATUBO: The chairman is here.

THE SPEAKER: No. Where is the report? Where is the copy of the Bill? Anyway, this is just a repeal law. Let us spare some 20 minutes so that we clear it.

BILLS
SECOND READING

UGANDA TEA GROWERS' CORPORATION (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

3.51:
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, before we deal with item number 11, I wish to beg you to allow me present item number 3, which is the first reading of the amendment of the Animal Disease Bill, 2005. We were attending Cabinet this morning and I was unable to come.

THE SPEAKER: Have you got a certificate of financial implications? 

MRS MUGYENYI: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Read it.

MRS MUGYENYI: The certificate was forwarded to your Office, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) We have had this Bill for quite sometime.

THE SPEAKER: I do not have it. Maybe it is in the Clerk’s Office. That was just for your information, because the certificate of financial implications has to be presented by the person – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, our rules provide that we lay the certificate of financial implications on the Table. Therefore, I suggest we follow the rules and lay the certificate on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Let us handle that item tomorrow, please.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tea Growers Corporation (Repeal) Bill, 2002” be read for a second time. The Bill needs to be repealed to get it updated, to take into consideration the liberalisation of the tea industry. As you realise, government has liberalised and privatised. We are no longer in the habit of running government parastatals. This corporation must be liquidized in order for the tea industry to be totally liberalised. 

This law is also being updated, as it is an impediment to the operations of the tea industry. Once the Bill is passed, it will allow new investors in the tea sub-sector. Repealing this law was delayed because the Auditor General’s report was not ready. Now that it is ready, I think the Bill can be handled. I beg to move.

3.54
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I thank you and the House for being patient. This is one of the shortest pieces of legislation we have handled. The Uganda Tea Growers Corporations (Repeal) Bill was read for the first time on 24 July 2002 and then referred to this committee. The committee looked at the Bill, which seeks to repeal the Uganda Tea Growers Corporations Act, 1966 and provide for the appointment of a liquidator to dissolve the tea growers corporation with the following specific duties of a liquidator:
 
1.	To receive all the assets of the corporation
2.	Receive and settle any claims relating to any obligation of the corporation,
3.	Determine and settle the terminal benefits payable to the former employees of the corporation
4.	Dispose of the assets of the corporation
5.	Recover any debts owed to the corporation and finally carry out any other duty, which is incidental related to the foregoing duties.

The committee now presents its findings and recommendations for consideration by this House.

Methodology:

The committee met the following: 

•	The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
•	The tea unit secretariat in the ministry
•	The Director General and staff of National Agricultural Organisation (NARO)
•	The Vice-President and the Chief Executive of Uganda National Farmers Federation and 
•	Members of the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation.

The committee also had an opportunity to participate in a national conference on tea industry, focusing on the increase of tea production and processing for export.

Background to the Tea Growers Corporation:

The Uganda Tea Growers Corporation was established by Act No.3 of Parliament in 1966, and amended in 1967 to promote a smallholder tea sub-sector in Uganda. The objectives were: 

•	To design overall plans for the tea industry with a specific focus on the smallholder tea growers.

•	To develop and promote tea growing by smallholder tea farmers.

•	To train farmers and operate a tea training centre. 

•	To supply inputs and credit facilities to these smallholder farmers.

•	To setup and operate extension services.

•	To establish tea nurseries.

•	To secure a market for growers green leaf and

•	To negotiate for financing, construction and management of tea factories with the ultimate aim to eventually hand over these factories and facilities to the smallholder tea farmers.

The performance and achievements of Uganda Tea Growers Corporation:

By 1974, over 11,000 small holders compared to 1,200 small holders in 1965 had planted 9,440 hectares of tea, an increase from 1,618.1 hectare in 1965. This resulted in a green leaf production of 24 million kilogrammes. By this time, tea had become the third most important foreign exchange earner for Uganda after coffee and cotton.

The major funding agencies of the sub-sector especially the World Bank and Commonwealth Development Corporation (CDC) withdrew in 1975, owing to the harsh political environment in the country then. As a result, the industry experienced steady decline and the proposed tea factories mainly in Mityana, Kyenjojo and Buhweju were never constructed. The government initiated some policies to try and revamp the industry. 

In 1986, government secured a loan from the World Bank for the rehabilitation of the dilapidated tea factories. This fund enabled government to establish the Emergency Tea Rehabilitation Project (ETRP). In 1988, government secured a grant from the European Union to fund smallholder tea rehabilitation project under (UTGC).

Between 1989 to 1994, UTGC undertook tea rehabilitation and development activities under EU funded Smallholder Tea Rehabilitation Project (STRP). EU was impressed by the performance of STRP, which prompted an extension of another grant to support the smallholder sub sector. As a result, a new project was formulated known as the Smallholder Tea Development Project (STDP).

Following the rehabilitation of four factories with the European Union grants, the corporation formed Agri-Industrial Management Agency (AGRIMAG) to manage the tea factories. AGRIMAG was registered as a limited private company under the Company’s Act and has since become an independent entity with obligations and liabilities.

Challenges facing the tea sub sector: 

UTGC is constrained to maintain its activities due to the withdrawal of funding by donors. UTGC had all along been financed by grants and loans negotiated by the Government of Uganda to undertake its mandate.  With the withdrawal of government and donors’ support, the corporation is especially strained to maintain its functions, field extension services, green leaf collection service costs from Mityana, Hoima, Kibaale and Kasunga Tea Training Centre.

As markets begin to open up, companies previously sheltered from protectionist government interventions must be proactive and adjusted to the new environment. As such, there is a need to create an environment that will allow for efficiency in production of the local tea in order to compete favourably with imported tea.

The constraints affecting UTGC were not due to its incompetence, but were due to the political environment and the changing economic policies. There is, therefore, need for government to strategically invest in the tea sub-sector in line with the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture.

Observations:

The committee made the following observations:

•	The reform in the tea industry is in line with the government economic liberalisation policy, in which government has encouraged the private sector to take on investment in strategic sectors, which used to fall under public enterprises. Tea industry requires appropriate policies to enable its recovery and development to encourage the private sector to invest in the sector more sustainably.

•	It was not possible for the committee to complete its report before government presented an audit to ascertain the status of the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation. This requirement was fulfilled in the current session of Parliament.

•	There was a need to put in place a tea policy to avoid a vacuum in case the UTGC was repealed. This demand too was met by the ministry during this session of Parliament.

•	The committee received to its satisfaction the assets and liabilities of the corporation from the ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

•	A tea policy is now in place and the committee hopes that this shall be implemented, to enable the tea industry move to a more sustainable recovery and development.

Recommendations:
•	The committee recommends that Uganda Tea Growers Corporation Act, 1966 be repealed since there is already a new tea policy in place and the Auditor General’s report on the assets and liabilities of the corporation. This is well supported by a certificate of financial implications as presented by the ministry.

•	The ministry should put in place enabling environment to promote the tea industry in line with the policy already in place. This should be geared towards attracting investors to the sector and encouraging farmers to grow tea as one of the cash crops.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, given the government policy of involving the private sector in the development of the economy, and the need to revive the tea industry as one of the most important cash crops in the economy, I beg to move that the Uganda Tea Growers' Corporation be repealed.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of the committee. Honourable members, I think the report is very clear and I do not think we need a general debate. I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tea Growers' Corporation (Repeal) Bill, 2002” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS                                                                                                                           COMMITTEE STAGE
UGANDA TEA GROWERS' CORPORATION (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

4.06
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to
.
Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tea Growers' Corporation (Repeal) Bill, 2002” and passed it without any amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

UGANDA TEA GROWERS' CORPORATION (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

4.10 
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tea Growers' Corporation (Repeal) Bill, 2002” be read the third time and do pass.  

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE UGANDA TEA GROWERS' CORPORATION (REPEAL) ACT, 2002”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Bill has been passed!  However, the question is, why has it taken four years?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, there was a delay in presenting the status of the corporation to the committee, that took a long time. The committee also demanded for a tea policy. Therefore, those took the ministry two-three good years, but we are now satisfied that what we have presented is really what we expect the country to benefit from.

THE SPEAKER: We thank the committee and the ministry for handling this matter.

MR ATUBO: This might be a bit academic on the part of the tea industry. We know how tea is drunk all over the world and some countries like Sri Lanka and Kenya depend on tea.  My point is more of policy than the Bill we have just passed.  We have repealed the Act, which came into effect in 1966. The committee told us of how it was the third most important foreign exchange earner. Tea is a very sensitive cash crop product in terms of how you handle it, where it is grown, the climate and so on. 

I have not seen the tea policy but I am just wondering from the minister and possibly the chairman of the committee, as to whether this policy, which I believe is well documented, is going to be implemented. Who will implement it, the ministry or the private sector? Is it going to have any legal backing? 

THE SPEAKER: The question has been raised. Maybe at an appropriate time, a statement should be given to us about this particular policy. We have now come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 March 2005 at 2.30 p.m.)


        

