Thursday, 26 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I want to inform you that in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Uganda Christian University. You are welcome! (Applause) Also in the gallery, are leaders of women groups from Wakiso District, which is represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde. You are most welcome! (Applause)  

2.48
MS DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise one issue which is very pertinent to the people of Lango especially the young people and the people of Northern Uganda and Uganda in general. 

Sooner or later, Parliament will start the process of one of its fundamental roles, the budget process. But one thing that keeps bothering me, Mr Speaker, is the enormous number of reports that are pending with parliamentary committees. 

Rule 133(e) of our Rules of Procedure mandates committees of Parliament to report to this House on their functions. Specifically, on 08 May 2008, the Parliamentary committee responsible for Trade, Tourism and Industry, among others, visited Uganda Spinning Mills Lira to assess its operation and performance since it was privatised. Since May last year the report of this committee has never been presented, considered and adopted by this House. 

I beg for your indulgence because the people we represent in this House are asking us, “Where has this report gone?” I know the committee is also mandated to report in time and if the time is not there they are supposed to request Parliament for time. Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence in this particular report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Chairman of the committee? (Mr Angiro rose_) No, in which capacity are you standing? (Laughter) So apparently we do not have the chairperson. We cannot get an answer honourable but as soon as –(Mr Rukundo rose_)- but the minister cannot answer for the committee. I know hon. Obua raised this issue and the committee was tasked to give us an answer but apparently no official person from the committee is here. 

2.52
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We toured Uganda Spinning Mills, Lira with the vice- chairperson of the committee and I understand that she has been voted out and we had been consistently requesting for that report. So maybe you can direct that this report be availed here immediately because what we saw at Uganda Spinning Mills Lira was very disappointing. Even up to today some of the workers have not been paid and they are claiming for their salaries. They are soon going to petition this Parliament. So –

THE SPEAKER: So are you undertaking, together with your committee, to give us the report? Whether good or bad, what we want is the report. Can you undertake that?

MR ANGIRO: Yes, Mr Speaker, with your permission. I think the report of the committee should have been availed but since it was the prerogative of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson then, I think it is in order that they should be able to give this report when we prevail on them as a committee.

THE SPEAKER: In a week’s time?

MR ANGIRO: Yes, in a week’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.53
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, on the 5th of March this year we did raise the issue of the global financial crisis that is slowly but surely eating up into our economy. At that time, the Government side promised that they would be here with a statement on the crisis within two weeks. It is now over three weeks and the statement has not come and this is a very serious matter of national importance, which I am sure the government is not taking very seriously. I would wish to know from the government when they would be here with that statement that they promised. I thank you. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance for raising this. We shall bring the report on Thursday next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Next item!

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I stand here in the position of the Leader of Government Business. I have received information from the honourable Minister of Works and Transport that actually the statement should have been presented today but it turns out that there are experts who did fly in last night and have been analysing information available further. The view of the Minister of Works is that he should be in a position to give an even enriched report on Tuesday after getting the findings from the new experts who came in from the United States and are helping in the process of investigation. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The statement will be made on Tuesday. Next item! (Mr Amuriat rose_) The statement will be made on Tuesday! Next item! 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST OF GOVERNMENT ON THE PROPOSED ADDITIONAL FINANCING OF SDR 9,255,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE SECOND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECT (EMCP II)

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, including hon. Johnson Malinga, I beg to lay on Table a request by government for a proposal to borrow additional financing or special drawing rights 9,255,000 from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the second Environmental Management Capacity Building II. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take up this document, study it and promptly report to Parliament.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: As you will appreciate, yesterday we had a long debate and we adjourned to enable you catch up with the differences so that we can proceed. Can you now brief us about the position?

2.58
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to just clarify one or two points before we get into the substantive aspects of the motion. 

I noted with great concern that some of our distinguished Members of this august House, especially on the opposite side facing me, could not draw any distinction between IT and ICT.  

Secondly, as a result of that confusion, Mr Speaker, even the role of UCC and the newly inaugurated or Tabled Bill on NITA (U) caused a lot of confusion. So, I beg your indulgence that I clarify on these two points then we get into substantive debate as you have directed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence once again. This afternoon I was deprived of my capacity to read, in other words, my equipment got broken; in simple words, my eye glasses. 

So, in brief, information technology, for clarity and in the interest of our friends on the other side of the House, is digital, conference, storage and release while with communication technology, that is ICT, we are dealing with digital transmission and reception of the content. I was really surprised and a wee bit disappointed that this distinction was not clear. As a result my honourable colleagues were saying that NITA is not necessary and that therefore we could do with UCC.

Again for the sake of clarity, I will just read out a few distinct items regarding these two.  

With the Bill that we presented yesterday, we are talking about provision of necessary accessory to information. Mr Speaker, whereas with UCC, we are actually dealing –(Interjection)- regarding my proximity to the microphone, when you corrected me, I remember the etiquette in this august House. When the Speaker talks, you resume your seat and that is why I was heading for my seat. And I am sure the same practice still obtains -(Interjection)- it is the same Parliament and I will never go back there.

We have a number of items which come under the communications of technology whereas with IT, it is totally different from that aspect. Mr Speaker, I just wanted to draw that distinction before we get into a detailed debate and this is the clarification I thought would be necessary for the purpose of avoiding superfluous debate and other points of clarification. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity of clarifying this issue before we get into substantive debate –(Interjection)- with your permission, I will not respond to heckling but I am sure my honourable colleagues from the other side of the House are familiar with debating tactics. 

3.03
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Members. Just to supplement on what the honourable minister is saying; when we adjourned yesterday, there was a need for us to distinguish between the role of UCC and the envisaged role of NITA, and that is what I intend to do.

Mr Speaker, UCC is a regulator of communications and it has no role that overlaps with NITA. NITA allocates licenses to telecommunication providers; UCC regulates and allocates the use of frequencies. It ensures a fair playing field in the communications sub-sector and it also ensures universal access. While NITA, the body that we are trying to create will regulate the IT sub-sector in terms of coordinating and regulating such emerging industries like e-commerce and e-governance, it will be able to authenticate and act as a centre of clearance of electronic signatures. It will also help to coordinate and encourage business processes, the outsourcing industry and also encourage innovation in software development. So, clearly there is no overlap.

I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the Act of UCC. In that Act all the roles of UCC are spelt out and there is no single role of UCC that is captured in the NITA functions. So I think it was a misconception that the functions of UCC are the same as NITA.
 
When we adjourned yesterday there were members who were concerned that we are creating a body here in Uganda that does not exist elsewhere. I want to draw the attention of this House to the various jurisdictions where such arrangements exist. For example, in Rwanda there is RITA which is the equivalent to NITA, which regulates IT and there is RURA for communications. In Kenya, they have the Directorate of E-government created by an Act of Parliament, and they also have the Communications Commission of Kenya. 

In South Africa, they have the South African Information Technology Agency which is the equivalent of NITA that we are trying to create, and they have the Independent Commission Authority of South Africa (ICASA). In Nigeria, they have the National Information Technology Development Agency and the Nigeria Communication Commission.

So, this is not out of line with what is happening elsewhere. I have a copy of an Act of South Africa, “The State of Information Technology Agency Act” which is similar to the Act that we are trying to create, and I will be glad to share this with anyone who will be interested. 

There were also concerns from our colleagues –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you mean you will be able to give us copies of that Act so that we can compare?

MR BALIDDAWA: Yes, thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to lay this on the Table. 

There were also concerns yesterday that were expressed by the stakeholders during our committee work. The committee had not yet captured the mitigating responses to those concerns. I have here all these concerns and responses from the committee. With your indulgence, I would like to read them out so that we can allay fears of the Members as to the concerns that were raised by the committee. 

3.08
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I was trying to follow the chairperson of the committee and initially the minister had raised the same matters. I would like to draw the attention of the chairman that it is true there are countries where the two bodies are in operation but have you also considered, say, if the Uganda Communications Commission is not comprehensive enough, would it not be better to look at how you can say amend, repeal or do something about it so that it can accommodate this new aspect of National Information Technology Authority. Can you not see how it can be accommodated within UCC? 

Secondly, there is a growing trend of creating authorities; there is an authority on each and everything and aspect in this country. In other words, they are soon emerging to cut on the costs that were essentially meant to be during the restructuring process that this country underwent. What is the frenzy in creating one authority after another? I am seeking your indulgence, to see how you can amend the UCC Act. How you can incorporate all these concerns because you are now creating another autonomous body. I would like to request your indulgence, Mr Chairman and government.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to repeat this again. I would have the same concerns like hon. Ssekikubo regarding saving the nation from costs out of the formation of NITA. But there are technicalities which we cannot overlook. For example, Uganda is a member of the International Telecommunications Union and under the regulations of the International Telecommunications Union - and by the way, if any country wants to have mobile phones, if any country wants to have spectrums for television like DSTV, you have to be a member of the International Telecommunications Union. Therefore, we have to abide by the international standards. 

Under the regulations of the International Telecommunications Union, the Uganda Communications Commission is not allowed to engage itself in operations. Under the Uganda Communications Commission, the only thing that is allowed as it has always repeatedly been said is to regulate. Meaning, if Nsambu wants to have a television station in Masaka or radio station, I have to go to UCC. So, in this case if we want to have a regulator or an operator, there are two options: the first option is to have the Ministry of ICT leaving our desks and going to engage ourselves in, for example, providing software to everybody, regulating the standards of every computer which comes, while actually our main role is to do the supervision including policy. 

The other thing would be to create a directorate or have it as a statutory instrument issued by the hon. Minister. However, all that is not going to help us. If we have the same aspirations as other countries, this is exactly what they are doing. We simply have to have an authority. We can name it anything else but we have to have it. Otherwise, we will continue to trail.  

The other day, a fellow Member of Parliament told me that if all the papers we get in this House in a year were laid around Kampala, they would be enough to cover the whole city. That is how wasteful we are as a government. So when NITA (U) comes on board, one of its main jobs will be first of all to lower the wastage and at the same time spearhead e-governance and many other activities. 

If the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda writes to me a letter summoning me officially to do certain work, under this Act it can be taken as an authentic communication. However, as we speak now, if the Speaker communicated to me and seriously wanted me to go to his office, I could tell him, “Sorry Sir, I received your communication but it is not official”. That is not the way governments run. 

In today’s modern world, certain things have to happen. Look at banking, for example; when they send me an electronic statement, I do not take this as an authentic document and the bank cannot go to any court and say, “we have fulfilled our duty of sending you information about your accounts”. I can name a thousand examples. I know we do not have time to hear all these endless reasons as to why the National Information Technology Authority (Uganda) should be put in place. 

All we ask our fellow Members of Parliament is, in the first place, to understand the way things are moving today. In fact, we are already four years behind in having this legislation passed to allow government and the whole nation to move fast in this digital age. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a very important issue in regard to information and communication technology. As raised by the honourable minister, there is much wastage by government. However, there is also the element of counterfeit. When you look at the equipment that we receive in this country, I think over 50 percent of it is counterfeit. I have not seen in this report anything to do with counterfeit equipment. 

If you went and bought a battery for your phone today, honourable Minister of Health, after you use it for two days, it will get spoilt. Now, what level of wastage is this? That is why we were concerned with information communication council business. 

We have Uganda National Bureau of Standards in place but I wonder how much we are gaining from this institution, which should be guiding us on communication and information. At the end of the day, the information we shall get will also be counterfeit and that will render most of our activities irrelevant.  So, can I know how you are going to deal with counterfeit equipment in information and communication technology?  Thank you very much.

3.17
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I thank the ministers and the committee chairperson for affording us certain explanations meant to shed light on some of the questions that we raised yesterday.  

I am sad because I believe the explanations have fallen on rock, and they do not help to respond to the concerns that were raised yesterday. The minister and the chairperson of the committee have made reference to the Uganda Communications Act and to the Bill under consideration. They have specifically raised a matter of the functions of the commission and that of National Information Technology Authority (NITA) that this Bill seeks to form. In my view, apart from the semantics, the basic responsibility of the commission is almost a mere image of the responsibility of NITA.  

I would like to ask the minister: what does the Ministry of ICT actually do? Do you have a job to fulfil? The telecommunications companies are handling matters of telecommunications. Uganda Communications Council (UCC) is handling matters of regulation. We have two ministers, a permanent secretary and several staff members with a fairly big budget doing what I do not understand -(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am terribly moved when my honourable colleague - my best friend on the other side as my senior minister – says that the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology could probably have no relevance. It is the same as saying that because there is a Parliamentary Commission here there is no relevance in having a whole Parliament. Is it in order for my most honourable friend to overlook the relevance of my ministry and insinuate that we have no relevance?  

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a personal problem. (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you for your very wise ruling. It energises me because we have freedom of speech. This is one thing that the minister should have known, being an old Member of Parliament. 

I would like to address myself to something that hon. John Alintuma, the minister of state, mentioned in passing. This is to do with the possibility of having a directorate under the Ministry of ICT instead of having to legislate for a completely new body. I am mindful of the examples that have been cited by the chairperson of the committee that happened in other jurisdictions in Rwanda, Kenya, South Africa and Nigeria that he spoke to when he was presenting additional information from the committee –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: I would like to thank the member for giving way. The point here is that we seem to be undermining the importance of IT and what it can actually do for this country. The UCC was put in place to regulate the industry, and you have seen what UCC has been able to do. In coming up with NITA, Uganda wanted to emulate some of the countries that have been successful in IT like Malaysia, India and Ireland. You know, Ireland was a good place to grow these potatoes they call Irish potatoes, but they decided one day to go into the IT industry, and today you hear of Ireland being the centre for all outsourcing and BPOs for the whole US and most of Europe.

The issue is that IT can play a very significant role. So, I do not agree with the hon. Member that there should be just a directorate. India is making US$ 60 billion out of IT services now. Uganda is targeting only one percent of that, which is US$ 600 million. Now, you cannot relate that to only a directory in the ministry, but you also need people who can think about these software innovations – to create all the innovations that we need. We need people who cannot be paid by Ministry of Public Service; they have to be paid according to market values. These are people who are paid US $20,000 to US $30,000 per month. So, you cannot start competing with the global economy in terms of innovation when you are having people in a directorate and you are paying them at public service levels. 

We need an organisation which can help streamline Uganda and be able to guide Uganda in the right direction. One of the functions of NITA will be e-governance. E-governance also means procuring broadband, managing international backbone – these are things that UCC cannot do because UCC is the regulator. Therefore, NITA will be governing the e-governance infrastructure of the country. You cannot have UCC do the things it is supposed to regulate. That is why we wanted to leave UCC to do its part and introduce NITA. 

We cannot look at successful examples like Malaysia, Singapore, India and Ireland; let us have a specific organisation which can look at IT. The IT here is completely different because UCC is dealing with communication infrastructure, satellite, fibre optics, spectrum, radio stations and TV stations. Here in NITA, we are talking about IT content data; we are going into governance, national IDs, passports – this is all IT data. Data is now the biggest issue in the world. We cannot have UCC looking at that which is not its core. The core is to have NITA, which will be able to streamline where we think Uganda should go. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I see that we are just duplicating the exercise that we had yesterday; the same trend is being repeated. The question would be: why do we have the National Drug Authority and not a department within the ministry to do their work; why do we have NARO in Ministry of Agriculture; why do we have the Road Authority instead of having a department for roads in the ministry. You can realise that the trend is to have this authority. Why don’t we have a department in the Ministry of Energy to supply electricity?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I was about to conclude by giving the example of the Ministry of Works, whose minister sits right across there. The Ministry of Works has the ministry as a body with its core functions. It has also got a road authority that is responsible for projects relating to that ministry. It has just one authority, not two or three authorities. What I see the ICT Ministry doing is to establish not one authority - because we already have UCC - but another authority, and I am not sure what more they will come up with and ask us to establish tomorrow. 

I do not support the establishment of this authority because it is only going to help constrain the budget of this country and cause over-taxation on our local people who live in abject poverty. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION AND 
TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA BILL, 2008

3.28
MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, with your permission, given my inability to read with the spectacles available, I seek your permission for the minister of state to read our contribution.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay. That is an internal matter.

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, on clause 2, we propose that we insert a new word in –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Following past practice, we prefer dealing with the interpretation clause after we have exhausted the Bill. This is because there may be some terms that need interpretation or definition. We may adopt that procedure so that we deal with the interpretations after. Is that ok?

Clause 2, stood over.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we insert a new provision to be named 4(f), immediately after 4(e), to read as follows: “(f) To promote access and utilisation of information technology by the special interest groups.” 

Justification: for the law to specifically cater for the special interest groups.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, at the beginning I saw a number of ministers around but now they are depriving us of quorum. Is it in order for these ministers to come here, show their faces and run away?

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually, this is a government Bill and not a private members’ Bill, so the ministers should be seen here to support their Bill. I have heard your concern and I entirely agree with you. Let me now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment. I have not framed it but it is something to do with handling of waste that may come about as a result of use of equipment. It is about regulation and management of waste. I do not know whether it is mentioned somewhere within the Bill. I have not seen it. 

I would like to move a new sub-clause (g) to be introduced as follows: “to promote environmentally friendly handling of waste that may be accumulated as a result of the use of information technology hardware.”

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, that particular proposal is taken care of in a subsequent amendment - 5(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: okay, it is taken care of.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to find out from the committee chairperson whether he feels that this is the right position in which that particular amendment should be housed and not in the roles and responsibilities of NITA.

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, this particular concern of e-waste is captured within the functions of the authority as spelt out in 5(d). As we suggest in the amendment, we shall seek to add the word “disposal”. The justification will be to cater for hardware disposal in the country and set up a mechanism for proper e-waste disposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: This means you have agreed and now it is just a question of location, and it will be in clause 5. 

MR AKENA: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that in 4(b), the last three words should be deleted because the authority may be trying to bite more than it can chew. Looking at other similar authorities, their main focus is within government and if you put “throughout Uganda” you are widening the scope to be beyond what they can handle.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 4(b) provides as follows: “To promote standardisation, planning, acquisition, implementation, delivery, support and maintenance of information technology equipment and services to ensure uniformity in quality, adequacy and liability of information technology usage in government and throughout Uganda”. What do you want to amend there?

MR AKENA: I am proposing we stop at the word “government”.

THE CHAIRMAN: But what about the common men who are not in government?

MR AKENA: Does the authority believe that it can standardise across the board and plan for all sectors, private and public? I do not think that this is the intention of the authority. Looking at the other authorities, this is far more than they can handle.

THE CHAIRMAN: Would it be better to delete “in government” and say “…usage throughout Uganda.”? Maybe we can do that so that government and other people are covered. 

MR AKENA: Mr Chairman, most of the authorities that we have looked at in comparison deal with information technology in government and preparing policies for the rest. If you say that this authority is going to provide all these services to the general public –

THE CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think that hon. Akena, hon. Ssekandi or hon. Amuriat would also like to benefit from the services of the authority? It is better to have an umbrella provision which would cover even the ordinary people by deleting “in government” so that it says, “…usage throughout Uganda”. What harm does that do? Otherwise, people might say that government is selfish, it only wants services from this authority and it leaves them out yet they may need the services of the authority. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, I do agree with your suggestion that we delete “government” and leave “throughout Uganda” so that this authority can be all encompassing in its services rather than trying to limit it to government.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we amend clause 5(b) by inserting the words “usability, accessibility” immediately after the word “utilisation” appearing in the second line of the provision. The justification is to widen the application of the provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the difference between “usability” and “utilisation”? 

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Usability actually means whether or not a certain IT hardware tool can be used, and utilisation means that the result of using the tool can be used. 

As we said, we have a couple of other Bills coming and one of them will be the Electronic Signatures Bill. That Bill and the Computer Misuse Bill, if it gets passed by Parliament, will mean that the authority will have the mandate to apprehend anybody who misuses a computer to commit a crime. 

If anybody decided to forge a document using somebody’s computer, if NITA (U) is established, they will have the mandate to apprehend the person who is misusing that computer. In other words, this one gives the mandate to NITA (U) as regards usability of computers and utilisation of the computer. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, hon. Members, you have heard the explanation. There have been proposals. I put the question assuming that we will understand the difference later.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 5(c). We propose to insert the words “utilisation of” immediately before the word “information”, and substitute the words “the sectors specified in Schedule 2” with the words “in the public and private sectors”. The justification is to make the provision specific and to give the provision a wide application. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to clause 5(d). We propose that we insert a new word, “disposal”, immediately after the word “sustenance” appearing in the third line. The justification is to cater for hardware disposal in the country and set up a mechanism for proper e-waste. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to move an amendment to clause 5(f). We propose that we add the words “and other e-Transactions” immediately after the word “e-Commerce” appearing in the second line. The justification is to include all other electronic transactions. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: With almost ten amendments in one clause, why didn’t you re-draft and have a new sub-clause? It would have been better to substitute this with a new formulation. Anyway, let us proceed.

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 5(g). We propose that we insert the word “utilisation” immediately after the word “effective” appearing in the last line. The justification is to provide for adequate usage. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we amend clause 5(h). We propose that we add, at the end of the provision, the following words: “in conjunction with the Ministry responsible for Education.” The justification is to avoid conflict of roles performed by the ministry responsible for education and its agencies. I beg to move.

 THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 5(j). We propose that we substitute the word “an” with the word “for”. The justification is to ensure that in situations where such services already exist within Uganda, NITA (U) may not have to spend resources establishing other service centres but can rather recognise such existing ones. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we insert a new provision as (d) and (e) immediately after (c) to read as follows: “(d) to regulate and enforce standards for information technology hardware and software equipment procurement in all government ministries, departments, agencies and parastatals.” The justification is to ensure that information technology equipment procured for government is of quality and better standards. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, the (e) we propose to create would read as follows: “(e) to create and manage the national databank, its inputs and outputs.” The justification is that there is no government agency responsible for creation and management of national databanks and NITA is well placed to carry out this function. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to insert a new provision immediately after (n) to read as follows: “To protect and promote the interests of consumers or users of information technology services or solutions.” The justification is to have a specific provision catering for information technology users and consumers.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honestly, this is tantamount to rewriting the clause. You should have just deleted and substituted it with this one. It would have been better.

Clause 6

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 6(d). We propose that we add the following words at the end of the provision: “in consultation with the Ministry of Education.” The justification is to avoid a power overlap between the authority and the ministry responsible for education or its agencies. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we amend clause 7 by deleting paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i) and creating a new provision (d) to read as follows: “(d) four other nominees.” 

The justification is to have a smaller number of the board of directors for efficiency and low financial burden. Also, to have a board that includes members with knowledge and experience in various fields, and not to restrict the nomination of members to the board to a particular ministry, institution or organisation. I beg to move.

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to amend that section to read as follows: “four other nominees from the general public.” This will avoid the appointment of people from the line ministry so that NITA does not become an extended ministry. If all these people are civil servants within the ministry and are answerable to the minister, they will not be independent in performing their duties.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, by deleting those particular sub-clauses all the way to (i), we are going to lose (i) in particular, which talks about two eminent Ugandans with expertise in information and communication technology. Information and communications technology is something rather new in this country. It is not an age-old practice, and I think we really need the services of experts.  

In my opinion, rather than delete (i) altogether, we could have two instead of four, which is suggested by the chairperson. We could maintain two eminent Ugandans with necessary expertise. The number will remain the same but again we would guarantee that we have experts on this board.

THE CHAIRMAN: What he is saying is that in each category, where you said three, you put two so that it reduces but the category stays because of their peculiarities. You can lessen the number such that where you have given four, you say three or two as the case may be, but you leave their particular categories. That would reduce the number or size but you would leave the expertise untouched. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we are ready to follow your advice.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have the number? Is the number suggested? How we shall reduce this?

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, the committee considered those and we thought seven would be an ideal number for the board.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are going to leave this to the appointing authority to choose from which category? You want to limit him with the number but leave him to choose where to reduce? Why don’t you do it yourself?

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, I think we could maintain the four, two of whom would be eminent experts in IT. I think that would take care of all the interests in the amendments. So it would be any other four, two of whom would be eminent Ugandans who are experts in IT.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but how do you choose the four? I think these groups are categorised for a policy matter.

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we can leave the four nominees and say, “at least one of the four would be an eminent Ugandan with expertise in IT.” This is a body that we should not just staff with IT experts. We also need people with expertise in other fields. After all, there is already one person from the line ministry who is an IT expert, so we should not staff this body with IT people only.

THE CHAIRMAN: According to your amendment here, you say we delete paragraph (d). When you delete paragraph (d), you are deleting the commission responsible for information technology in the ministry responsible for finance and planning. You said delete (e), which is the Commissioner responsible for Information Technology in the ministry responsible for local government. You say delete (f) and that is the Commissioner responsible for Information Technology in the ministry responsible for education. Then you said delete (g), which is a representative of an institution for higher learning that has a proven record of research in the field of computer science and information. You said delete (h) - three representatives of a private sector organisation and association working in the field and so on. Then you say delete (i) - two eminent Ugandans with expertise in information. Now you say we create a new provision. So, do you forget about all these people? Is that what you want?

MR BALIDDAWA: Yes, Mr Chairman, because we already have three people who are experts in IT. We have the chairperson, the executive director and the commissioner responsible for information technology in the ministry. We are saying we should have four other nominees one of whom will be - because you need people with various expertises on this board. We just do not want people with IT expertise only.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, hon. Members?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we would like to propose an amendment to clause 7(2). We propose that we substitute paragraph (g) (h) and (i) appearing in line 2 of paragraph 9d). 

The justification is to make it consistent with the amendments that we have just passed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 8 by substituting paragraphs (g), (h) and (i) appearing in line 2 with paragraph (d) and the words “information technology and business management as the minister may determine”, appearing in lines 4 and 5 with the words “disciplines relevant to the functions of the Authority.”

The justification is to make it consistent with the amendment made in clause 7(1) and to have a board that includes members with knowledge and experience in various relevant fields.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to make an amendment to clause 9 by substituting paragraph (g), (h) and (i) appearing in line 2 with paragraph (d). 

The justification is to make it consistent with the amendments we made to clause 7(1). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: These are consequential amendments. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to make an amendment to clause 10(1) by substituting paragraph (g), (h) and (i) appearing in line 3 with paragraph (d). 

The justification is to make it consistent with the amendments made in clause 7(1). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub-clause 10(3). The justification is the amendments made to clause 7(1). The provision is rendered redundant. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr chairman, we propose to amend clause 11(g) by inserting at the end of that provision the words “and any other reports as maybe deemed necessary”. 

The justification is to provide in the application of the provision to provide for other reports other than the quarterly reports when ever need arises.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 15(d) by substituting the word “government” appearing at the end of the provision with the words “the public and the private sectors.” 

The justification is for the provision to have a wider application. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to create a new provision as (e) immediately after clause (d) to read as follows: “Perform any other duties as the board may instruct from time to time.” 

The justification is to enable the secretariat to undertake any other activities that are within the framework of this law other than those specifically mentioned in clause 15(a), (b), (c) and (d). I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 16 by inserting a new provision immediately after sub clause 1 to read as follows: “A person to be appointed Executive Director shall be a person of considerable practical, professional and administrative experience in Information and Communication Technology.” 

The justification is to enable the board to have a head with considerable experience in the relevant field. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 17(8) to substitute the word “control” appearing last in the first line with the word “management.” 

The justification is that the word “control” is obsolete in modern management. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 18 (2) to delete the word “an” appearing in the last line of the provision. 

The justification is to correct the grammatical error. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 19(1) by substituting the words “for any of the sectors specified in Schedule II to this Act” appearing in the last line with “in both public and private sectors.” 

The justification is to give the provision a wider application. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR BALIDDAWA: I propose to amend clause 20(3), by deleting sub-clause (3). The justification is that the provision is very restrictive and yet there are so many ways within which to obtain information.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR BALIDDAWA: I propose to amend clause 22(1) by inserting immediately after the word “prosecution” the following: “Public interest, court order or state of emergency”. 

The justification is to widen the grounds under which information may be published, admitted in evidence or shown to any person. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 24 by deleting the whole provision. The justification is that this provision is very restrictive and redundant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, deleted.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 26(1) by adding the words “for the following financial year” at the end of the provision. The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 26(2) by inserting the words “for the following financial year” immediately after the word “expenditure” appearing in the last line of the provision. The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR OPANGE: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance on this clause. Mostly it is Parliament to approve all the borrowing from the government. I do not know if it would apply here.

THE CHAIRMAN: For instance, dealing with the borrowing powers of Bank of Uganda and NEMA, do we deal with corporations? We do not. This is when the government is the one borrowing to pass on to the other so that the borrower is seen to be the government.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 30 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 33(1) by substituting the word “may” appearing in the first line with the word “shall”. 

The justification is to avoid duplication of efforts and wastage of public resources since there may be other existing institutions carrying out the same activities. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35 

MR OPANGE: We wish to make an amendment to clause 35 so that the minister consults with the board for the direction of the secretariat because in most cases if the minister deals directly with the executive director, it will undermine the powers of the board.

MR ALINTUMA: We accept the proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the proposal?

MR ALINTUMA: The clause goes as follows: “The minister may after consultation with the executive director…” but the Member is proposing that we add “in consultation with the board.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am concerned about a protection from liability of members of the board and really to call the attention of the House to sub-clause (2) where it says, “If he acts in respect of any act or omission done in good faith …” – I do not know how we measure good faith and how we can determine that a person acted in good faith or otherwise. I would like us to be clearer on this.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a normal term used not only in this Bill but many other Acts. Good faith will be a question of evidence – if the evidence is that it was in good faith, he has to be protected otherwise he will never act. If the good faith is not there and he causes damage, then he is penalised.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 36 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR BALIDDAWA: We propose to amend clause 41 by deleting sub-clause (2). The justification is that the Schedule to which the provision is referring has been deleted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you remember we agreed to have this clause stood over because we thought we would need to do some amendments to it. But apparently I notice that it is not necessary to make any amendments to this – 

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, there is an amendment to clause 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, then move it.

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 2 by inserting a new word, “e-transaction” to come immediately after the phrase, “definition of e-readiness” so as to read as follows: “e-transaction means the exchange of information for data, the sale or purchase of goods or services between businesses, households, individuals, governments and other public or private organisations conducted over computer-mediated networks.” 

The justification is that the word has been introduced in the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, it is possible that the chairperson of the committee forgot, but we had introduced the word, “e-waste.” I am seeking clarification from him on whether this was adopted or not. If yes, then there is need to define it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, move an amendment to that effect.

MR AMURIAT: I wish to move that the House adopts an interpretation of “e-waste” to mean any form of waste that is accumulated as a result of hardware used in information technology. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the First Schedule stand the Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we delete the Second Schedule. The justification is that it is very restrictive. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, deleted.

Third Schedule

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we propose that we amend paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule by substituting the word “eight” appearing in the first line with the word “four.” The justification is that the number has been reduced from 12 to 7. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question -

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, there is still another amendment in respect of the Third Schedule, which seeks to create a new paragraph 4 under paragraph 3 to read as follows: “The decision reached by the board thereafter shall be binding on all members.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule

MR BALIDDAWA: Mr Chairman, we had a typing error. Instead of the Fourth Schedule we wrote 24. I beg to amend it by substituting the words, “specifically permitted by the President” appearing in the last line with the words “authorised by the law.” 

The justification is to make the exception wider. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment, accordingly.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fourth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered all the clauses of this Bill and passed it with various amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the National Information Technology Authority Uganda Bill, 2008, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA BILL, 2008

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Information Technology Authority Uganda Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The National Information Technology Authority Uganda Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY UGANDA ACT, 2009”

THE SPEAKER: Okay, congratulations, but those concerned should take note of the reservations that have been expressed about this authority and ensure that it succeeds in what is expected of it. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2009

4.23
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Private Members’ Bill entitled “The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009” be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is second time or the first time of reading. I think it is first time. Well, the note I have from the clerk is that this Bill is now ready for first reading and the copies are available. A Certificate of Financial Implications is also attached. The note is dated 17 March 2008 and I do not remember having had the Bill read the first time between 17 and now - it was read last week? Oh, now you have finished? Now what do we do? How about our rules? What do they say if it was read between 14th and now? How many days must be taken before the Bill returns?

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, not more than 45 days, Sir. So any time from day zero to 45.

THE SPEAKER: Can we abridge the period between the first reading and the second reading? I think I want guidance from you. You read the Rules. 

MR KASAMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. This Bill was read for the first time last week. However, sometime back last year, it was presented on the Floor of Parliament. You remember hon. Lukwago contested that there was a slight alteration on the original Bill, which had been submitted way back in December 2007 and the committee had considered this new Bill -

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, hon. Member, I agree that what you say might have taken place last year but something intervened and that is why you had this Bill read the first time as you said, last week. 

There is a procedure to abridge the period between first reading and second reading; a procedure asking leave to abridge the period between the first reading and the second reading. That must be something done before we can undertake giving a second reading to a Bill which was read for the first time last week. 

I must commend the committee for expeditiously handling this matter. All the same, abridging the period between the first reading and the second reading has its own procedure and- this normally happens when we have financial Bills. Someone has to apply that, “In spite of this let us do this,” and we abridge. Ok? 

So I think what we can do is that you count the days after the first reading and immediately that period is covered we shall deal with this. But you see, you cannot bring for instance a Bill getting first reading today on Monday then on Wednesday you say, “We have finished and this is the report. Let us have the second reading.” No. There are certain procedures to be followed. 

You see, the idea is not the speed at which the committee handles the Bill. That is important but there are other stakeholders who are interested and who must be given opportunity to study the Bill and have a say on it. That is why there is a time period given. But as I have said, I am very happy that the committee has expeditiously handled this Bill. Should the period expire, it will be the first business to be handled. Does this satisfy you? This is exactly what I said. You move a motion -

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to move a motion that we suspend rule 114(5) which says, “Subject to these rules, the second reading of a Bill shall not be taken earlier than the fourteenth day after the publication of the Bill in the Gazette unless this sub-rule is formally suspended for this purpose.” 

I would like to move that we suspend this rule so that we read the Bill because it is ready and has been adequately debated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, it is not only that the finishing has been done. There are many stakeholders and many people interested in this Bill. The purpose of giving time is to enable them also have a say on what has been published in the first reading. I think 14 days will expire next week. Why don’t we - you will have it. I guarantee that it will be the first item in as far as Bills are concerned next week.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you appreciate why you have to do this. Yes.

4.30
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bearing in mind the current wave of human sacrifice, the issue was raised in the House asking Government to make a statement on this matter. At that time you guided the House that piece of legislation was in the offing and we expected it to be in this Bill. 

As we peruse through the Bill - unless we are satisfied that other laws in place like the Penal Code Act abundantly provide for abducting children and removing body parts. But I thought this matter needed to be mentioned specifically in this legislation which is coming. I need your guidance on this. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is to take time to study this Bill which had its first reading and when it comes for the second reading, you would have collected the necessary information to back your proposal that certain provisions in this Bill be amended and we insert this and the other. This is exactly why you are allowed those 14 days to study a Bill which has already been through a first reading.

I do not know whether this one will also cover human sacrifice. I heard one incident recently from Rukungiri and another one. I do not know whether this will cover that. This is different but still we need a statement from Government about human sacrifice which is very rampant now.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence; I seek guidance from you because we have a report from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on this Bill. And I think they expected to present it today. Now that there is the issue of giving the Bill more time, are we effectively opening the work of the committee so that they may now listen to submissions from the public; is this what we are doing? 

THE SPEAKER:  No, if you have a report on this Bill - I have said it is good that the committee has acted fast but that does not remove the requirement of those days to allow other people who were not part of the committee to study this bill. There is no harm really waiting for 14 days between the first reading and this reading. I think it is better not to rush it because other people may criticise us that they also had something to say about it - tomorrow will come. (Laughter) So I think let us do this; since this is a requirement of our rules, let us abide by our rules and handle this Bill next week.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE ADHOC COMMITTEE ON THE CONCERNS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON ALLEGED DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I remember yesterday the Leader of the Opposition confided in me that the chairman of the committee is out and he wanted this matter to be handled when he is back; and they seem to have agreed that he would be back next week. This is what Professor Latigo asked me to do yesterday. But are the reports for this Bill out? Mr Kasamba, are you the one handling this Bill?

MR KASAMBA: Yes, sir; the report will be distributed. 

THE SPEAKER: Oh, they will be distributed. (Laughter) Okay, let the reports be distributed; Members go with them and study them and then see what to say when we start the general debate about the Bill. 

Well, it seems we have exhausted business for today and I thank you very much. It was not easy but we managed to clear the Bill. Therefore, I think it is time to adjourn and I wish you a happy weekend. House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 March 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
