Tuesday, 21 March 2006

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a great pleasure to welcome you from the recess, which started shortly before Christmas and for this reason I wish to congratulate you, for having successfully completed 2005 and wish you a prosperous 2006. (Applause)

It is with much regret to say that we are here without one of our colleagues, hon. Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo, who unfortunately passed away early this month. A formal motion to deal with this unfortunate occurrence will in due course be handled by the august house, but we may stand and observe a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since last year many important matters, which have affected important events in the country have been handled in this House. These include: the constitution amendments, the referendum enactment and electoral laws etcetera.  

The presidential, parliamentary and local government elections have already taken place. Allow me thank you for your personal contribution towards the successful realisation of the political desired goals the country has achieved. I thank you for exhibiting mature leadership during the transition, especially in the just concluded elections meant to usher in the multiparty political system under which the country will be governed from 12 May 2006.  

I thank you for having participated in those elections either as candidates, voters or leaders.  I congratulate you for enabling the desired transition envisaged by the constitution amendment and referendum to be achieved.

Congratulations to those who will be Members of the Eighth Parliament! I believe those who will not be Members will continue to be available to serve your motherland in one capacity or another as your experience in public affairs is greatly treasured.  Your love for your country is greatly appreciated. Now that the elections have been completed, you are expected to diligently handle the unfinished work before Parliament, which work includes: bills, reports and motions. 

The Budget process for the financial year 2006/07 is due to start, as far as Parliament is concerned, in early April and you are expected to participate in the process to enable the budget to be formally presented in mid June. Your mandate is to continue up to 12 May 2006, and so there is a lot of work you are supposed to handle.  

In carrying out the unexpired mandate, you have to prepare for the Eighth Parliament to enable it have a smooth start. The Parliamentary Commission is looking for necessary logistics like office accommodation to enable the Eighth Parliament to start on schedule. I thank all those who are collaborating with the Parliamentary Commission to ensure that this is achieved. I wish you fruitful deliberations. Thank you, very much.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

2.37
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.  I also want to add my voice to wishing my colleagues a happy and prosperous New Year one. 
 
Mr Speaker, as you have just said, we have been in a process of campaigns in this country and I would like to congratulate my colleagues who have made it back, but also say sorry to those who failed to make it back. They should take heart because there are many other things that we are capable of doing.  

Mr Speaker, I would like this House to know that elections for the Woman MP for Adjumani were not held because of a very tragic event that occurred on the 11 February 2006 in Lewa Parish, Adjumani District.  

On that fateful day, I was scheduled to have my campaign rallies in Lewa and Melijo parishes. Unfortunately, when I arrived at Lewa, I found my opponent, the late Ms Clara Vuni, who was also campaigning as an independent candidate, with her supporters occupying the space in which I was supposed to hold the rally. That area being insecure because of LRA incursions, I proceeded to inform the security personnel of my presence in case of any insecurity. 

While there, I saw people gathered outside the barracks where I was supposed to hold my second rally. I went there to check on what was happening only to find my opponent addressing a rally from which she had displaced a candidate for the district council.  

I did not say anything but using my video camera, I zoomed and captured a few of the events going on and left without disrupting her rally. I went back to Lewa. Shortly after that, she arrived in her mini bus and disrupted my rally as my agent was recording the proceedings.

Mr Speaker, when my agent turned the camera towards them, they grabbed it and took off. As they were taking off, my driver and my agent were going to report the matter to police but this was after some time after they had taken off, and unfortunately they went and met a tragic accident in which she died.  

This country has lost a young, educated lawyer, who had just finished her course at LDC a year ago. It is a very unfortunate event! I am definitely very, very sorry for her death. I would not wish anything like that to happen.

Mr Speaker, I also had a camera, which I used to capture a few photographs of the events and I can show to my colleagues what happened if I could lay them on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these photographs on the Table and maybe some can also pass by for my colleagues to see for themselves because I cannot explain everything.  

What I would like to say before I sit down is: the report in the press was both exaggerated and wrong because my vehicle was never involved in that accident. There are eyewitnesses, the vehicles are still parked at the Police, and there is enough evidence to show that these two vehicles never collided at any time. Unfortunately, these people proceeded to pass on wrong information, which even went to the press and the people reacted by burning my house, that of my driver, those of our neighbours and some of my supporters’ houses and were threatening to burn more houses including that of the First Deputy Prime Minister whom they were saying was supporting me.  

Now a number of people who have got to know the reality are definitely sorry for having participated in burning the houses and passing on wrong information. But there are those who are still hunting for me and think they should also kill me. I would like to ask my colleagues to pray for me.  

I would like to say, Mr Speaker, that God has strengthened me because I know that if it were not for Him, I would not have survived that day. When they failed to get me, was when they descended upon my house and burnt it. 

I stand by these verses, which I would like to read to my colleagues from the Bible:
Jeremiah 29:11, the Lord says: “For I know the plans I have for you. Plans to bring you prosperity and not disaster, plans to bring about the future you hope for” and Mr Speaker, I still hope for a peaceful and justified future.

Isaiah 59: 15 –16, maybe my colleagues can go back and read that, but I wish to read: “The Lord has seen this and He is displeased that there is no justice. He is astonished to see that there is no one to help the oppressed. So, He will use His own power to rescue them and to win the victory.” 

I still love my people of Adjumani, even those who participated in destroying my property. 1Corinthians 13:7 says that love bears all things; believes all things; hopes all things; endures all things and that is why I am enduring and I thank God for keeping me alive. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

2.45
LT. GEN. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Adjumani): Mr Speaker, I just want to add to what has just been said because I was connected to it. This accident happened on Saturday, 11 February 2006, when I was in Kampala, and I flew to Adjumani the following day after the accident had already happened.  

But I heard about the accident from Kampala and also heard that there was a plan to burn her house. I personally talked to the DPC of Adjumani who should have taken action. I told him to send the Police there but he did not.

During the burial, the relatives of the late Clara Vuni openly accused us (her and I) of having planned her death, something which I want to deny.  It is wrong and there was no plan like that. It was a pure accident. So colleagues should know directly from us otherwise, whatever happened should be related to the accident. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Before we proceed, I want to introduce some visitors in the Gallery this afternoon. We have students from the School for International Training whose headquarters are in the US. They are taking part in a school study abroad programme in Uganda, and they are now here to see how we do our business.  Please join me to welcome them to Parliament. You are most welcome! (Applause)  

2.46
MR OTTO ODONGA (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate all those who went through in the last elections, and especially the Speaker of Parliament whom I want to congratulate personally.   

Why I rise as the MP for Aruu County and MP- elect is that, we notice that the presidential elections are over and some cases are before court, but a very funny incident is happening in Aruu County and some other parts of Northern Uganda. I was in my constituency a couple of days ago and there is a very funny kind of division of security and politics.  

There are two incidents, which I want to make the Minister in Charge of Security and that of Information to know: that in Acholi Bur sub-county, on the day they were voting for the LCIII, residents went to the barracks of the 115 battalion, requesting for escorts so that they could be escorted to the next camp, called Latanya IDP camp. But what happened? The army officer in charge of the barracks, a captain, whom I do not want to name now, said that the civilians should go and look for their escorts from Kizza Besigye. So, the people had to dare to move through that distance unescorted and the LRA abducted seven people.  

I consulted the GISO of Acholi Bur, Mr Opio Lakana, and he said that he had also talked to the same army officer and he refused to offer escorts. Mr Speaker, I think this is a very unfortunate situation where politics and security are being fused and it will not help in any way to nurture the results of the presidential election. 

I have another incidence where one youth called Tenet was killed by the LRA and up to now his body has not been collected because the soldiers refused to give escorts, and they are still saying that the people of Acholi should go and collect their escorts from Kizza Besigye.

So, I am really praying that the Minister of Defence and the Leader of Government Business come up with a clear statement on the Floor of this House, directing some army officers who may have misunderstood the national politics, and yet they wield the power to bring security to the local people, to distinguish between the presidential elections and matters of providing security for the people. Otherwise, there is a very big outcry in my constituency, and I know the Prime Minister is in position to make a statement that can be extensively covered so that people can be at peace with one another and know that it is not all over with the elections. Anything less than that, Mr Speaker, we may seek legal redress. Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: We did not intend to – unless something is connected with my communication, I think we should not open up like this. Let us hear him.

2.50
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is in connection with the communication. We rose up for a moment of silence to pay tribute to our fallen comrade, hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo. But from your communication you said we had lost one Member.  

I note with concern that there is also another development that came up, where one of the Members of Parliament was dismissed from this House purportedly for non-compliance with the Leadership Code and perhaps we are not fully aware. We know that the Parliamentary Elections Act, Section 84(1)(e) states: “A Member of Parliament shall vacate office if he/she is found in breach of the Leadership Code by an appropriate tribunal.”  

Maybe it will come at an appropriate time. We might have to be informed as to which tribunal found hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi in breach of the Leadership Code. We may gloss over it, but who knows, some of us may be the next victims.

THE SPEAKER: I think you do not have to go very far. I had no intention of making a comment on that subject because hon. Ken Lukyamuzi ceased to be a Member of Parliament on 5 December 2005 before we went on recess. What he was reporting about were matters that happened after the recess. But for your benefit, let me assist you so that we put this matter to rest. 

I do not think this Parliament can turn itself into a court of law; you are not competent. We make laws, but we do not interpret them, and we should know that you have captured this matter in many places.

The former Member of Parliament, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, who ceased to be a Member of Parliament on 5 December 2005, is reported to have gone to court. Now, if he has gone to court, then you see the problem we may face if we start debating it.  But since it appears that he is the one who has started it (because I know) let me give you the details.  

Early last year, I received many letters from the Inspector General of Government (IGG) reminding Members to submit their returns according to the law. A number of you know that I passed these letters to you and advised you to make good what you had not, and several letters also came in respect of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. Apparently, I do not know what happened between him and the office of the IGG. But what I know is that, on 30 September 2005, a letter addressed to me came as a decision of the IGG saying he should cease to be a Member of Parliament. I know that he received a copy of the same letter that day.  

I kept it a secret, I did not react immediately, to help him if he could mend fences with the person.  I kept it a secret for three months and he was even able to get his allowances and salary, just to help him settle with the IGG. I think to bear witness is the Chairman of the Rules Committee. We sat with him and he said, “What will you do, this is a serious matter?” 

I drew the attention of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to the provisions of the law because the law, which you made, provided for an appeal if you are aggrieved by a decision of the IGG. As this was a decision of the IGG, you could appeal within 30 days and, therefore, if he thought that the IGG was wrong to have made the decision, he should have made an appeal on 1 October 2005.  

In case that was overlooked and he was aggrieved by the letter communicating what the IGG had said that his seat would become declared vacant, he should have appealed within 30 days from the date that letter was communicated to him. Now that there was no appeal against the decision under the Leadership Code, the chapter is closed. I understand - because I have seen the copies of letters, which he has given you, anyway. That is what has prompted you to make the remark.

The Electoral Commission only dealt with the record. So, you cannot try to correct the error of the IGG by going against the Electoral Commission because that is the record. So, since this matter is in court, and using my discretion that this may prejudice a matter pending in court, I think we do not debate it. I know that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi has said that he is confronting it by demonstration, maybe that will help.  But, honourable members, let us not use political muscles to deal with legal matters. We are the ones who made that law and now you are talking about the tribunal.  

I have seen the letter where the honourable member is quoting an amendment, which you made recently in the constitutional amendment. I wish to tell you that, yes, you did but that provision has not become effective because the formulation is to the effect that Parliament shall make a law to decide the composition, functions and so forth.  Since the composition and functions - then what is that tribunal, which you created? There can never be a vacuum in a law. The Leadership Code has been enforced for many years and the IGG was given the powers to act as a tribunal. A tribunal need not be of several people; one person can constitute a tribunal.

So, I did not want to use this as a lecture on law, I am just presiding over Parliament. I am advising that let us not venture into a matter that has competent people, the judges, who will handle it.  I think this matter should end there.

2.57
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I congratulate you and all the people who participated in the last elections. There are very urgent matters of the state, which I thought that this Order Paper should address. When I look at item six and a brief by the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs on the bill, I thought that besides this bill, government needs to brief the country on the progress and programme of the Commonwealth meeting next year.
 
And two, government needs to brief this Parliament and the country at large on the programmes to address the shortage of power. We cannot operate in this Parliament when we are only able to have power for five months. So, we need to know what programme the government has to address these shortcomings. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think the matter will be addressed, but this was the first Order Paper, which we arranged because of business available but many things will come up in due course.

2.59
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): I also wanted to talk about the urgent business for the House - I know the Business Committee will handle, but I was just imagining and of the view that there are certain things of urgency, which this Seventh Parliament should deal with and competently complete without allowing it to go to the next Parliament. So that if the Business Committee meets they may be able to use the Clerk’s Office and go into depth to look at all outstanding business and then be able to see what we should deal with. We do not have much time if you look at the fact that there will be a short holiday for Easter, we may have less than 30 working days. Therefore, you really need to programme yourself and utilise this time to the maximum before we go.  

There are certain urgent matters I may be able to bring one or two to your attention, which this Parliament should deal with and not push to the next Parliament. Certain Bills will be able to go to the Eighth Parliament, but there are certain things which this Parliament passed motions on and we asked our committees to deal with. Those reports should be dealt with by this Parliament and not left to the next Parliament. Certain laws can go to the next Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, without trying to interrupt you, what I would advise on this is: if any Member thinks that there is a very important matter which we should handle, let them notify me so that when the Business Committee sits, it can consider and see how to plan. But what you see on this Order Paper, for instance, the refugee law is a matter, which we had handled. There was a first reading and a report was given, therefore, it is according to our rules that we have to complete it. 

You see, we have labour laws. It is very important that we deal with these labour laws so that they are in place because there are certain conditions, which we are to fulfill shortly. Therefore, on this subject let those who have urgent business notify me and we shall address them in due course.  (Interjections) But when are we going to end?  Because we are going to take most of this - I have said the debate should be on matters arising from my communication and not general. So, if you have any other matter, please notify me and maybe tomorrow we shall be able to accommodate you.

3.02
MS ALICE ASIANUT ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, on your communication –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. You did talk about the election exercise, which we have just gone through and the business is not complete until we have the elections for members of Parliament for the youth. My concern is that up to now very little information is available in the public domain about how the youth are going to be elected. We are not aware who constitute the electorate under a multiparty dispensation. We have no idea when the display exercise of this election is going to be conducted. So, I would like to ask that the minister in charge probably updates the nation so that the youth who are interested in contesting will prepare accordingly.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, before I respond to the honourable Member, I would like to congratulate all Members who participated in the just concluded elections. Those who lost have not lost they have just tactically retreated.  

Mr Speaker, I am in touch with the Electoral Commission; we are discussing with them and possibly tomorrow, I will give the nation and the youth the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. What is the most burning issue that you would – but let us cover him and then we close.

3.05
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank all those who participated in the elections we have just made through and even those who have not, I thank you for your participation. 

Mr Speaker, there are things I would seek clarification on because I have a number of questions. I have heard people talk vaguely about issues concerning Shimoni Demonstration School and so some clarification should be made to the country. I would ask the honourable minister possibly at an appropriate time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I said any comment you can make should be relevant to my communication although Shimoni school is very important. But what you can do is to formerly raise the question with the Minister of Education rather than bringing it up when we are dealing with communication. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Speaker, for that advice I will do that by tomorrow. Secondly, in connection to the urgent matter as you have asked us here, the most important thing which I bring to the attention of the House and the Members here is the issue of the DRB –(Laughter) - I think it is one of those issues, which we must deal with and finish as the Seventh Parliament. Thank you.

3.07
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I stand to appreciate government’s efforts in the preparation for the coming Commonwealth Summit in 2007. As a Member of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I feel I should appreciate government’s effort to make preparations towards a successful summit in 2007. 

However, Mr Speaker, the urgency of the matter is about two developments that have been reported:  One, about Shimoni Demonstration School and Shimoni Primary Teachers’ College, which have been given to a Sudanese billionaire –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think I have made it very clear that any statement that you are trying to make now should be relevant to my communication. Good enough you are the one who has informed us that you are a Member on a committee that is relevant in as far as this matter is concerned. So, through your committee, you can requisition an explanation and then we shall get a report on that.

3.09
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your communication. I have always thought that as a Speaker of a National Assembly, also to be involved in these heated politics when you are supposed to be the referee, the judge - I do not know how and   whether we can establish some tradition when you can be exonerated from this kind of –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you think you have to change, move for a constitutional amendment. I think that answers it. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: No, but I had a second point, Mr Speaker, if you permit me. Quite seriously, the elections we have just concluded were a milestone in our democratisation process in the country. But the tension and anxiety was quite grueling and I even have a feeling that the death of our colleague, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, could have been accelerated by the anxiety that these elections caused. As a learning exercise, I do not know how we will make competitive politics more accommodating. I have a last point, Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But professor, this is a very wide matter which cannot come within a minute and so we cannot get responses from others. If you really have a motion on this, you bring it and I will accommodate it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: My last point, Mr Speaker, I know deserves your attention. We have the new phenomenon of independent candidates in the House, where will they sit? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think when time comes we shall handle that. But as far as we are concerned with this Parliament, the issue does not arise. But that will be solved because we have made consultations about this and where we have two sides, the independent candidates will be asked where they want to sit. 

3.12
DR STEVEN MALINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I think he just took out of my mind what I had. There is need to strengthen the position of the Speaker in the House. Let us adopt one of those traditions where the Speaker is not subjected to competitive politics and does not show his position. There is an urgent need to amend the Constitution to this effect and let us define how many terms the Speaker should remain in that position. At the moment it is difficult and some of the weak Members of Parliament might look at it as if the Speaker is being partisan when actually he is not. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I want to add my voice to those who have already congratulated you and say how much I wish you higher horizons. I wish also to congratulate my colleagues who have gone through this grilling period and to welcome you all back. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow $7.00 from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for the financing of the construction and rehabilitation of road bridges in the West Nile region. I beg to move. 

Secondly, honourable members will remember that regulation 126 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulation, 2003 which is statutory instrument No.70, procurement and disposing entities are required to develop a shortlist of service providers from which bidders are obtained. The Procurement and Disposable Public Assets Act, that is Act No.1 of 2003, establishing Public Procurement and Disposable Public Assets Authority was passed in January 2003. 

Section 97 of the Act stipulates that the authority may issue guidelines from time to time, which shall be laid before Parliament and shall be gazetted for the better carrying out of the objectives and functions under the Act. I am happy to say that the authority, pursuant to the above laws, has prepared guidelines and I have now guideline No.1 of 2005 which is for pre-qualification or shortlisting of service providers. I now beg to lay the said guidelines on the Table. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the document be handled by the appropriate committee; they first study it and then they report to the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Rating) (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and then subsequently a report.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we have not seen the certificate to that effect.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I am very sure my senior colleague who has just excused himself has the certificate. I cannot delve into his papers, but I had to stand in just because he moved out. But we have the certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think since I have already committed it to the committee, let the minister make an undertaking that he will produce it tomorrow. Otherwise we may suspend the handling. 

RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 21st of March 2006. 

WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the sudden demise of hon. Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo, a former Member of Parliament for Bukoto Mid-West, a former Minister of State for Water, Lands and Environment, a former Minister of State for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and a former Minister of State for Ministry of Internal Affairs, which occurred on 11 March 2006; 

AND WHEREAS  the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo has had a distinguished career as a veterinary doctor and an exemplary political leader who deserves national recognition;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Masaka District and the entire nation upon the loss of the distinguished son of Uganda, Dr Kezimbira Miyingo. 

DO FURTHER register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that he has in the course of life rendered to the people of this nation. I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I discovered hon. Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo when he was teaching at Makerere University in the then Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies. He specialised in reproduction. I have gathered from some of his former students like, Dr Ben Kanyima, the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was an effective lecturer who was also very practical.

Some professors and lecturers teach very well in class, but they are unable to put into practice what they teach. I am pleased to point out that the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo did not make this mistake. For in addition to teaching well, he was a successful boar goat breeder and a dairy farmer. The high quality goats have a large local and an international market. The late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo’s students who include Dr Kanyima once again are very good clinicians. Indeed Dr Kanyima has treated the President’s animals and my animals at Buloba.  

Uganda is grateful to the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo who stayed at Makerere during Amin’s time when there was a lot of insecurity and financial deprivation. 

When he left Makerere, the late hon. Dr Miyingo served Uganda as a Member of Parliament, the Member of the Constituent Assembly, which made our Constitution and as a Minister for Animal Industry in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Later he served as a Minister of State in charge of Environment before he was transferred to the Ministry of Internal Affairs as a Minister of State until his death. 

He was a nationalist who did not allow sectarian interests to overshadow national interests and he loved Buganda and his Church. The lesson we should learn from the late Dr Miyingo is that we must learn to ensure that national interests take precedence over local and individual interests. 

He chaired African group negotiations during the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which underscored the importance of poverty eradication and environmental protection, which took place in South Africa in 2002. He was instrumental in persuading the developed countries during the summit to understand the importance of dams as being essential to provide energy. He worked very hard to revive the African Ministerial Conference on Environment, which had since become the main political voice for the African environment globally. 

On 20 March 2006, the children of the late Kezimbira Miyingo came to me and they expressed the gratitude of their mother and theirs to the government, which met funeral expenses. They received amabugo from His Excellency, the President whom I represented at Rubaga Cathedral and at the funeral in Masaka. They also requested me to thank the honourable ministers and members of Parliament and other people who sent condolences and attended the funeral. May the Lord Almighty sustain the bereaved! I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.24
MS OLIVER WONEKA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo, as a leader, was known for his strong support for government initiatives in development programmes and processes for this country.

As a Minister of State for Animal Health, the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was known for fostering policies and legislation that supported the sector. It is known that he was very instrumental, for example, in the meat-master plan study, which was followed by the policy and others.  

The late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was known to be a leader. He spearheaded and contributed greatly to the control of major animal diseases, for example, FMD (Foot and Mouth Disease), which is rampant in this country and Render Pest. It was during his time in the ministry that Uganda was declared Render Pest free at the World Health Organisation for animal diseases. 

Dr Kezimbira Miyingo, the late, was known as a team player; he was known as a team leader. He worked cordially with colleagues. He is known to have worked well with staff, to have built team spirit among the technical people and also to have provided both political and technical guidance, as he was a technical man.  

It has been said by the mover of the motion that he was a nationalist. Indeed, Dr Kezimbira Miyingo, was a man who looked beyond his native place, Masaka. It is known that in the carrying out of his duties in all these ministries, especially the ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, he covered the various regions of this country including Karamoja, which considers itself marginalised. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was able to reach there. In his nationalist outlook, he got married to a beautiful Mukiga wife from way beyond Masaka.  

Dr Kezimbira Miyingo, as a veterinary doctor, was seen as a rare one. He was not only an academician - I have learnt that about 70 percent of all veterinary doctors in this country must have passed in the hands of the late Kezimbira Miyingo. (Applause)  

As a politician, he was exemplary. We knew him within the Movement circles as NRM Chairman, Masaka District. I am sure you remember that. He was a Member of Parliament, he was a minister. He was not only that; he was a distinguished farmer. At Mbirizi, I understand those who were lucky to be his neighbours, enjoyed his expertise and his generosity in the exotic animal breeds as well as   plant seeds. He was sensitive and appreciative of the plight of farmers and he led, therefore, by example - a practicing veterinary doctor, a farmer and a politician.  

As a politician, at a time that I was privileged to be in Parliament while he was here and even for those who shared Parliament with him during the CA, the Sixth and Seventh Parliaments, you know that the late Kezimbira Miyingo approached issues in a calm and composed manner. He held various ministerial posts, he was a dedicated politician, a devout Christian of the Catholic faith, a practicing veterinary person, a distinguished farmer, a great Ugandan that led by example. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace!

3.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister to recognise the late Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. It was very unfortunate that Dr Kezimbira died at a time when we could not all gather here and pay tribute to a hero of a political revolution of this country.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, sometimes we do not take seriously what is said on the Floor of this House and yet we devoutly quote what they say outside this country. We ought to begin to learn from ourselves, to know that even we as Ugandans or Africans for that matter can be authorities in our own affairs. The Prime Minister said this, “He was a nationalist who did not allow sectarian interests to overshadow national interests.” In my opinion, this is a heavily laden statement about a Ugandan politician. 

Why do I say this? Ugandans in particular and Africans in general are possessed with the evil of sectarianism. Many political leaders look at everything they say or do through sectarian lenses. It has ruined our ability to forge a nation called Uganda and even a greater nation called Africa. If you draw the political map of a country like our neighbours to the east, you can simply pose on the tribal map of that country and the political map of that country. Each political party for a tribe; they coincide. In other words, everyone is looking at politics through their tribal lenses. 

Even here that disease is beginning to show its ugly face and, therefore, people like the late Kezimbira should really teach us a serious lesson that we must desist from the temptation of looking at our country through tribal lenses. In his case, I must say, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that it was not politically designed it was natural. Why do I say it is natural?  

I first met Dr Kezimbira when he was still a young student at the University of Nairobi. He used to come and spend his holidays with me at Makerere University. He graduated and eventually came and joined us. I thought the Prime Minister would have said when Kezimbira was working in the Department of Clinical Studies, the head of that department was a man called Kagonyera. (Laughter) We worked with Dr Kezimbira. He did his postgraduate in our department and I want to assure the honourable members that really at no time did I ever find in this man something that made him lead to any of this sectarianism. This is very true and very fundamental to say about him. 

In fact, in Uganda, I am afraid to say that all of us Members of Parliament are literally tribal representatives. Who does not represent an area populated by his tribe? Hon. Kabakumba Masiko is not only representing a tribal area, she is even a princess of the kingdom of Bunyoro.  

Mr Speaker, I am reminded that there are exceptions to what I have said and I recognise, for example, the representatives of the workers. We are moving in that direction and that is why I think we should recognise the likes of Dr Kezimbira Miyingo and other people who are making this step.  

My sister who spoke before me thought that Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was a native of Masaka. He was not. Actually, the late Kezimbira was a native of Butambala. He moved to Masaka and in his liberated form he found it comfortable to lead people who were not of where he was born. That is another mark and another plus for this man.

Dr Kezimbira was a man of courage. I remember and I do not want to go into details, but there were political situations where I would feel like trembling and one of the people I would consult was the late Dr Kezimbira. I always found a lot of comfort in his advice. Because of his courage, he always had a solution or an answer to many of the political problems we had and because of his fairness, his answers were usually good answers and they helped. He was a man of courage.

Dr Kezimbira had his fair share of the trials and tribulations this country has gone through. You have been told, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that he lived in Uganda under very difficult conditions of financial and other deprivations and we who were at Makerere University at that time, including the Prime Minister, were having extremes of difficulties. You needed to even visit the houses in which the teachers at Makerere were staying. You would find out for yourselves. By the way that is why our jobs at Makerere University never attracted any of the interests of Amin’s guys. None of them tried to come and teach at Makerere because if they looked at our pants totally worn out and the houses in which we lived, none of them would want a job at Makerere. You needed to go to Makerere at that time and see the misery and deprivation in which the teachers at Makerere were living. Ask those who were our students. But I was telling you honourable members that he had his fair share.

We need to remind ourselves that in 1979, Dr Kezimbira Miyingo had a tragedy. During those chaotic times, he actually lost his first wife to a murderer’s bullet. It was so sad to go to the bush and find the body of this young woman lying still having been murdered for absolutely no reason. This did not deter the late Dr Kezimbira. Such occurrences sometimes impact negatively on people’s attitudes to life, but his was not and again this reflects on his courage. It is befitting, it is in order for this House to pay tribute to this great son of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace and I support the motion.  Thank you.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. It is unfortunate that when the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo passed away, we were not here. It would have been befitting for us to have his body here and pay tribute when we are looking at his body.  

Mr Speaker, as the saying goes or as the Bible says, God gives and God takes away. God gave us the late Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo and took him away in His time. I met the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo at Makerere University and I left him there in 1974 when I left university. Again I met him when I joined Parliament in 1996.

The late Kezimbira, Mr Speaker, was a man of knowledge. He knew his subject very well as a great doctor, he was an eloquent politician but the interesting bit about Dr Kezimbira was the fact that he was a humble person. If you really did not know or if you did not hear people call him doctor, you would not know that he had the knowledge that he had. That humbleness!

Mr Speaker, all that has been said about the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo is true but I think I want to mention that the late Dr Kezimbira loved Buganda as a Muganda, he loved Uganda as a Ugandan and he loved the Movement. He was an NRM who was concentrated.

Mr Speaker, last but not least, I would like to say that the late Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo will always be remembered by colleagues for always cautioning us and asking us to reconsider issues and take into account national issues. He was a nationalist. May God rest his soul in eternal peace!

3.44
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion that Parliament pays tribute to the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo. When we learnt that the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was ill, many of us did not expect his condition to deteriorate and, therefore, the news of his death really surprised us. It is indeed sad that hon. Dr Kezimbira departed at a time when his family needed him most. My sincere condolences go to the family, to the widow, the children and to the people of the constituency, which he so loved and served diligently.  

I want to say that death robbed us of a dedicated person who was honest in his time of service, and    he was a determined man who always laboured to excel in his work. Therefore, the Cabinet will miss his contribution. 

To those of us from the veterinary profession, we have lost a senior colleague. The late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was always a ready source of professional advice for those of us who cared to talk to him. I will personally miss those moments of professional debates, many of which were centred on issues of disease control, privatisation, veterinary services, animal breeding, genetics and the improvement of the livestock sector in this country. 

The late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was always an honest man in his views. Politically, the late Dr Miyingo has definitely left a mark for the people of Uganda, the people of Masaka and especially the people of his constituency. He was one of the few ministers who were courageous enough to contest for the post of a district Movement chairperson, a post he won, and he used that position to articulate the political, social and economic needs of Masaka District.  

Mr Speaker, as we bid him farewell, we need to pray and stand by his family during this trying moment. Psalms 46:1 tells us that God is our shelter and strength, always ready to help in times of trouble. May we continue praying for his family and may the Lord rest the soul of the Late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo in eternal peace.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.46
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of this House in mourning the fallen colleague. I came to know the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo in the Constituent Assembly where he did make a very serious contribution and where his attributes that have been alluded to by the previous speakers manifested his national consideration and his generous character. 

But the point I want to make, in addition to what the rest of the members have said is about his courage, which was put to test in the Sixth Parliament when there was a problem to do with the dams, he handled that situation in such a manner that made him the envy of many. He put his case out in such a courageous manner, with a lot of tact. I was not in Parliament then but I used to follow the debates, especially on that very subject. 

There was a moment when he put to test the House and he used an analogy of the ancient Egyptian pharaohs that whenever they died, there was a practice where they would be buried along with other commoners, and he put his case that, “Here I am, Kezimbira Miyingo, I have done this and that bit in this saga, I made my case clear - and he provided how he advised - but he said and pleaded with the House not to sacrifice him just like in the practice of the ancient pharaohs where the commoners were buried with the big man. And he said that, “At least spare me, do not bury me with the big person for the sake of it.” That turned the entire debate and the mood in the House, and he managed to survive the eventual calamity that was going to befall him.  

So he was a man of tact and he did it with a lot of calmness, wit, consideration and consultations. He was a very courageous man and he remained true to himself. Once he came to work with you he would always have space in his heart and time for you. That is the kind of man Kezimbira was. It is very unfortunate that he died at a time when such people are very much needed in this transition, as we move to multi-party politics, and to another level where we need all the skills, the attributes, and all the people who can add value to the process. 

So he will definitely be missed in Masaka District and in Uganda at large. And those of us who have known him will definitely miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.50
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I stand here to support the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo, MP Bukoto Mid-West.  

I first met the late hon. Miyingo way back in Namilyango College - when I joined the College he was there. At that time he was a very calm person, very humble, and a devoted Catholic. He belonged to the debating club; he was a member of the WCS, and he always carried an air of respect. 

For us who had just joined the school, we would look at him with respect. When he left Namilyango and joined the university, it took me sometime before I saw him again because he went to Nairobi University but whenever I met him, he would meet us like equals. He would meet me calmly, he always wore a smile and he was a very active member of the Old Boys’ Association of Namilyango College and Namilyango is going to miss him a great deal - we are going to miss him a great deal.

I eventually found him here in Parliament and he welcomed me. But before I came to Parliament I used to meet him. It took me time to know that he was already in Parliament. He never carried airs around himself; he always remained humble but afterwards I found out that he was actually a big man in Parliament. So that is how humble he was.  

THE SPEAKER: You are suggesting Members of Parliament carry airs? (Laughter)

MR MUGAMBE: Some go to the extent of introducing themselves as Members of Parliament, even on telephone calls, but for him, he was always very humble. When he went for campaigns, I met hon. Lwanga from Masaka; I asked him, “How are the campaigns going?” He told me that in some constituencies the situation was a bit chaotic.  He particularly singled out his and that of hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, and he told me that honourable - by the way the word “Muyingo” is singular and “Miyingo” is plural. “Miyingo” is one of these bars, which are used to close the kraal gate I think it is because he is of the cow clan. But the plural is “Miyingo.” We used to call him “Muyingo” but his real name is “Miyingo”. 

He told me that the constituency of hon. Miyingo also had some chaos; some people had gone to the extent of throwing doughnuts at him but he had ordered his policemen to be calm: he said, “Please, do not disturb the people at all, no matter how much chaos they cause.” He remained calm even during the campaigns; that is what he told me about the campaigns.

Afterwards, we were told that his health had deteriorated, and eventually we were told that he had been admitted to Mulago Hospital. The next time I heard about him, he had passed away. We went for the requiem mass at Rubaga Cathedral, and that is where we were told that actually his life had deteriorated even before the election date, that he was in bed a week before the elections, and we were told that his life could not be saved. It is sad that we have missed a friend, he has played his role and we pray that his soul may rest in eternal peace. Condolences go to the children, the wife and the entire family. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.56
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues who have spoken before me to support this motion brought by the Prime Minister, to pay tribute to the late Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. 

Mr Speaker, I found Dr Kezimbira Miyingo in Parliament when I joined it in 1997. In him we found an embracing man, a man who gave us guidance as new Members of Parliament, and who was always warm whenever you interacted with him. Indeed the family has lost a compassionate, humble, kind parent, and may God comfort them.

Dr Miyingo moved me when he was pleading his innocence in the controversial valley dam saga that was in this House. In pleading his innocence there was no doubt that Members of Parliament in this august House did not hesitate to exonerate him for what he pleaded that he was innocent. This is a clear sign and a manifestation of who Dr Miyingo the man was.  

Mr Speaker, this House has paid tribute to various statesmen who have passed away before, and Uganda indeed has lost many statesmen of the calibre of the late Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo, but when you look at the trend of the way we want to carry the torch burning for these statesmen, I think there is something that is lacking. We have debated before in this House that we should initiate a mechanism whereby the contributions and the attributes that have been made by these great statesmen and women can remain; there should be continuity. What do we see in other countries?  Indira Ghandi passed away, her son Rajiv Ghandi followed in her steps. The people of India contributed in moulding the child of Indira Ghandi to come into national leadership. 

George Bush Senior: his son George Bush Junior is now the President of the United States. Can’t we Ugandans have a mechanism of initiating the off springs of our great statesmen and women to follow in their footsteps so that they can become the good leaders tomorrow –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that members who want to contribute do so when their time comes, instead of interrupting me. What I was saying, in short, is that we could have a locally initiated mechanism, where we have off springs of our fallen statesmen and women continue with some of the skills that they inherited from their parents.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to pass my condolences to the family, the House and the nation for the loss of the late Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. I thank you for giving me this time.  

4.01
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our fallen comrade, colleague and hero, Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. I happen to have worked very closely with Dr Kezimbira Miyingo. We were together as Ministers in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and we did move together to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I did find Dr Kezimbira Miyingo a very humble man and I am not surprised that a number of colleagues have made reference repeatedly to this quality. 

He was truthful, hard working and principled. Actually if you met Kezimbira you would not penetrate to see how principled he was because of his humility. You needed to face a tough situation or an area where he has a sharp disagreement to be able to realize that in his simplicity he could turn up to be a rock and a lion in defence of what he believed to be correct. It was, therefore, not surprising that at his burial in Bukoto Mid-West, very many people did turn up and the mass was celebrated by Bishop Kaggwa of Masaka.  

Mr Speaker, you graced the occasion, which was presided over by the Rt hon. Prime Minister, representing the President of Uganda. The Vice Chairman of the Movement also graced the mass and almost 20 ministers; many Members of Parliament and many dignitaries were also there. It showed what the country thought about this fallen comrade. 

It is true that he was very committed to the Movement and he was by the way very proud to be the Chairman of the Movement in Masaka. In fact he would refer to it with pride and commitment and he devoted a lot of time to ensure that the Movement stood at a very high level in Masaka. I am not surprised that the Movement generally performed very well in Masaka, Ndugu Kezimbira Miyingo made a significant contribution in this direction. 

At Parliamentary level, most of the time hon. Kezimbira Miyingo did represent the Ministry of Internal affairs and even then Ministry of Water Lands and Environment. He sold to Parliament a number of Bills, the most prominent that I am aware of is the Bill that established the National Forestry Authority and also the Bill that brought about the Police Act. He used to spend the lot of time with the hon. Members of Parliament and was in many respects very persuasive.  

At an international level, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo represented Uganda as a Member of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, a job he performed very well. As the hon. Rt Prime Minister has said, because of that work Uganda took over the leadership of the African Ministers’ Environment Conference in Africa and subsequently the global leadership because of the great recognition that the world had taken into account that Uganda was doing well in the environmental sector. As you heard during the Earth Summit, Uganda was chairing the African ministers of environment and our fallen colleague did that job with distinction.

Mr Speaker, what do we learn from Ndugu Kezimbira Miyingo? What do we remember him for? Commitment and devotion to one’s country and colleagues have been eloquent about this very point. Commitment to Africa because our country is just part of the mass of Africa where all of us belong. 

That it pays a lot to be humble and principled at the same time. Because of this, in the elections of Bukoto Mid-West there was some turbulence both at the level of primaries and the final elections for Parliament. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to the MP elect, Mr Ssejoba, who is taking over the constituency of Bukoto Mid-West, to go out of his way to heal the wounds, to unite the people and continue the excellent constituency work that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo has been doing in that constituency. 

I want also to convey once again our heartfelt condolences to the late’s family and I want to support the timely motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker, that on the first day when Parliament reconvenes, you are able to get appropriate time for honourable colleagues to pay their last respects to their fallen comrade. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.08
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think from the emotional speeches we have heard about our colleague we all agree that he was a distinguished person in his area, which is veterinary medicine and also as a politician who represented his constituency. However, the departure of our colleagues brings out something special in my mind and that is the need for health care in our hospitals. I did not have the chance of either knowing in detail what our colleague died of nor did I have a chance to talk to his doctors. But from the report in the papers, they said that he died of kidney failure, secondary to high blood pressure or hypertension.  

If this is the case, I went to Mulago hospital because I wanted to know if there is what they call a kidney dialysis machine. This is a machine, which is very common in most of the hospitals and some were just mere community hospitals where I was working in the United States, but they had at least four or more of these machines. Hypertension gradually leads to kidney failure and –(Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Mallinga. I want to inform hon. Mallinga and the House that Mulago Hospital is equipped with machines for renal dialysis and the late honourable minister did benefit from this facility at Mulago Hospital.  

DR MALLINGA: Well, I went to Mulago Hospital; I am glad that my honourable friend has told me that. I went there and asked if they had a renal dialysis machine, what they told me is that they use peritoneal dialysis, which is not as good as renal dialysis and the doctors assured me that they do not have a kidney dialysis machine. Dr Kigonya is the nephrologist –(Interruption) 

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much hon. Mallinga for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Mallinga and the House at large that recently I had a patient who had kidney failure - my father - and one of the hospitals we used was Mulago Hospital. There are two machines of renal dialysis from which he benefited, but at times they are on and off. All the same I can assure you that the machines that do dialysis for renal failure are there because my father benefited from them before we took him to India. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: I think we are talking about two different things. You can carry out dialysis, what they call peritoneal dialysis. And that is what Dr Kigonya tells me they have. And just a week before hon. Miyingo died, there was a boy, a son of a very rich person in the area who also died of kidney failure and there is concern among the professional people at Mulago Hospital that they are not receiving the equipment they need. 

We have trained these people, we send them abroad and then we do not equip them. This is particularly true of the kidney and the heart departments. A dialysis machine, the modern ones they are using in our days, are different. You have to run your blood through the machine to remove all the dirt from the metabolism and then return the blood into circulation, whereas with peritoneal dialysis, you are taking out the blood and then putting it in the peritoneum. You take the blood from the patient; introduce it to the peritoneum in the hope that the peritoneum will remove the impurities. 

There is actually a need - when you go around our hospitals - for us to look at our budget and equip these hospitals with modern equipment. I go to the lab of Mbale Hospital and the methods they are using for estimating what they call electrolytes are maybe for 1920s; they get the blood, put it under the oil and then try to estimate the electrolytes and blood sugar. 

The committee concerned has gone around these hospitals. When I go to Jinja Hospital and that is a regional referral hospital, it is worse than even a community hospital. When I go to Mbale, the operating theatre is just along the road, where people pass. An operating theatre is supposed to be sort of a dead end so that the people passing do introduce bacteria near the theatre. But there is a big need for the concerned committee to visit these hospitals and appeal for introduction of special equipment like it is outside. I do not see why our patients should go to Nairobi. 

Most of the doctors who are running the equipment in Nairobi were trained here. I do not see the need for our people to go to South Africa either. When we were in medical school by the World Health Organisation Assessment, Mulago Hospital was a much better hospital than the hospitals in South Africa at that time; and in the Commonwealth, students from Mulago who went for fellowships in Britain - the passing rate was much higher than anywhere else. So what these people lack is equipment and we should seriously visit these hospitals and re-equip them to enable our doctors to look after patients. 

Mulago is not at the level of a national hospital. I can assure you about that. The regional hospitals are not regional hospitals, they are worse than community hospitals, if you are to compare them with other countries. Let us agree that there is that big problem and let us address it. I am sure our colleague did not have renal dialysis. Whether that would have prolonged his life or not, I do not know, but there is need for machinery. 

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I want to add on top of what he was saying is this. I was somewhere and I happened to talk to one of the doctors who were working on our honourable colleague here, and what he told me was that they were only two specialists in this sector in Mulago Hospital. And to make matters worse, on that very day one of them was arrested by the Police. He spent the whole night at Central Police Station and the following day when they called hem, they were trying to get in touch with him and his phone was somewhere else, until late when he was released and that is when he went there. To be sincere, he told us that he could not do anything. So I just basically want to add on what the member said that we need to do more. 

Let us do much more in terms of health facilities and those who are helping us in these areas to help other Ugandans as well let us only lose people when we cannot avoid it, but quite much more needs to be done in these hospitals here. That is what I wanted to say.

THE SPEAKER: I think the point has been sufficiently articulated; it requires simply investigation and funding and then – okay hon. Oulanyah.

4.18
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. After the speech by the hon. Ruhakana Rugunda and the hon. Dr Mallinga, my speech has been substantially reduced. 

I remember the hon. Miyingo from the frequent debates that we used to have. One of them was outside in the front lobby, when an honourable member called me “learned friend” and (Dr Kezimbira) came up and said, “What is this thing about lawyers calling themselves learned?” Then I said, “It is because we know everything about anything.” Then he said, “I will tell you something. All principles in professions have universal application. I will give you one principle in veterinary surgery. That principle is called the principle of divert attention. If you are going to carry out surgery on the leg of a cow, you clump its nose so hard that it concentrates all pain in the nose while you are operating the leg.” 

And then he said, “That principle applies even where I work now.” They call it a decoy. That you send signals in the wrong direction so that you do something somewhere else. He said that is called diversion in road construction. He said he found that principle more so applicable in politics. He then asked me, “Can you now tell me an equivalent of that principle in the law?”  

Mr Speaker, you being a lawyer, I should tell you that I was stuck. In the law, no one is ever the final person. If you are an Attorney-General giving an opinion, the whole public assesses that opinion. If you are before judges arguing a case, the entire bench has to agree on the final position. Therefore, I failed to get an equivalent of the principle of diversion, in the law.

Mr Speaker, I also want to supplement the point raised by the hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. It would be a failure of duty and responsibility of this House if as honourable members we did not explore in our hearts the circumstances that could have led to this tragedy. We all saw the newspaper headlines regarding what happened when this honourable member received election news. We have to think as people who have participated in elections and who will participate in many more elections. 

What pain could have been in the honourable member’s heart to put his entire system in danger? We have been through an election with all its hatred, the acrimony, the brutality, the lies and deceit, the tribalism, the in-fights and the betrayal by close friends. (Applause) All these combined forces made the man sick and we should only be grateful to the Almighty God that so many others have not become victims. I say this with a very heavy heart. 

Therefore, it would be right and fitting at this time as honourable members of this Parliament and of the next Parliament to deeply reconsider what we do during elections. I want us to come to a point where we will all say, “Never again shall we hate in an election, never again shall we get involved in falsification, brutality and all kinds of crimes.” It is then that we shall be able as Members of Parliament, as citizens of this country, to come and say, “We have truly respected the true mandate of our people.” Without that, Mr Speaker, it will never be the same. I respected hon. Miyingo. I understand the pain he had, which is shared by many people. Let us share that pain and let it shape our decisions for the future. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

4.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen Minister, the late hon. Kezimbira Miyingo. As a member of the backbench, I held the late in high esteem and I want it to be on record that sometime around November 2003, there was a problem in my constituency where policemen were harassing innocent civilians. They brutalised two people and I raised the matter on the Floor of this House. To my relief and to that of my people, Dr Kezimbira Miyingo acted, and indeed very fast! He was responsive and in that way people who had been illegally detained were released. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, since that moment I held the minister in high esteem. This should be a lesson to the other ministers and to those who will soon be ministers. This particular incident led into a firm bond, to the extent that each time I met him, I gave him the respect he deserved.  

I also note that the late is survived by a wife and eight children. As members may recall, we have lost several of our colleagues, some due to motor accidents, others natural causes. However, raising a family of eight in the absence of its head is not easy. I do not know whether ministers have a separate arrangement. I hope the Prime Minister will respond to this. I do not know how the families of our departed colleagues are fairing. Mr Speaker, I would like to call on government to make sure we do not only stop at eulogies, but also ensure that survivors are catered for. I am sure it will do good to all of us if our colleagues, wherever they go, feel that those they left behind are thinking deeply about them. 

Lastly, I appeal to my colleagues to always tone down the emotions that arise because of elections. Once we allow ourselves to be stressed whenever we lose an election, the consequences are disastrous. Life must go on whether we are in Parliament or elsewhere. Let this not be the end of the world. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I pray that the good Lord blesses the soul of the late Kezimbira Miyingo. 

4.30
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): I also pay tribute to the late Kezimbira Miyingo. Hon. Mike Sebalu talked about the defence of Dr Kezimbira in the House during the valley dam saga. I remember his defence vividly. Mr Speaker, he spoke so well that with due respect I realised that day that one did not need a lawyer to defend himself, if they are in the right. He was very articulate. I want to say that that did not mean either that the Vice President was the one involved - I want this to be clearly understood. 

Dr Kezimbira shall remain a pillar of the National Resistance Movement in Masaka District. The experience he went through during primaries must have had an impact on his health. I remember he petitioned three times. I was very pleased when he made it that time because he was after all the chairman of NRM in the entire district.

I will not forget to extend my condolences to our colleague Dr Rugunda. It is very painful to lose a colleague you have been working with in the same ministry. This period is very critical for there are riots to handle due to the aftermath of elections. I am sure that Dr Rugunda himself needs to be counselled.

Mr Speaker, it is true that many of us were absent when the burial took place in Masaka. I am very grateful to the Speaker and the Prime Minister who have agreed to give us this belated opportunity. 

I had an opportunity of staying with Dr Kezimbira at my home in my constituency. He was a chief guest at one of our schools’ functions and he stayed at my home that evening. By 6 a.m. the next morning, he had got out of bed to look at the animals and he just came back after breakfast. Therefore, I asked him, “Do you travel with boots?” He said, “Yes. You know I am a veterinary doctor and I must congratulate you because your animals look fine.” He stayed with the animals for two hours.  

Finally, it is wonderful to have an academician and a politician who does not forget that the communities in the villages need professional advice. You cannot wear a white shirt and a necktie - and remember that the communities need your profession as a veterinary doctor. Mr Speaker, may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Labwor, I congratulate you all upon the good work you have done so far. I would like to make only three brief points about our colleague.

I interacted with Dr Kezimbira Miyingo at a close range as a colleague in cabinet since 1999.  What I have heard from this august House so far confirms my own analysis of the person. He was an embodiment of humanity. In the Bantu languages, it is called Obuntu. In the Luo language we call it Bedo calo dano. You can translate that into so many other languages. What our society needs are the qualities of living with each other as human beings. Before we even talk of marriage or getting children and developing our society, we need to live as human beings and appreciate each other. We should learn this lesson from Dr Kezimbira Miyingo.

Dr Kezimbira was an intellectual. It was not by accident that he held the title “doctor”. Prof. Mazrui once said a person who is fascinated with ideas should have the capacity to manage them. I would like to list the qualities of intellectualism that our colleague had:

One, boundless capacity to learn. We all have a lot to learn all the time. He was asking questions all the time.

Two, he had the capacity to look at all sides of an issue. He was not uni-lineal but multi-dimensional. 

Three, he looked beyond the superficial. This refers to what you see, what you hear, what you taste, what you smell and what is immediately obvious. Dr Miyingo really impressed me as a person who when he did not know something he would tell you, “I do not know”. And he would give credit where it was due.  

Four, Dr Miyingo was a tower of culture, tradition and for that reason a tower of wisdom. He was a Muganda who was deeply rooted in the culture and tradition of the Baganda. 

Mr Speaker, finally I highly appreciated one other quality in Dr Miyingo. He had a democratic personality. There are people who are committed to democracy as a political principle. However, there are people who are democratic by personality, who are prepared to listen to what the other person has to say. I think this is something we Ugandans need to learn. The circumstances under which Dr Miyingo died involved political turbulence. Did we as a society have a democratic personality? Transiting from the Movement system to a Multi-party system is not easy. I think he is not alone in being challenged by this.  

I, therefore, would like to suggest, Mr Speaker, that a formal way be established, preferably through your office, to see how we as Members of Parliament make an input into some of the issues that have dogged us during these elections. One of them, which we tried to deal with in this Parliament, was the one on election violence but election violence is not the only problem. Incidentally some people think election violence is one way, that it is only the Government side, which is capable of fighting election violence.  However, we need to go deeper than that.

Therefore, our challenge is to ensure that the conditions, which have led to this tragedy be properly appreciated. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In 1996 Dr Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe was posted to Entebbe as the Vice-President and Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The same year, I was also posted there as Minister of State, Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo was also re-posted to Entebbe as Minister of State, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We found him there for he had worked there for about three years, with Eng. John Nasasira. 

Dr Kazibwe and I were both new. We found Dr Kezimbira there. I was much schooled in sciences and Dr Kazibwe was much schooled in medical sciences. Dr Kazibwe had been a minister before unlike me who had just done many administrative duties in the research sector. Therefore, it fell upon Dr Kezimbira to give us orientation courses so that we would fit into that setting in Entebbe. I thank him because he did a very good job. By the time Dr Kazibwe left, she was very well schooled in the agricultural sector and I had become very well schooled in administration.

I always found him very hesitant but thorough. Many times the three of us would hold discussions in what we called top management meetings. It was not always very easy to convince Dr Kezimbira. He would always wish to receive the last evidence on any subject before he went along with us. Before that I had taught with him at Makerere University. I taught Genetics at the Veterinary School while he taught Veterinary Surgery. We used to interact quite a lot. I must say he was sometimes mean because normally the best of his students scored about 60 percent, while mine scored 96 percent. I think this was a reflection of his thoroughness. He would really want you to prove that you are worth the mark.

He was also sometimes anxious but I think that is also a virtue. He would always strive to ensure that all his wishes were fulfilled.

Finally, I heard hon. Butime say that hon. Kezimbira exonerated himself in the valley dam saga. For the record, apart from the Nyakahita dam, which was constructed before the two of us went to Entebbe, all the other dams constructed in our time exist. If you go to Nakasongola for instance, that dam has accumulated so much water that it even qualifies to be a lake. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
4.49
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion as moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. For us in the Muslim community, this is a calamity. When we are befallen with such a calamity, we say, “We are from God and to God we shall return.”  I do not want to bother you with Arabic but let me say, “Inah lilaahi waina ilahi lajihuun.”

Mr Speaker, I do not look at late hon. Miyingo as a Member of Parliament for Bukoto Mid-West. I look at him as an intellectual, an academic and a scientist.  If I could use hon. Oulanyah’s principle of diversion, from death of a Member of Parliament to being deprived of a brilliant scientist, this is really a big calamity and a big loss to the entire nation. This country has lost yet another brilliant brain. 

Not long ago we lost many intellectuals and academics: Prof. Odayet, Prof. Adonia Tiberondwa, Prof. Anikwo and of late, Dr Bachu, who was also a Member of Parliament in this august House. My concern is, at this rate we must pity ourselves and wonder what is going to happen to this nation. On behalf of the people of Aringa and the Muslim Members of Parliament in this august House, we convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo; may his soul rest in eternal peace.  

4.53
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, late hon. Kezimbira Miyingo. Before I say something about the late, I would like to remind members that we have lost seven members in this Seventh Parliament. [Hon. Members: “Eight”.] I do not know, but I remember seven: the late hon. Opot, the late hon. Basoga Nsadhu, the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, the late hon. Wapakhabulo, the late hon. Francis Ayume, the late hon. Patrick Musisi, and the late hon. Dr Kezimbira Miyingo.

Mr Speaker, for all these colleagues of ours we mourned our, I have heard people talk a lot about the deceased. There are specific things that people talk about as others listen. These include what one has done for the society, one’s character and what people will miss one for. I attended the requiem service as well as the burial. I listened to what they talked about the late Kezimbira.  

The late Dr Kezimbira was not very close to me but I used to interact with him here in Parliament. He appeared before my committee twice and I admired him. I stand here today - because I rarely talk on matters similar to this - they talked of his contribution to society and Uganda. He has taught people in the profession of veterinary surgery - I happen to be a farmer. Therefore, in one way or another I have benefited from his brain and service. 

We have heard that he was a nationalist, he looked beyond Masaka, beyond Buganda and in fact his wife is from the extreme West. In Uganda, we lack people who think like the late Miyingo. It is very unfortunate that we are losing people of his calibre.

I was always impressed by the late Dr Kezimbira Miyingo’s nationalistic concerns. When the Prime Minister read the President’s condolence speech, he brought out how Dr Miyingo convinced the international community to do something good for Uganda. I thought that was a milestone in his life, for which Uganda will always remember the late.

Finally, for every event that happens, there is a learning experience. I challenge my colleagues to always remember that at one time people will talk about us. We should, therefore, thrive to make our records clean and our contribution positive. I have attended burials where people run short of words about the deceased. I happen to come from a community where people are obsessed with telling the truth. I urge members to always remember that today we are here but tomorrow we shall be elsewhere and people will talk about us. We should prepare our way as Ugandans. With those few words, Mr Speaker, may the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for the contributions.  

4.59
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your contributions. A question was raised as to what will happen to the wife and children of hon. Miyingo. I recollect that we passed a Pensions Bill here and I am reliably informed by the Ministry of Public Service that the family will benefit from this pension. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember the terms of the motion moved by the Prime Minister in respect of our fallen friend, Dr Lawrence Kezimbira Miyingo. Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That concludes our business today. There are a few items, which we were not able to deal with. However, we have a problem. As you are all aware, honourable members, load shedding is becoming a problem and Parliament is equally affected. UMEME has given us a load shedding roster and we are affected on alternate days. If we have electricity today, the next day we do not have it. We can only use our generator in the absence of electricity but it cannot operate for a full day. It is also not connected to certain facilities that are crucial to our working comfortably. We may be forced to adjust our meeting times to manage this contingent. For instance, tomorrow we will be load shed and we were planning to use our generator but because it is not connected to the air conditioner, we thought doing our business in the morning when we do not need the air conditioning would help us. 

However, I realise that tomorrow is also a Cabinet day and most of the business we have would require ministers to attend to it. Therefore, because of this, we may have to adjourn to tomorrow afternoon. Maybe we also have to consider looking for funds so that all the time we are able to work, in case we have a problem of this nature. For the time being, we have financial problems, which may not allow us to do so.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I wonder whether our generator operates lifts. Some of us depend on lifts almost all the time we are out of this House.

THE SPEAKER: This is one of the problems I am talking about. Sometimes we have light here in the House because we are using the generator but the lifts cannot operate. I quite appreciate the reason behind your question but I have to discuss it with the relevant authorities that will probably advise me on this. I see the inconvenience this is causing all of us. 

With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, at 2.30 p.m.  

(The House rose at 5.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 March 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)








