Thursday, 24 March 2011

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but we should encourage our colleagues to also come to attend to parliamentary business up to the end of our mandate. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SITUATION IN LIBYA

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker, this is a statement on the situation in Libya. Hon. members of Parliament, as you are aware, Libya and Uganda have for a long time enjoyed friendly relations as demonstrated by cooperation in the political, economic, social, cultural and religious spheres. Current developments in Libya have some implications for Uganda, Africa and the international community on a number of fronts. These include: 

1.	The safety of our citizens living in Libya. 
2.	The implications of the situation in Libya to peace and security. 
3.	Issues of Libyan representation. 
4.	The status of Libyan assets in Uganda. 

The situation in Libya calls for a cautious approach that takes a long term view of the best interests of all the Libyan people. 

Inspired by the successes of similar revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, the Libyan protesters, began organising protests against President Muammar Gaddafi’s continued leadership, in mid February 2011. The protests that began in the eastern part of the country gained momentum and spread to various cities including Benghazi, Tobruk, Brega, Misrata in the east and Az Zawiya in the west, close to Tripoli. What had started as peaceful protests turned violent. Army desertions brought weapons in the hands of protesters. The situation has now deteriorated into a civil war with Benghazi as the centre of the uprising. The Libyan army used excessive force to quell the protests, including use of heavy weapons and fighter jets. The death toll plus injuries reported by international media and local sources seems to increase daily. The international community was galvanized against these excesses. 

On 26 February 2011, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 1970 demanding an immediate end to the violence in Libya and calling for steps to fulfil the legitimate demands of the people. It referred the situation on Libya since 15 February to the International Criminal Court. The resolution also imposed an arms embargo, a travel ban and an asset freeze on President Muammar Gaddafi and members of his family. 

On 17 March 2011, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 1973. The resolution demands the immediate establishment of a ceasefire and a complete end to violence and all attacks against, and abuses of, civilians; imposes a no-fly zone over Libya; authorises all necessary means to protect civilians and civilian-populated areas, except for a “foreign occupation force”; strengthens the arms embargo and particularly action against mercenaries; imposes a ban on all Libyan-designated flights; imposes an asset freeze on assets owned by the Libyan authorities, and reaffirms that such assets should be used for the benefit of the Libyan people; extends the travel ban and assets freeze of Resolution 1970 to a number of additional individuals and Libyan entities; and establishes a panel of experts to monitor and promote sanctions implementation. The allied forces of United States, United Kingdom and France launched air strikes on Libya soon after the adoption of the resolution. 

On 10 March 2011, the African Union Peace and Security Council (AU PSC) met at the level of Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa with the participation of Libyan Government representatives. At that meeting, the AU expressed deep concern at the prevailing situation in Libya which poses a serious threat to peace and security in that country, and the region as a whole and to the safety and dignity of Libyans and migrant workers, especially Africans. The AU was equally deeply concerned with the humanitarian situation which was deteriorating daily. 

The AU further expressed solidarity with Libya and underscored the legitimacy of the aspirations of the Libyan people for democracy, political reform, justice, peace and security and the need to ensure those aspirations are fulfilled in a peaceful and democratic manner. The AU strongly and unequivocally condemned the indiscriminate use of force while reaffirming its strong commitment to the respect of the unity and territorial integrity of Libya as well as the rejection of any foreign military intervention, whatever its form, and condemned the transformation of peaceful demonstrations into an armed rebellion. 

The AU reiterated that the current situation in Libya called for urgent African action and for:
 
a)	Immediate cessation of all hostilities; 
b)	Cooperation from Libyan authorities to facilitate delivery of humanitarian assistance to the needy; 
c)	The protection of foreign nationals in Libya and particularly African immigrants there. 

As a way forward, the Peace and Security Council decided: 

(a)	To establish an AU ad hoc high level committee on Libya, comprising heads of state and Government of Uganda, South Africa, Mali, Mauritania and Republic of Congo. The Chairperson of the AU Commission is also a member. 
(b)	To give the committee the specific mandate to: 
(i) 	Engage with all conflicting parties in Libya and continually assess the situation on the ground to be able to advise for appropriate measures; 
(ii) 	Facilitate inclusive dialogue among Libyan parties on the appropriate reforms and 
(iii) 	Engage AU partners (Arab League, OIC, EU, UN) to facilitate coordination efforts and seek their support for an early resolution of the crisis in Libya. 

At the conclusion of the meeting, the AU Peace and Security Council requested AU member states to provide logistical and humanitarian support. The AU Commission is to facilitate convening of a conference for mobilisation of required resources; and to provide information on reported presence of mercenaries in Libya as a basis for further action. Operative paragraph two of the Resolution 1973 acknowledges the role of the AU Peace and Security Council in its efforts to promote peace and security.

The AU ad-hoc high level committee on Libya held its first meeting in Nouakchott, Mauritania on 19 March 2011. The meeting was attended by their Excellencies Presidents Mohmed Quid Abdel Aziz, of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania; Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of Congo; Amadou Toumani Toure of the Republic of Mali and the ministers representing their Excellencies Yoweri Museveni, Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of Uganda and President of the Republic of South Africa respectively, as well as by the Chairperson of the AU Commission, Dr Jean Ping. H.E. President Museveni was represented by the Minister for Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa. 

The meeting provided an opportunity for an indepth exchange of views on the situation in Libya, as well as the modalities for the implementation of the mandate of the African Union high level ad hoc committee. In order to contribute actively to the search for an early solution, consistent with the international legality as reflected in relevant Security Council resolutions, the high level ad hoc committee:

1.	Made an urgent appeal to all parties concerned, namely, the Government of Libya and the National Transitional Council, to observe without any further delay comprehensive cessation of hostilities and to take other measures aimed at defusing tension and ensuring protection of the civilian population.
2.	Reaffirmed the relevance of the elements of the road map articulated by the Peace and Security Council and invited the Libyan authorities and the National Consultative Council to a meeting to be convened as soon as possible in Addis Ababa or in any other venue agreeable to the parties, to discuss this road map and particularly the establishment and management of an inclusive transition period that would lead to political reforms meeting the aspirations of the Libyan people.
3.	Requested the African Union Commission to convene in Addis Ababa on the 25 March 2011, that is tomorrow, in a meeting that will bring together high representatives of the League of Arab States, the OIC, the EU and the UN including the five permanent members as well as other partners and stakeholders, in order to agree on ways and means to ensure the early resolution of the crisis.
4.	Decided to organise, under the aegis of the ministers of foreign affairs of its member countries as well as the AU Commission, a regional consultation of Libya’s neighbours and parties concerned with a view of seeking a solution to the Libyan crisis. 

The committee reaffirmed its determination to carry out its mission in the face of the worrying developments in the situation and the recourse to an armed international intervention, called for restraint and undertook to spare no efforts to facilitate a peaceful solution within the African framework, duly taking into account the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people.

Against this background, the high level ad hoc committee will act within the framework of its mandate and in a manner consistent with and complementary to the Resolutions 1970 and 1973 of 2011 of the United Nations Security Council. Accordingly, it appealed to the international community as a whole to provide unreserved support to African Union efforts.

Uganda remains committed to efforts to resolve the current crisis through dialogue and shall participate actively in the ad hoc committee’s meeting convened on Friday, 25 March 2011, in Addis Ababa. We believe that this path and not the path of pursuing a regime change that is advocated in some quarters, remains the best course of action for the Libyan people and for long term peace and stability in the region.

The resolution of 1973 imposed a no fly zone. This effectively closes Libya’s air space and means there can be no flights to and from or over Libya even for diplomatic reasons unless they are cleared by the Security Council. It should be noted that commercial flights from Arica to Europe usually use the Libyan airspace and must now re-route.

It also imposes an arms embargo that prohibits the flow of arms in and out of Libya. In addition to 1970, the 1973 Resolution imposes a freeze on assets of Libyan individuals and government departments. These are classified as follows: 

•	The asset freeze applies to all funds, other financial assets and economic resources, which are owned or controlled directly or indirectly by President Gadaffi’s regime or by individuals or entities acting on their behalf or at their discretion or by entities owned or controlled by them. 

Uganda is required to ensure that any funds, financial assets or economic resources are prevented from being made available by Ugandans or by an individual or entities within Uganda to or for the benefit of President Gadaffi’s regime or individuals or entities acting on their behalf or at their discretion or owned or controlled by them. The frozen assets must be made available to and for the benefit of the Libyan people.

Annex (ii) in the resolution on asset freeze specifically named the following entities concerned:
1.	Central Bank of Libya
2.	Libyan Investment Authority
3.	Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company
4.	Libyan Foreign Bank
5.	Libyan African Investment Portfolio
6.	Libyan National Oil Corporation

A sanctions committee chaired by Portugal will meet in New York today for its first formal meeting to consider and approve draft guidelines. Based on the guidelines, the ministry will provide written operational guidelines on implementation. This is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Travel Ban

A travel ban has been imposed on two Libyan officials for their direct involvement in recruiting and co-ordinating mercenaries. They are Quren Salih Quren Al Gadaffi, Libyan ambassador to Chad and Col. Amid Husain Al Kuni, Governor of Ghat in Southern Libya.

Ugandans in Libya

In the spirit of the East African co-operation, Kenya Airways evacuated all Ugandans who were willing to return home. They arrived in the country on 28 February 2011. I would like to reiterate our gratitude to the Kenyan Government and Kenya Airways for this kind gesture. 

However, a few Ugandans opted to remain behind. These included an official of the Ugandan Embassy in Tripoli and some students who chose to stay behind to sit for their exams. The minister of foreign affairs has a standing arrangement with the Organisation for International Migration to facilitate the return of any Ugandans who wish to return home.

Representation of Libya in Uganda

On 27 February 2011, the Libyan Arab People’s Bureau, Kampala, informed my ministry that His Excellency Abdalla A. Bujeldain, the Secretary of the Libyan People’s Bureau, that is the Ambassador of Libya to Uganda, had been relieved of his duties and that Mr Yousef S. M. Murgham had taken over as the Acting Secretary of the Bureau.

My minister received the letter from the General People’s Committee for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation confirming the assignment of Mr Yousef S. M. Murgham as Charge D’Affaires. The ministry, in line with the Vienna Convention guidelines on diplomatic relations has recognised Mr Yousef S. M. Murgham as Charge D’Affaires.

The status of claims against Libyan Embassy by Ugandans

A number of companies have requested the ministry in writing to help them recover their claims to the Libyan Embassy. The ministry will continue to work with the Libyan Embassy with a view to ensuring that claims undertaken by the embassy are honoured.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Uganda and Libya enjoy warm relations. Over the last few years, Libya has emerged as a leading source of investment capital and Libyan investment in Uganda now amounts to about US $325 million spread over various sectors of Uganda’s economy.

In addition to this, Libya has demonstrated generosity towards Uganda by way of funding several projects here, prominently the construction of the Gadaffi National Mosque and the renovation of the Toro Royal Palace.

Furthermore, developments in Libya have significant implications for regional and international peace and security. It is, therefore, in the interest of Uganda that the crisis in Libya is resolved peacefully and that any transition arrangement is handled cautiously. To this end, we continue to work with others in the African Union, the OIC, the Arab League, the United Nations and the international community. I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement.

3.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I want to thank the Government and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for responding to the question I raised here on Tuesday quite comprehensively. But I would like to seek a few clarifications.

One; on the Ugandans who were repatriated from Libya; could we possibly know the number of Ugandans who have so far come back and how many are remaining behind? 

Two, I would like some clarification regarding the former ambassador because we got information that he is under house arrest. But later I, of course, got information that he found his way and managed to sneak out of the country to South Africa. I would like some clarification on that. 

Lastly, it is in regard to the Ugandans who are working at the embassy who have not been paid. Much as the Government here is coming up to ensure that they will be paid, how soon will this be? I thought that you would name the people who supplied goods and services but I could avail you with a list of some of them because the Libyan Embassy owes them to the tune of US $2.5 million. We have: Super Rides Travel Limited, Serena Hotel, Imperial Royale, Eagle Air, Africa One Travel, Stanbic Bank, Total Wampewo Petrol Station, Toyota Uganda, which even clamped the vehicles through Stanbic Bank and the landlords are very concerned about their due rent because they also need this money to survive. 

So, these Ugandans need to be helped; is there a way the Ugandan Government can come in and pay them? Whether Gaddafi remains or goes, Libya as a country will remain but our people need to be paid in order to survive. 

I was made to understand from reliable sources that one of your staff from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs wrote a letter on Monday to these people as a guarantee from the Government of Uganda. But if it is guaranteeing, why can’t it go ahead and pay these Ugandans who have been supplying goods and services and those working at the embassy in order to relieve them of the financial stress they are undergoing such that they are also able to continue living a comfortable life?  Thank you. 

3.16
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Minister for elaborately presenting this statement which is really long overdue - I expected him to have presented it much earlier; but I would like to thank him for that.
 
Just like my colleague has just said, in paragraph 2 of page 10, the minister says something about the Ugandans in Libya. That, “In the spirit of East African Cooperation, Kenya Airways evacuated all Ugandans who were willing to return home.” And he goes ahead to say, “They arrived in the country on 28 February 2011. I would like to reiterate our gratitude to the Kenyan Government and to Kenya Airways for this kind gesture.” 

I would like to ask the minister, before the Kenyan Government offered this to Uganda, what was our plan? And what were we really thinking as Ugandans before our neighbours could rescue our own from the disaster in another country? So, much as we thank Kenya, it should be a lesson to us that when a disaster befalls our own, we shouldn’t wait for our neighbours to go and rescue them. 

Two, on page 3, the minister says that on 10 March 2011, the African Union Peace and Security Council met at levels of heads of state and government to talk about the Libyan problem. But my question goes to all the African leaders that why should we wait for this long? Because usually most African governments have said, “Problems of Africa must be left to Africans.” But when problems befall a sister country of Africa, we first wait for the Western world to act and then we react because we as Africans came in on the 10th of March. And yet the problem started much earlier in mid February and the United Nations had already acted much earlier. So, my plea to African leaders is that next time when a problem befalls a sister country, we must act very fast in order to ensure that we are also responsible. 

Lastly, I would like to humbly request that this Parliament pays tribute to especially the innocent Libyans who lost their dear lives; can we observe a minute of silence for that? 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.20
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement that has brought to light some information on what is happening to this country. I would like to sympathise and stand with our brothers and sisters in Libya for what they are undergoing is not a good thing especially on the African continent. 

As we read this statement and as we watch events unfolding in Libya I would like to remind this august House and the country at large that the Libyan people didn’t like the situation they are in. Circumstances and bad governance have forced them into such a bad state. And I hope that as a country, we shall learn from such precedence. I would like all interventions that are supposed to be made to be made in the interest of the people of Libya rather than individual interests or regimes. 

The statement by the minister has highlighted some issues from which I would like to seek clarification. First of all, before the African Union came up with this arrangement the minister is presenting to us, as a country we had our head of state coming out strongly to blast the Western countries that they are intervening in the matters of Libya and yet they were probably trying to save the lives of Libyans. Don’t you think that such an early reaction by our head of state, who according to the statement of the minister is going to be actively involved in the deliberations of the committee, will jeopardise his role in this committee and his effort to join other heads of state to advance a meaningful solution to the Libyan problem?

We should also be mindful that in the neighbourhood - I read in the papers that a president of a neighbouring country is in support of foreign intervention and yet others are not in support. Ours, in the early hours, has already made his position clear. Will it not jeopardise his role in this event?

The minister talked about the economic concern as a country. Of course, he has fallen short of telling us how this crisis in Libya will impact on Uganda economically and to which magnitude. 

I would also like him to clarify on the issue that we had in the early pronouncement of this crisis that Ugandan soldiers were sighted in that country. Is it true or not? Please, help us by clarifying on this because all this has a big impact on what role we can play to bring about peace in the region. This is not the first time that we are hearing such rumours. When there was a crisis in Kenya, it was indicated that we were siding with the regime. Please, put Ugandans at rest by clarifying on these issues.

I would like once more to say that as a country, we stand warned of such events as a result of bad governance and we must learn from them. For God and my country!

3.26
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to debate this statement. I want to thank the minister for the statement and honourable colleagues who raised this matter here. The international system recognises all of us equally so even Uganda as a country, we are a player irrespective of what financial or military capacity we have. That is why the UN resolutions, though quite often rhetorical in nature, affect all of us. 

We have a saying that when two elephants fight, even when they are three or four, the grass ultimately suffers. When there is civil war, unrest and conflict - the other day, it was Bush and his coalition of the willing versus Saddam, but look at the whole conflict in Iraq, who was the grass to suffer? The ordinary civilians! 

This same UN that we are talking about here passed a resolution to the contrary and the coalition forces violated it. That is how the UN is so toothless, so meaningless and unfair. I have reason for what I say. Woodrow Wilson, the former President of America, called for open diplomacy. The UN must stand up to the challenge and discuss things openly and be able to say -(Interjections)- yes, they should be able to admit that whoever pays them, perhaps sanctions their action. When you look at the solution here, it is very clear. It is calling for peace but the coalition forces are busy pounding Libya and you are saying you are protecting civilians.

Gaddafi is power hungry; we condemn him. The Western world is busy fixing their economy; they are destabilising the Arab world and we are saying we want peace in Libya. Having passed this resolution to call for the immediate cessation of hostilities, a committee of the UN or African Union would have gone in and said, “Gaddafi step down for the sake of peace”. After all, he had given in and declared a partial ceasefire. That was a stepping stone. So, for you to compound efforts and pound Libya, look at the financial and human loss - let us talk as peace loving Ugandans. Open diplomacy should be able to raise issues that will affect all.

The cold war politics is slowly coming back on this globe. The error of where the weak are going to ally with the strong for fear of conquest is coming back. My president is right to fear for an arms race for this world. I am telling you the truth.

I am concerned about the complacency of the UN for always turning up to endorse the rhetoric of the West as ordinary Africans are dying. I appeal to all Africans irrespective of our political feelings and differences to stand up and oppose this rhetoric and condemn actions of the West. Gaddafi is no good. He should have resigned yesterday but the impact of the coalition forces is damaging Africa to the marrow.

3.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs for the detailed statement of what has been happening since the Libyan crisis started. Hon. Members, you will note that this is a democratically elected institution of Parliament and as spokespersons of the people we represent; we must also promote the values of democracy and see that the same values are nurtured and promoted internationally. 

The crisis in Libya did not start in Libya; it started in Tunisia. We should as a Parliament uphold the leaders of Tunisia and Egypt who saw the uprising of the people and they chose to maintain democracy in their countries. There has not been war in those countries but progressively a referendum has been held in Egypt, they are progressively amending the laws and they will soon conduct elections. How I wish Gaddafi had done the same, the situation would have been different.

May I also state in this House, that we are almost relegating our responsibility as a Parliament because there have been so many crises in Africa but as a Parliament we have not come up to take positions on them. Every time we are waiting for the Front Bench to bring a statement; I do not know what the Shadow Cabinet on the other side is doing if our side has taken time to bring up a statement? For instance, what is happening in Ivory Coast? We have never commented. What is happening in other African states? There are challenges which demand this Parliament to come up and debate them so that our position can be heard and put on record as issues come up.

Coming to the issue of Libya and the statement —(Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank my colleague for honouring the order. I wish to know whether my honourable colleague is in order to insist that Members on the other side did not rise up to the challenge to condemn what is happening in Libya when actually the minister was responding to the issue that was raised by a Member from the Opposition. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: By the other side, he meant which side? (Laughter)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: He actually was very clear and said members of the Opposition and I am aware that the minister was responding to an issue which was raised by hon. Okupa Elijah, who is a member of the Opposition. So is hon. Dombo in order to say that members of the Opposition have not shown interest in this matter?


THE SPEAKER: Would you like to clarify on what you said?

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether the Member was following closely what I was saying. I put collective blame on this House that we have not stood up as a House to take position on the many controversial African issues, which have come up. In this case, I would have expected a full debate requested for by the Leader of the Opposition or any other responsible sector of the Opposition and not just a question to a minister. It could even be a motion by a Member of Parliament from the ruling side or a Member from the Opposition. But it would be easier if it was done by the responsible shadow minister on the other side. 

Let me comment on the Libyan crisis. We have already honoured the dead in Libya and we sympathise with them. But in the President’s statement on Libya, he mentioned something which I would like to seek clarification on from the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs. In the President’s statement in the press, he regretted that the United Nations had taken so long to pass –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence in this matter; my colleague is heaping blame on the Opposition that it should have been the one to bring up this issue so that we could have a full debate. But it is the Government ministers with the responsibility to inform this Parliament and the nation on all matters arising. So is my colleague procedurally right to insinuate that unless the Opposition comes up with an issue, the Government and the ministers who have the mandate cannot inform this Parliament and the nation at large? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think anybody is being blamed on this, because when we started, hon. Okupa wanted to get information and he asked the Executive to make a statement which statement has been made. So where is the blame here?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am tempted to comment, especially when we are deliberating on such important issues, that five years and more should enable a Member of Parliament to come to terms with the proceedings of Parliament, especially when the Speaker has guided. We are going to encounter more of such issues in the Ninth Parliament where those who have stayed longer will show the new Members how best to proceed. (Laughter)

As I was saying, the President lamented in his statement that the UN Security Council failed to grant a no-fly zone for the Somali airspace and the children of Uganda have continued to be exposed to very high risks and others have paid the ultimate price of death because the Security Council did not approved it. But recently, Uganda had the opportunity to chair the Security Council. Can the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs tell us; was it a failure on our part, was it refusal by the international community – what problem is there to continue exposing our children to such risks, even when we had the opportunity to chair the Security Council? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the report to this House, on this very serious continental and global matter. As it was said by Madam Clinton, this is unprecedented violent, rushed and inconsiderate military action by the so-called international community – and I repeat, so-called international community and I will explain why I call it so - against the African people, the Arab people and all the people who are now threatened by that group in the West. 

They are continuing the colonial imperialist methods, worse than Berlin; when they use their might against the weak and say that the example this matter has risen to the rest of the world is to say; “Whoever you are, the powers that be can come to your house, rape your daughter and go away.” This is rape of Africa. Whenever a powerful person humiliates a weak one, then it is similar to rape. That is why I call it rape. 

The methods used to reach that decision were unprecedented in terms of the time, the participation and more conspicuously missing was African participation. The African Union was not consulted seriously; their voice was not heard because the time was not provided. Even those who are perpetuating the aggression are in such a mess that they have failed to find a base for the command of the operations of that mission. 

That shows how, not only unprepared but also rushed the decision was. It shows how inexperienced the leaders that took that decision are. They are demonstrating to the world how they are going to mess up the whole affair. And this is following a similar experience where America invaded Iraq on wrong intelligence information. And the world is continuously being threatened by this “international communiqué” which I now want to define. I request Members to answer the question, “Who is the international community?” Is Africa not part of the international community? Is China not part of the international community? Is Germany, India and all the countries that are opposed to this decision not part of the international community? 

Is the international community only those who have nuclear weapons which are now killing them and has become a self-destructive weapon? I would like us to look at it in that way. And I would like this House to condemn, in strongest terms, the methods used and the action taken without – hear this; in all military operations, we have what we call end-state. They took action without a clear end-state. Up to now, the so-called international community has not defined the end-state of that mission. If you go for any mission without any end-state then you are blundering. 

Therefore, I would like this Parliament to condemn this action as one voice and as part of the real international community that we belong to because the masses of the world -(Interjections)- let me finish. The masses of the world are the actual international community. If any citizen is going to go on the street, take arms on the street and then call upon the international community to support him against the established state, those are not the rules of the game of a civilised world that we want to create and the international community we want to see. The moment any protestor holds a gun, he has put himself at the mercy and danger of being attacked with a gun. If that was to apply everywhere, it would mean that the people who are not happy with the distribution of wealth in the United States -(Interjections)-  should go on the streets and capture arms. It would mean that the students in UK whom I saw demonstrating and bashing the car of Prince Charles should take up arms and should be supported by the international community. It means that the French people who are always demonstrating should take arms and should be supported by the international community. 

That is what has resulted into this rush decision to establish what they call a no-fly zone. You should have heard when they brought the idea. There was a general in the United States who said that, “I have heard the rules talk of establishing a no-fly zone,” because they seem not to understand; these politicians who were rushing. To establish a no-fly zone, you must first destroy the defence system of that country. You must first destroy the capability of the air force of that country. It means destroying -(Interjections)- all the savings, all the things -(Interjections)- of the -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order against the submissions of Gen. Elly Tumwine who himself carried up arms -(Interjections)- and is now condemning those who are carrying up arms. The point of order I am raising is this; is it in order for a whole general in the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to make such irresponsible statements like condemning the international community in such a forum yet the lives of thousands of people in Benghazi were saved by the action of the international community? Is it in order for a general whose statements would carry a little more weight than mine in such a military contest to continue making irresponsible statements as if he is fearing something happening in Uganda here? Is it in order for him to continue like that? Besides, they went to Somalia and have not got an end to it. Is he in order to talk about the end in Libya when in Somalia, the war is just germinating from all the corners of the country? (Laughter) What is he talking about? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The point of order raised presupposes that the Chair is conversant with details as to how the generals in the UPDF behave. I am sorry, I am not. (Laughter)  

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wonderful ruling. I will even come to the point of Somalia for your information so that – that is why we are here; to clarify some of the things you do not seem to understand and have not bothered to know even when information is available. The reason I am clarifying this is that there is a huge difference between the situation in Somalia and our involvement there. It was on the invitation, it was on the preparation, it was after discussion between regional authorities and AU -(Interjections)-  and this Parliament approving. So do not compare non-comparables. The preparation that took place to reach that decision - as we speak, a Congressman of the Democrats in the United States is opposing his commander, Obama, because they never went through the processes of involving the necessary authorities which need to take decisions of war in any country. 

I would like to say that rushed decisions which involve many lives are the ones we should condemn because they threaten the masses of the world. 

The other point I would like to make on this matter as I wind up, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: But according to our rules, we should have taken only an hour but we are going beyond. I want this matter to end by giving one other person from this side and two from this side and they end. Otherwise, we have gone beyond the hour in discussing this particular subject although it is an important subject and I appreciate that.    

GEN. TUMWINE: Just in conclusion, I would like to call upon all of us, the African people, the Pan Africanists to all go to the Pan African Square which is available here to continue this debate and discussion because it concerns all of us -(Interjections)- and we share. The Pan African Square was put in place for us and I invite all of you to come there. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, gender balancing. 

3.50
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much –

THE SPEAKER: But please be brief because we have gone beyond the expected time. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member who raised this issue and the minister for the statement. This should be a lesson to all Africans -(Interjections)- in Africa, governments and government agencies are bringing up a lot of impunity in their actions. The Libyans had the freedom to express themselves. I do not want us to stand here and say, “These ordinary people were armed.” They were not armed. Instead, it was government that had armed people against the civilians who were expressing themselves. It is a human right to have freedom of expression. It is even in our Constitution. I do not expect a Member to stand here and talk against freedom of expression when it is in our constitutional right. Just imagine -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, hon. Lumumba, for giving way. I also just want to inform hon. Members that those who were demonstrating were demanding for political reforms, which were never adhered to. The demonstrations had a purpose and it was inevitable that it would degenerate into where you have seen it. (Laughter) So, I would also condemn those who are condemning those who have gone in to help the demonstrators to demand for political reforms. A president for 43 years! Barnabas, I am 40 years old - forty-three years and you are a president – no! (Laughter) 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Tinkasiimire, for the information. From that, I think it is going to be bloody since they are going to – 

THE SPEAKER: But I don’t think it was information; it was a contribution. (Laughter) 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, it was information to me because I did not know his age, but I now know that he is 40 years. 

The issue of freedom should be something that should be upheld by all African governments. Yesterday I watched Al-Jazeera and they showed the way in which the Police in Uganda arrests people. They arrest you and throw you in their double cabin and you are at their mercy. I saw a man stepping on the very essential parts of a fellow man -(Laughter)- is that good for Africans? If you were a person in Libya and you wanted to express yourself peacefully, what would you do? You would have done exactly what those people did. 

We have to be sincere to ourselves as Ugandans. When we get visiting presidents to Uganda - our security organs are professionals and they have been doing their work; but whenever the Libyan President comes here, he takes over and makes our organisations in charge of security useless. Is that what we deserve as a country? That is disrespect to the whole of Uganda -(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like to put it on record in this House that it is not true that when the Libyan leader visits Uganda, they take over. It is the Ugandan security that remains in charge, tolerates some of the indiscipline of some of the other people, manages them so well, maintains the peace until the visit is over, and things remain calm. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, if one has been observing and following the current affairs, especially when the Libyan President visits us, then you have seen our security exchanging physical blows with his security. So, we cannot come here and hide. It has been happening and it does not please Ugandans. It may be pleasing to those in security, but it does not please us the ordinary people to see a visitor slap the owner of the home. (Laughter) This should be a lesson to all African leaders to guard against dictatorship – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I do not know whether it is proper for us to talk about individuals or persons in this debate. I think the debate should concentrate on Libya rather than the heads of state. You can talk without making reference to individuals. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the statement was about the situation in Libya and the head of Libya is a President. So, I find myself in a difficult position that I can’t avoid talking about the Libyan President, yet the demonstrations were against the Libyan President and his regime. 

Finally, this should be a lesson to all African governments against dictatorship. The governments will not oppress the ordinary, harmless, people with impunity. I want to thank the presidents who were able to give way when the ordinary people expressed themselves and I pray God gives them more life. Thank you so much.

3.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to the statement of the minister. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs for bringing this statement, which is long overdue, to Parliament. 

I stand here on behalf of the peace-loving people of Koboko and Uganda to express our sympathies to all those who are struggling in Libya; to express our condolences to those who have lost loved ones; and to express our solidarity for those who are struggling to see that they bring back peace in Libya. 

Mr Speaker, I was in Libya – we went as women of Uganda – and I saw how peaceful Libya was. There are no houseboys or drivers in Libya because they consider that slavery. The people of Libya were very peaceful under Col. Muammar Gaddafi’s rule. Although he has been there for the last 40 years, I am sure the people of Libya enjoyed the peace and prosperity which has been interfered with. I know and I say so because it is the innocent women and children that are suffering most as a result of this war which has been brought to Libya. I am sure this situation has been cooked from outside and it is being imposed on Libya to upset them. 

I think our President is right to support and sympathise with the people of Libya because we have been friends and if your friend is in problems, you must come and support them. So, it is true that Gadaffi has stayed for 40 years but there should be a better way of negotiation so that we do not bring untold suffering to the people of Libya. 

What we need now is an immediate ceasefire so that these people and the Libyan soldiers stop the demonstrations so that there are no more blasts, and then we can begin the negotiations. I am really in pain to see that the people of Libya are suffering, and this pain has been imposed by people from outside. Thank you very much. 

4.02
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has made. Matters of international nature are very delicate and for one to handle them, you need to get to the genesis of the problem and probably suggest a way forward. What is happening in Libya has alarmed all of us Africans because we wouldn’t like to see fellow Africans being killed every night. But where did the problem start? 

As most Members have hinted, definitely the problem started when a section of Libyans felt that they needed more freedom and at that time, they felt that their lives were at risk and they were being killed. Was it right for the UN to intervene? In the first place, I would think that the intention of the UN when it intervened in Libya was to save the Libyans who were disgruntled and the UN was right in that respect. Having said that, what next?

When the UN went to Libya the intention was to save the Libyans. And how was that to be done? The intention mainly was to make sure that the Libyan air defence system was disabled so that the Libyan Government stops bombing its own people. However, given what is happening now, I think the UN has gone beyond what it was supposed to do because the extent is beyond what was expected since even people on the other side are dying and in the process you might find that even innocent people are dying. What is the way forward, Mr Speaker?

I am one person who believes that the African Union still has a role to play in Libya. It is not too late for the African Union to step up and play its role in Libya. I definitely know that the African Union has come under strong criticism from different circles because of its failures, but if you analyse the failure of the African Union in some of the missions she has had, it is not of its own making. In most cases it has been because of lack of logistics; take for instance the situation in Somalia; it is because we are not empowered. So, my appeal to the African governments is that let them link up with other international organisations so that we can work out the situation in Libya and save the Libyans.

Definitely, I know African countries have to go by the UN resolution, but the UN itself might have a way. Within the UN Charter there is a provision for regional arrangement. It is not too late for the African Union to explore this option so that we see that our friends in Libya are safe. Otherwise, if we go as we are moving now, we may come to a situation where we cannot get out of this problem. 

Much of what I wanted to say has already been said. However, lastly, I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister. When he mentioned some Libyan investments and of course there are some sanctions, I would be interested to find out from the honourable minister and request him to give us guidance as to what organisations or bodies operating here or their investments may be affected so that we can take maximum care in whatever dealings we have with them locally here in Uganda. Thank you very much.

4.06
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I thank you for taking interest in this matter here. I would like to look at this issue of Libya from the perspective of the Organisation of Islamic Conference, OIC, to which I am a member. But first, as a citizen and as a Member of this Parliament, I would like to specifically ask the minister here on the issue of the re-routing of flights from Africa and from Uganda to Europe which used to go through the airspace of Libya. Which route are we following now that we cannot go over the Libyan airspace? Which is the route which is safe for all Ugandans?

And for my dear mother, the honourable woman Member of Parliament for Koboko, I respect you, and the people you represent are my people also. If you feed a person with food, the person can get satisfied in the stomach with the food, but human needs are not limited to food or basic needs only. Freedom or democracy as may be expressed in our simplest terms like, maybe, free and fair elections. These are things also which people need. If you visit people in Luzira Prison they have food; they even sleep in a house. Rain cannot beat them, but you cannot say that those people are peaceful. Peace should not be defined in our limited sense of Uganda. When there are no gunshots you say everybody is peaceful; even a prisoner is peaceful! 

Libyans have been having this disease. Today, they have the sickness. You can carry a disease without being sick. The sickness in Libya which is the problem of most members of the Organisation of Islamic Conference, Uganda inclusive, is the lack of democracy, free and fair elections - if you can take that component of democracy. The disease of Libya is a contagious one. Mr Speaker, you can see. 

In the medical sense, when you are dealing with a contagious diseases - our doctor, Minister of Defence, if you have not forgotten the medical science - you are dealing with a contagious diseases and you must look at the cause and the risk factors; the people who are at risk, and those who are likely to catch the disease. Even these Heads of State of the African Union who are sent there are at risk. (Laughter) Their countries may catch this disease because, Mr Speaker, as you know, the thing started from somewhere and then it spread to another country and then to another one - Tunisia, Egypt, Libya today and it is moving southwards. (Laughter) You can see the pattern of the disease. 

So, the way forward, Mr Speaker. My word to the hon. Members of Parliament here is to insulate our countries before the disease reaches here. If we can insulate ourselves as Ugandans we cannot have the fear which Gen. Tumwine has -(Interruptions)- yes! He spoke genuinely without disclosing actually what is inside him and actually his fear is good. It calls for insulation. It calls for vaccination of Uganda and for those of you who are Generals; you must not forget this. If you have a gun in your house, with a bullet in your house, like the one of Gaddafi, even if you do not fire it yourself, one day it will explode. (Laughter) Yes. One day. If you exist on the fact that you have a gun or a bullet, one day this bullet can explode. Whether it is you shooting it or what, but it can explode near you. But are you going to be safe? (Laughter) You ask Gaddafi. 

When Gaddafi comes to Uganda, he brings good news to the ordinary people. He brings money, investment, aid, but what you see in him is power. “I have the power.” And what power is that? Military power, gun power, weapon power! Today, the guns are exploding; some explode because he is the one firing them; others explode because they are being fired against him. 

So, I advise my dear highly respected Gaddafi - by the way I am a Pan Africanist. He knows that. We debate sometimes together. I am one of the people he invites to go and debate there. But as Pan Africanists we do not fear talking about the weaknesses that we have amongst us. If you bow to your strength on the power of the gun, not the power of the people, you are defeating yourself -(Interruptions)- the power of the people should not be hijacked by anybody if we want peace in Africa.  

If we want peace in Africa we must put democratic principles first, beginning with ourselves here in Uganda. The issue of Libya should help Ugandans in the sense that Ugandans should examine themselves and make sure that they take precautionary measures to avoid the burning, the destruction of the things we have built painfully. Look at Libya. Forty two years of struggle to develop have been burnt in a second. It is easier to destroy than to build.  Something you build in ten years can be destroyed in a second when a bomb explodes there. We can prevent this through regular free and fair elections, which is lacking in Libya and I do not know whether it is present here.

Regular elections are different from free and fair elections. We have a half situation here in Uganda, but the one of Libya is full. They do not even have regular, unfair elections like the ones we have in Uganda. In Uganda we have credit because we have elections and that is why I am here as a Member of Parliament. We can still improve the democracy which we already have, but if we close all the avenues and start preparing the president’s son to take over like the one of Egypt and Libya then we shall have a problem.

My dear mama from Koboko, it is not food or money, but it is freedom that Libyans cherish. Libya like most undemocratic countries prevents local people from talking to visitors about their problems. It is better when people speak out and demonstrate their will. People in Obongi and the whole of Northern Uganda want peace not money distributed through NUSAF, PRDP or during elections. 

MR ACHIA: Who is sponsoring all these demonstrations in the Arab world? Who is giving them guns to go to the streets instead of just demonstrating? The resolution is talking about a no-fly zone; so, who is talking about regime change?

MR FUNGAROO: Your question brings me to the issue of the United Nations. There is a constant and permanent interest to interfere in Libya. Libya has been under constant threat of bombardment from the US. Members of the Islamic Conference know that there are countries in the Islamic world which are targets of the US, but why do you give an excuse for the US to attack you?

It is very difficult for the US to attack Iran because it holds regular elections. The UN should have picked neutral countries and sent them as peace keepers to Libya. Members of the UN are aware of the deep rooted interests of some western countries in Libya. Why send US and not Uganda to keep peace in Libya? Civilians should be protected in Libya.

4.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County, Kitgum): When Col. Gaddafi took power in Libya in 1969; I was active in students’ politics. One of the reasons Col Gaddafi gave for taking over from the king was that the institution of the monarchy was undemocratic. He became one of our heroes because of that, but looking back after 42 years, I cannot see the difference between the monarchy and his rule. I do not know who is more democratic than the other.

People are talking about demonstrations; in Africa you can demonstrate in any manner. Whether you are empty handed or with stones, the government in power will pounce on you with guns –

THE SPEAKER: But you cannot demonstrate naked. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Even that way, they can pounce on you with guns. So, the excuse that the demonstrators were using guns does not arise. I want a specific statement of Libyan assets in Uganda such as UTL and National Housing. The composition of their boards was constituted with the help of the Gaddafi regime. What is the status of these assets now? The people who are dying in Libya are dying unnecessarily because this is a man-made disaster. If there were term limits in Libya -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you hon. Okello-Okello, for the question of Libya’s assets here. I may have to remind you that in 1979 when we had a war here, incidentally one of our planes, a Boeing 737 was taken to Libya and to-date it has never been returned and your government has never recovered it. (Laughter) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Ssekikubo for the information. Mr Speaker, I was saying that if there were presidential term limits in Libya, maybe the people who are dying now would not be dying. We as Africans have to learn from some of these events. Today it is the people of Libya who are dying; tomorrow it will be somebody else’s turn. There is no way you can stop the situation happening in Libya if you insist that you are the only one who was born to rule. However much you suppress people with a gun – that is a temporary measure.

To conclude, I heard the word “condemnation” here. If this House is going to condemn the Western world, that condemnation will not include me. I cannot condemn the people who are trying to save lives from somebody who is killing his own people; not even foreigners. I will not support that condemnation. People who are going to – whether open speech or demonstration, you go there, but you will not see me. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please bear with me that we end this debate with hon. Bako. Otherwise, we shall not be able to tackle the other items on the agenda. 

4.26
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put a few questions to the Minister. He has told us that the Libyan investment interests in this country stand at US $375 million, but he has not told us the real ownership. Was this an investment portfolio being held by Libya as a Government or by Gaddafi as an individual? We will need to understand this.

Much as the Minister is talking about an investment portfolio of US $375 million, is he aware that currently Gaddafi’s personal assets in gold alone stand at US $6.5 billion? And why are the Libyans protesting and saying, “Enough is enough”? 

Currently, Libyans and Gaddafi are suffering from pakalastism. Allow me introduce that terminology. [HON. MEMBER: “What does it mean?”] This can only be defined by a yellow colour, but the definition here is simple: you want eternity in power against all odds; you want to be a god and yet you are mortal. You promise yourself as somebody who will never leave; no, you have to leave! 42 years! That is above the age of hon. Tinkasiimire. Can you imagine? And Libyans are saying, “No.” 

Unfortunately, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine has gone out. He said everything was good in Libya. That defines one thing; once a rebel, never a democrat; and that is what is happening here in this country. We are using Members of Parliament to lift terms and we say, “We are in power because people still like us.” No, they do not like you and are telling you that you should have left yesterday.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. The information I would like to give her is that people who insist on being there pakalast will insist until paka-lost. (Laughter)

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate hon. Bako for her parliamentary discipline. The word “pakalast” is just a party line which means that if you have a party with a presidential candidate, parliamentary candidates, LC V, LC III, LC II and LC I chairperson candidates, if you are a party member, you vote all those candidates pakalast. It does not mean “for life” please.

MS BAKO: Thank you for that definition, which actually means that from the last to the first; the entire list shall work for one – and that is eternity. Thank you.

I want to tell hon. Okello Oryem that he is wrong to assume that the reconstruction of the royal palace in Toro was one of the investments that Ugandans should use as a position not to condemn the killings in Libya. That was a personal relationship between Gaddafi and Toro kingdom. I do not have a kingdom; so when will Gaddafi come to invest in Arua so that I should support him? Personal interests should not be taken as state issues.

Another reminder to the Minister concerns his claim that the Gaddafi Mosque was constructed by him. That is not true. That mosque was constructed by the late Idi Amin and we all know that. What Gaddafi came to do was some basic renovations. And we are now crediting all that to him, using it as a way of not condemning his atrocities against Libyan people. This is very unfortunate.

The question in Libya is a governance question. I want to inform this House – it is good that we have a member of the Pan African Parliament. Libya is one country that heavily financed the APRM processes on the continent, but it never acceded to the process. Why? Simply because Gaddafi had already crafted himself as the first head of the United States of Africa; thank God that one day he will not realise this. 

He positioned himself in financing dictatorships on the African continent, including our own country. Therefore, we cannot show solidarity with him. We must condemn him in the strongest terms possible because ask me today, for the last three elections, what has been the investment of the Libyan leader in Museveni’s campaign? Where does Museveni get all this money to wire this country during election time? And today, the very Ugandans are crying of inflation. The poor are suffering; those who have won have good faces here; those who have lost as a result of this unnecessary wiring of monies into communities are suffering and crying and we are calling this democracy? 

I can assure you the next revolt will start from this House and it will start from the government side. Why? It could even start from Kyanamukaka. Therefore, as a nation -

THE SPEAKER: You are invited there. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you. As a continent, we should actually be focusing on addressing governance questions and governance is premised in such a House - Parliament. When you find institutions like this being derailed by presidencies on the African continent in order to perpetuate longevity in power, it is an unfortunate development on the African continent. I am happy as a person and on behalf of the people of Arua, I am actually happy that Gadaffi will be quitting soon. Museveni should even get ready to quit. 

Now, lastly, my heart goes out to those Libyans, most especially the mothers who are losing their children in such a senseless fight, but the cost of freedom is always high and to the Libyans out there; fight on until you get your total freedom.

I have the opportunity to interact with men, including those in this House. The situation -(Interjection)- my husband is a dignified man, excuse me; and he has a reasonable height. The situation in Libya is like this - I am concluding. When a man gets married to a pretty woman and this man is not allowed to go on a honeymoon with his wife just because he must protect either a king or a demo god, it will not even take two days before he revolts and this is the situation. The Libyans had their honeymoon with Gadaffi; the honeymoon is over; it is time they settled in a marriage where they revolt until he quits and he is quitting. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t we really ending this debate? Okay, from the mountains of Mbale.

4.37
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since I am taking the Floor for the first time since we returned to this House, I want to take this chance to congratulate all those who made it back to the House. I want also, in a special way, to congratulate those who put up a spirited fight, especially those on the Opposition side and made it back to this House.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the statement on Libya, which he should have done in the first instance, but hon. Okupa reminded him to come and make a statement. It is very unfortunate that the Government side will wait on a situation that concerns Africa and that they are reminded then to come and make a statement in the House.

We should have had so many statements and the AU is waking up when it is too late to cry crocodile tears. What is going on in Ivory Coast? No statement at all and the African Union is looking on. What has happened in Somalia? The General has just informed us that our boys are dying there; and the AU is there. And some of them even came up and said they are going to commit their soldiers to go to Somalia. Did they send them there? Double standards, ladies and gentlemen!

Look at what happened in Rwanda. Habyarimana was murdering and massacring the people of Rwanda and the AU was looking on. The UN was looking on and we condemned the UN. Now Gadaffi is butchering his own people and the UN comes up to go and protect the people of Libya, and we are making noise in this House. 

We have just returned from a democratic election in this country - the one we call a democratic election - and you people are here talking. The international community is killing Libyans. Gadaffi was killing his own people; you are looking on; you did not condemn it. Look at what has happened in Darfur and you are keeping quiet. Now the international community comes up to protect the Libyans and you are condemning it. 

When Gadaffi comes to this country, he comes as a ruler. He dictates in this country. He takes over the security, he takes over the airport. You saw him last time at Munyonyo. The man has no respect for African leaders. The man walked out of a conference and sat outside simply because he gives hand outs, and you people in this House are praising the man and we are talking of freedom of expression, freedom of association and democracy.

Gen. Elly Tumwine went to fight for democracy because the elections had been “rigged”, but today I was shocked when hon. Tumwine came and was saying the western countries have attacked Libya. Those people have been pushed to the wall and that is why they came out on the streets without arms. Forty two years of one man’s rule! Instead of siding with those people of Libya by saying, “Please give them a chance of choosing their own leaders.” 

Term limits: when one is a bad leader, how do we get rid of a bad leader like Gaddafi? People can go to the elections and choose another person instead of taking up guns. The people of Libya have come to the streets. The wind of change is blowing in Africa; it is blowing in the Middle East. We are the “democratic institution” because elections were rigged here. We must support the people of Libya who have come out on the streets; we must not condemn those who have come up to fight for their rights.

The African Union have a permanent member at the United Nations and Uganda is a member of the UN. The Security Council came up and passed Resolutions 1970 and 1973, and there is nobody who vetoed because they saw that there was need for the people of Libya to be protected. So, we must support those who came up and are trying to bring sanity in Libya. 

I am even shocked that the man who comes and dictates in your country is the one you are praising. I want to find out from the Minister of Foreign Affairs whether you have already started implementing the UN Resolution. You must because the resolution says you must freeze the investments of the Libyans. Have you started doing it? You must do it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I call upon the minister, if you have anything to say? Hon. Members, we have spent over two hours.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me thank my colleagues for the enormous interest they have shown in the situation and the crisis in Libya. Let me respond to some of the issues raised.

Let me first respond to the issues raised by hon. Okupa on the Ugandans that have returned. I don’t have the names and number of the Ugandans that have returned, but I am prepared to avail them to him tomorrow. 

The former Libyan Ambassador to Uganda was never at any one time under house arrest. He was rather under protection by the Uganda Security Services to avoid anything happening to him because he personally asked for additional security. The Ambassador decided to leave Uganda out of his own choice. 

About the Ugandans working with the Libyan Embassy, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing everything that is within its means to ensure that these Ugandans are paid. And in any case the agreements are not with the former Libyan ambassador; the employment agreements are with the Libyan Government. Therefore, despite who takes over the Government of Libya, the Government of Uganda will continue to pursue the interests of the Ugandan workers and ensure that their dues are paid. That is hon. Okupa.

Responding to the issue of my sister, hon. Franca Akello on the issue of Kenya Airways, yes, we thank Kenya Airways for having assisted and flown Ugandans from Libya. I can assure you that the Ugandan Government and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was at all times on standby and prepared to evacuate Ugandans from Libya, in the same manner we were prepared to evacuate Ugandans from Egypt, Tunisia and any other country. If you read very clearly on page 10, we have a standing arrangement with the Organisation for International Migration to facilitate the return of any Ugandan from Libya and any other country if and when we wish. 

My good sister from Kitgum, hon. Beatrice Anywar, raised the issue of the statement by H.E. the President on the situation in Libya. I do commend and congratulate the President on his assertive diplomacy on the statement he made on Libya. I think he was the finesse of diplomacy in what he said and I think it was guidance to other heads of state on the way we should move within the AU and not succumb to being dictated to and being policed by foreign powers. Uganda is an independent country like many African countries and we do not accept to be dictated upon, policed and guided by foreign countries.

On the impact of the economy, there was a meeting, an inter-ministerial one this morning that was chaired by the Third Deputy Prime Minister, which involved the ministers from those sectors where Libya has investments, and I am sure that the Third Deputy Prime Minister will soon be reporting on the output of that meeting. But the intention of that meeting was to evaluate and examine the impact of the UN resolution on the Ugandan economy. And hence it dealt with issues like UTL, National Housing Corporation and Tamoil, where Libya has interests. 

On the rumours that Ugandan soldiers are in Libya, those are rumours as my sister said, and they remain rumours as far as I am concerned. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not comment on rumours but only comments on facts. 

Hon. Dombo raised the issue of a no fly-zone over Somalia; the President has on many occasions raised the matter as to why the United States and other countries have not come forward in enforcing a no-fly zone in Somalia. I had the opportunity of attending two such meetings when His Excellency the President was in the United States in the General Assembly of 2009 and last year. In the General Assembly 2010 President Museveni had a meeting with President Obama and Mrs Hilary Clinton. In both of those meetings President Museveni gave out his wish list of what he expected from the Unites States and other countries in order to assist Uganda do a good job in Somalia. Among the wish list was a no-fly zone. So, Uganda has already presented its case to the United States - directly to President Obama, Mrs Hilary Clinton and other heads of state of developed countries, wishing that there should be a no-fly zone to protect Ugandans in Somalia, to avoid foreign soldiers flying into Somalia bringing in equipment and other unnecessary facilities that can endanger the lives of Ugandan soldiers and other members of AMISON. 

The immediate Libyan assets in Uganda are: the former Lake Victoria Hotel in Entebbe; interests of about 69 percent in UTL; and about 49 percent interest in National Housing Corporation. They also have an interest in Tamoil where they have a contract to put a pipeline to Eldoret in Kenya.

The hon. Fungaroo raised the issue of re-routing flights to Europe by the various airlines. I cannot comment on this because it is the choice of each airline to identify the best possible and efficient route for them to fly. So, each airline has its own routes which it will prefer; either they will fly to east or west of Libya choosing the one that is the most economic or best for them. So, I cannot comment, but I could get that information available to him if he wishes us to pursue this further. 

Mr Speaker, that covers most of the issues raised - the issue of the sanctions: I made it very clear in my statement that there will be implications on Libyan assets and investments in Uganda. I have listed the assets and the Government of Uganda is taking immediate action to enforce the UN Security Council resolution.

MR OKUPA: You have just given us a sketchy outline. I wish you could do it like you have promised to give the list of Ugandans who have returned and those who are still there and also give us a list of the assets or investments in Uganda. We would appreciate that. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Hon. Minister, thank you for giving way. I haven’t heard you commenting about – you know when these things happen, we need to have our record very clear. It is true our plane vanished in Libya in 1979. The last time we heard about that new Boeing 737 was that it had been sprayed green by the Libyan Government. I don’t know whether it has come to your attention while balancing the accounts and assets; has it come to your attention? Are you putting our interests on board? You seem to be quiet about it and yet it is a fact that you know. Can we have a response specifically on that? 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Mr Speaker, I cannot immediately respond on the issue of the aeroplane that my brother says was taken by the Libyans. My recollection is that one of the Boeings was bombed on the tarmac of Entebbe Airport during the liberation struggle and it was insured against war which was very unusual and the insurance paid for it thereafter. 

I will definitely investigate and find out about this aeroplane that was taken by the Libyans, but there have been several governments since that plane was taken to Libya and to the best of my knowledge, Boeing 707s today, because of their nature are not allowed to fly across international borders. But I am prepared to ask the minister concerned to investigate this matter and have the facts tabled here.

I will also ask the Third Deputy Prime Minister who chaired the inter-ministerial meeting to see the impact of the sanctions on the Ugandan economy, to avail this House the list of Libyan investments in Uganda, if and when he is tabling his report -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. As you are trying to avail us with the information on the investments of Libya in Uganda, I would also in the same vein request you to look at the investments of Uganda in Libya including the business interests of our Ugandans, which they had already taken to Libya and which are most likely at stake. We shall appreciate that information. Thank you.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you my sister. I think she is right. If there are any Ugandans who have invested in Libya or have interests in Libya, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is willing and ready to pursue and ensure that their interests in Libya are protected and nothing happens to them.

On the issue of the sanctions, yes, the ministry has written to the Secretary-General of the UN seeking specific details on how Uganda is to handle issues regarding sanctions on Libyan assets because of the nature of how Libya has invested its assets in Uganda. We have 30 days and other countries have 30 days in which to ensure that these sanctions are enforced and we hope that we receive this response of the Secretary-General within the next week in order to allow us to immediately enforce the Security Council resolution. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. minister and Members for the contributions on the statements. I hope it will help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or Government to decide on how they can intervene and assist our brothers and sisters in Libya.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO US $10 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND US $11 MILLION FROM SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT (SFD) FOR FINANCING OF THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT


4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to US $10 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and US $11 million from Saudi Fund for Development for financing of the Rural Electrification Project. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the document be taken up by the appropriate committee to examine and subsequently report to the House within two weeks.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 93/1/08 OF 2009 

4.58
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I ask this question, I beg that the numbering be corrected. I have been advised that the numbering is 93/1/08 not just 93.

“(i) What criteria are in place for issuing diplomatic passports to the citizens of Uganda?
(ii) How many diplomatic passports have so far been issued to Ugandans?
(iii) Which categories of citizens qualify for official passports?”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister for Internal Affairs - But as I had indicated before, in answering these questions, ministers should be very brief because in some jurisdictions, over 30 questions are answered within 40 or so minutes.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I will be very brief. The question was asked:

i) 	What criteria are in place for issuing of diplomatic passports to the citizens of Uganda?
ii) 	How many diplomatic passports have so far been issued to Ugandans?
iii) 	Which categories of citizens qualify for official passports?

Currently, issuance of Ugandan passports is governed by the Immigration Control Act Cap. 66 and Passport Regulations 2004, which were issued in 2004 under that Act. There are, however, passports that were issued prior to the coming in force of these regulations.

Before the coming in force of the Immigration Control Act Cap. 66 and Passport Regulations 2004, the law in force was the Passport Act, 1982 and regulations made there-under. Those regulations specified categories of persons qualifying to hold diplomatic, official and ordinary passports. They also conferred discretional powers to the Minister of Internal Affairs to authorise the issuance of diplomatic passports to persons he or she considered qualified to hold diplomatic passports.

When the 1982 Act was repealed by the National Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, the current Passport Regulations, 2004 were issued. These are the laws that are currently in place.

Members will, therefore, note that we currently have passports that were issued under the old laws and those that were issued under the new law.

Diplomatic passports are issued to the following:
a) 	Government ministers and their spouses;
b)	Foreign service officers and their spouses and children below the age of 18 staying with them abroad;
c) 	The Head of the Public Service;
d) 	The Chief Justice;
e) 	Justices of the High Court and the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court;
f) 	Chancellors and vice-chancellors of state universities;
g) 	The Governor and Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda;
h)	 Recognised traditional and cultural leaders;
i) 	The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament;
j) 	Permanent Secretaries and 
k) 	Chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of permanent commissions.

Regarding the number of diplomatic passports that have been issued since October 2002, when we started issuing the new type of passports on the 18 November 2009, 1,761 diplomatic passports have so far been issued. These are the ones we expect to still be valid since they were issued with validity for 10 years. Those issued before 2002 are not valid since they were valid for five years. Therefore, they must have expired by now. 

Regarding categories of citizens who qualify to hold official passports, regulation three of part two of Passport Regulation, 2004 classifies the categories of Ugandans who qualify to hold official passports. These are, chancellors and vice-chancellors of universities, heads of government departments, Members of Parliament, Archbishop of Church of Uganda, Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Church, the Patriarch of the Orthodox Church, the Chief Kadhi of Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, members of permanent commissions and any other person as the minister may authorise. 

Mr Speaker, we live in a dynamic world where situations are constantly changing and amendments to laws and regulations are thus necessary as and when they arise. We are constantly monitoring the need for review and if necessary, amend the current passport regulations. 

I, therefore, wish to take this opportunity to call on my colleagues to speak out all their recommendations in this exercise. All these will be taken into account during the review exercise as and when it arises. 

In addition, I do not rule out the possibility of some passports having been fraudulently acquired. We are tightening the net and whenever this possibility comes to light, the matter is investigated and appropriate action is taken. Therefore, I request Members to always give us any information when it comes to their knowledge. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.04
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I have two supplementary questions. The first one is that I have a list of the National Leadership Hierarchy issued by Government. On this list, Members of Parliament are in position 17; chairpersons of constitutional boards are in position 23. But these chairpersons and their vice-chairpersons are entitled to diplomatic passports whereas Members of Parliament are not. Is it a contradiction in Government?

Secondly, in 2009, a story came up in the papers that there were more than 50,000 passports uncollected. They were paid for and prepared, but remained uncollected. Can the Minister inform the House the status of these passports? Who are these people paying for passports and not picking them up, and what happened to those passports?

5.06
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request the Minister to table the reference numbers of all the diplomatic passports that are valid. Let the minister lay them on the Table, because that will make it easy for diplomatic missions to invalidate any number that has not been displayed in this House. So, could he table the numbers of the valid diplomatic passports?

5.07
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister said that some diplomatic passports which were issued eventually expired after five years. So, were those which expired after five years withdrawn? How many were withdrawn?

THE SPEAKER: Is it necessary to withdraw them? If a passport has expired and it has not been renewed, then it is of no use, you just keep it.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, what I mean is, when these diplomatic passports expired, were they renewed as diplomatic passports or not?

THE SPEAKER: If it expires and it is renewed, then that is different, but if it expires and it is not renewed, then you just keep it among your souvenirs. 

MS ANYWAR: Secondly, this country is under a multi-party dispensation. The Minister’s list for those who qualify for diplomatic passports includes Government ministers and their spouses. But under the multi-party dispensation, we have shadow ministers who also deliberate in this House. So, why are the shadow ministers not considered?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the supplementary question should have been, “Do you have plans to issue diplomatic passports to shadow ministers”? 

5.10
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three questions. The first is: may I know how long it takes to give out a passport to an ordinary citizen? 

Secondly, which unrecognised traditional and cultural leaders have been considered to get these passports and why?

Thirdly, you said on page 3 of your report, “Any other persons as the minister may authorise”. Could you provide us with the list of these any other persons which you have authorised to get these passports and why? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: It appears we may have to change our rules on questions because as I have said, in a number of jurisdictions, questions are answered within 40 minutes or so. But with this kind of trend, definitely he may not even answer ten or five. And the answers should be straight; when you are asked, “Are you aware of this?” Just say, “I am not aware”. And then a supplementary may come up, “Do you intend to investigate?” you say, “Yes I intend to investigate”. This is how questions are answered. Anyway, let the hon. Minister answer the supplementary questions.
 
5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, can I make one apology that my list – the list which I made on page 2 does not go in accordance with the hierarchy of our national leaders? (Interjections) I am sorry about that. 

My brother Okello-Okello asked about a passport paid for but not collected. Well, first of all, if you do not collect a passport and you have paid for it; as far as I am concerned, I have got the revenue. So, the problem is not mine. I keep it for five years. If you do not appear, I destroy it because it is no longer valid. 

Hon. Ekanya, you wanted to see the list of all valid diplomatic passports -(Interjections)- well, I have no strong objection to that -(Interjections)- but I do not know why you need this. If there is any passport you are keen to know about specifically, the ministry is more than willing to give you a copy of that passport -(Interjection)- please, do. 

MR OKUPA: You raised this some time back in our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. There is this Ugandan by the names of -(Interjections)- I was just getting your attention. There is this issue of this Ugandan who is behind bars in Kenya, Michael Ezra, who has a diplomatic passport and is abusing it. That is the one we had interest in -(Interjections)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as I said, if you are interested in -(Interjections)- a particular passport – no, because this list - can I – if you look at our law, a passport is a property of Uganda, but entrusted to a Ugandan. (Interjections) The holder, yes, you read the law carefully. Therefore, unless I am ordered by court, I am not under an obligation to display this list. If I am requested to come and defend a particular passport, I will come.  

Expired passports that are not recovered because they are – I think I have answered that one -(Interjections)- passports they are not worried about -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is an intervention.

MR KASAIJA: I am sorry I did not see that. 

MRS NYOMBI NANSUBUGA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I am seeking clarification. When I cease to be a Member of Parliament, am I obliged to return it since it is for 10 years? I just renewed mine in 2011 and I lost -(Interjections)- it is 10 years to go. When do I bring back this official passport? (Interjections)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, ordinarily, we do not claim these documents from officers when they have left their offices because in my view, although the law is very silent on this - we have had a debate on this in my ministry. If one is a minister today and is not a minister tomorrow, should we withdraw that passport? The law is quiet but as a ministry, we have agreed and said, “Look, this guy still maintains a certain amount of status in life.” At one time or another, we might even deploy him. So, we normally do not withdraw -(Interjections)- until they expire.

Shadow ministers -(Interjections)- well, you remember in my statement I said if you have proposals, pass those proposals to me. (Laughter) Now that this proposal has been passed over to me, when we are reviewing the regulations, we shall look at the shadow ministers -(Interjections)

How long does it take to process a passport? It takes five days. If you bring in your application on Monday, by Friday, I should be able to give you a passport. [MR OKUPA: “Even one day. We have got it in hours.”] Well, it can be one day. It can even be a number of hours depending on the need and urgency of the matter -(Interjections)- for Shs 82,000.

How many traditional leaders have not been served with diplomatic passports? I do not have that answer right now, but any traditional leader who has been recognised is definitely issued with a passport when he places in an application. Now, I am not sure of the exact numbers who have been -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected? There are many Parliaments going on - I am ending, anyway. As I said, I am not sure about the number of recognised traditional leaders whom we have not issued with diplomatic passports so far, simply because they have not applied. Once they apply and we have them on our list of gazetted traditional leaders who have been recognised, we do the needful. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 103/1/08

5.20
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): “Can the Minister of Water and Environment explain;
a) The compliance of Uganda with the Hyogo Framework for Action?

b) Steps or measures Government has put in place in making Disaster and Risk Reduction a tool for climate change adaptation?

c) What percentage of the ministry’s budget is allocated for Disaster Risk Reduction and climate change adaptation?” 

5.20 
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. The question was presented to me. In fact, I got it yesterday so I have not been able to compare notes with my colleague, but I have given him a copy so that he can guide me all along. (Interjections)

Hon. Members may know that the Hyogo Framework for Action is a key global instrument for implementing Disaster and Risk Reduction (DRR) and has been adapted by member states of the United Nations. It is an over-reaching goal intended to build resilience of nations and communities to disasters by achieving substantial reductions of disaster losses by the year 2015 in lives and in social, economic and environmental aspects of communities and countries.

I may have to go through the preamble because I wanted you to know where I come in.


THE SPEAKER: Can you be clear. What is the question number? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: Question number one is about the Hyogo Framework of Action. Regarding the national co-ordination –

THE SPEAKER: But can you read it? How was it framed?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Pardon?

THE SPEAKER: How was it framed because I only see a question mark at the end? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: Okay, question No. 103/1/08. 

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: “Can the Minister of Water and Environment explain:

a)	The compliance of Uganda with the Hyogo Framework for action?
b)	Steps or measures Government has put in place in making Disaster and Risk Reduction a tool for climate change adaptation?
c)	What percentage of the Ministry’s budget is allocated for Disaster and Risk Reduction and climate change adaptation?”

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Hon. Members, I have started with the introduction to show that this question is mainly outside my area, but I will show you where I come in. The Hyogo Framework for Action is a global instrument accepted and adapted by the member states of the United Nations. The over-reaching goal is to build resilience of nations and communities to disasters and by achieving substantial reduction of disasters by year 2015 both in lives, socio-economic and environmental aspects of the communities and countries. 

The Hyogo Framework for Action offers five areas of priority of actions, guiding principles, and practical means for achieving disaster resilience for vulnerable communities in the context of sustainable development; and in order to achieve the five broad areas, member countries are responsible for the following:

i)	Developing a national coordination mechanism;
ii)	Conducting baseline assessments on the status of DRR; 
iii)	Updating and publishing summaries of the national programmes;
iv)	Reviewing national progress towards achieving the objectives and priorities of the framework;
v)	Working to implement relevant international legal instruments; and 
vi)	Integrating DRR with climate change strategies. 

Hon. Members, you will realise that that is where my sector comes in. 

Hon. Byarugaba is inquiring about the compliance of Uganda with the Hyogo Framework for Action. Regarding national co-ordination, the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, and representatives in the Office of the Prime Minister, served as a Government of Uganda focal point for DRR in Uganda under the framework. Therefore, I would expect my colleague, the minister responsible for the Hyogo Framework for Action matters to articulate more on these issues. 

However, progress on Uganda’s compliance to the framework includes among others a national platform for DRR hosted by the department of disaster preparedness and management. This is a multi-stakeholder national mechanism that serves as an advocate for DRR at different levels. It provides co-ordination, analysis and advice on areas of priority requiring concerted action. The platform draws membership from the government ministries, UN agencies, international NGOs and academia. The platform is guided by a national work plan in its operations, which are no longer focusing on clusters, but sector intervention. Originally, we used to call them clusters, but we are now looking at sector intervention.

There is also an effort to publicise programmes and any related information on the website. They have given on the website, as well as the national print and electronic media. 

The vulnerability and risk assessment is ongoing. It started with the Mt Elgon region which we know is very susceptible to disaster. This is supposed to generate information utilised in planning and reducing risks in specific areas in the eco-system. We are also made to understand that the ministry is currently focusing on the eminent adaptation of the National Draft Disaster Preparedness; that is the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness under the Prime Minister’s Office, and they are also preparing a management policy and thereafter, we will concentrate on its implementation. In the meantime, there are consultations on the development of DRR strategies and initiatives in Uganda such as drought risk reduction strategy development which started in May 2010. 

On the other hand, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, which is directly under the mandate of the Ministry of Water and Environment, focuses both on climate change adaptation and mitigation. Hon. Members, you will agree with me that climate change has a direct impact on the prevalence and seriousness of disasters. Higher rainfall leading to floods and mudslides, increasing drought and changing temperatures will probably make disasters more frequent in future. 

Over the last 30 years the world over, disasters have increased both in frequency and intensity. Therefore, the two instruments are closely linked; that is the United Nations Convention on Climate Change sets the goal to stabilise the Greenhouse gases emissions with the hope to solve the problem, while the Hyogo Framework for Action seems to focus mainly on prevention and preparedness. Both frameworks consider resilience and sustainable economic development as the key aspects in their guiding principles. 

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Barley Action Plan, stresses the need for disaster risk management as a critical component of climate risk management for enhanced adaptation. This explains why my ministry is working very closely with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Mr Speaker, question No. 2 required us to highlight the steps or measures that Government has put in place in making DRR a tool for climate change adaptation. Colleagues, the climate change unit is a member of the National Platform for DRR under the Office of the Prime Minister, and the DRR team is a member of the Climate Change Forum under the Ministry of Water and Environment. That shows the close collaboration that we belong to each other when it comes to planning. 

The annual work plan of the DRR platform incorporates activities for both climate change adaptation and the DRR. The current version of the draft National Disaster Preparedness and Management Policy includes a climate change chapter. A National Climate Change Policy is also under development in my ministry with terms of reference to integrate DRR. Therefore, collaborative planning between the two ministries is vital to ensure full realisation of Uganda’s obligation under the two instruments, while also addressing the national concerns. 

In conclusion, my ministry has taken complementary steps towards making the DRR a tool for climate change adaptation. The steps taken include an inter-institutional climate change technical committee in place, which involves members of the DRR platform. Climate change fora are convened periodically with similar objectives to the DRR platform.  

A national climate change policy development process has commenced and should be sensitive to the DRR platform. The National Adaptation Plan of Action – the NAPA - has several interventions geared at reducing disaster risks. If I may mention a few here, we have rain water harvesting, which is meant to avoid water stress during the dry period. We have also incorporated early warnings which are shared information between ourselves and the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Agriculture. We have bulk water transfer, which is meant to transfer water from areas of plenty to areas of scarcity; we are also intensifying our efforts in water for production. 

Tree planting is one major step in adaptation and mitigation and we also have a software component of sensitisation and involvement of stakeholders. 

In the third question, he asked what percentage of the ministry’s budget has been allocated for DRR and climate change adaptation. Colleagues, it is important to know that coordination of the implementation of DRR Framework under the Hyogo Framework for Action is the mandate of the Office of the Prime Minister. Likewise, co-ordination of the implementation of climate change adaptation under the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change falls under the Ministry of Water and Environment. However, implementation of related aspects of DRR and CCA within the various sectors should be provided for in the sector budget. What my ministry is focused on now is collaboration with the National Planning Authority in developing mainstream guidelines for climate change proofing at central and local government levels. 

In the meantime, my ministry has focused on water for production as a key adaptation intervention. Out of the Shs 254 billion in the current sector budget, Shs 21 billion is for water for production alone. In the coming financial year, allocation to the climate change unit budget has been stepped up in our budget framework papers from Shs 220 million in the current budget to Shs 1.1 billion in the next financial year. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, that is all I can say or I can offer, but I want to request my colleague to visit the website for more information. I thank you.

5.34
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my sister for this input. I would like to draw the attention of the minister and the House - in reference to her statement - at the moment, the Ministry of Water and Environment has no national climate change policy in place to guide us on the questions my colleague is answering. Therefore, I would like to know, rather than saying it is being developed, how long will it take for this policy to be effected, so that it guides us as a country in implementing the adaptation effort for climate change?

Two, my assessment is that most of these efforts which the minister is projecting are efforts which are in the boardrooms; that is, the committee meeting and trips to see how other countries are doing. We would like to have specific interventions or activities that apply to our own country where you have gone ahead and made it work after the boardroom and the trips abroad.

I also want to draw her attention to her report here on the one effort, which was highlighted, on the money projected, Shs 254 billion, of which Shs 21 billion is for water for production; this is particularly targeting big farmers - commercial. We would like to know - this country is an agricultural country whereby most of the Ugandans are small-scale farmers. What are you doing to address the water scarcity that smallholder farmers who rely heavily on farming experience, and in the whole country? We would like those ones to be forthcoming rather than the water harvesting at headquarters and schools. How far have you gone up to the household or the small farmers? We want those ones also to come out very prominently.

THE SPEAKER: You see we are supposed to ask supplementary questions arising from the answers given, but as I see, I think arising from the answers she has given, the appropriate committee may have to sit and examine and make a more thorough interview with the minister rather than - these were not supplementary questions. They were bigger questions than supplementary. But I do not know what the minister wants to say.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I would like to thank my shadow minister for asking. She always has the opportunity to come and put those questions to me in the office. However, how long will it take to have the policy on climate change in place? I want to assure this House that we are quite advanced in the preparation of the climate change policy. A number of workshops have been held at national, regional and even sub-county levels. 

So, we are actually consulting more or less everybody at different levels so that we can have an input. I believe that by mid next financial year, we will be having the policy -(Interjections)- it cannot be done this financial year because we are left with only two months. So, I hope by mid next financial year, we will have a climate change policy in place. And I want to assure Ugandans that this is a new concept, a new understanding. We really need to get everybody to understand it.

Another question is, “Where have you put action?” Next financial year starts in July, so we are not very far. We have started on the adaptation action plan and this adaptation action plan was launched in 2005. So, we have started on tree planting, rain water harvesting, the water for production and on the sensitisation. All these are in place and ongoing. I think we have already started on that. 

And then the last question is, “What do you have for small farmers because the Shs 225 billion seems to be for the big farmers?” No; most of this money is actually going to the water-stressed areas like Karamoja where people are not big farmers but they need water. So, that is one initiative for small farmers. 

But on the other hand, we are also looking at rain water harvesting where we are going to provide people with appropriate technologies for rain water harvesting like dams and other water tanks so that people can harvest water at their households and their farms in order to improve on the availability of water and on food security as an adaptation and mitigation measure. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the answers. As I have advised, the appropriate committee has to undertake a study and then get clear on - 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This one also may help us to get it clear. Last time, Mr Speaker, through you, we had requested the minister to bring a statement on climate change to help the Members appreciate the difficulties and the efforts the ministry is making in mitigation and adopting measures towards climate change. But since then, the House has not received that report from the minister. 

I would like to re-echo that the minister comes back here with a full statement about the climate change policy to let the Members appreciate the difficulties and maybe efforts she is putting in.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, noted. Well, thank you very much hon. Minister and hon. Members for what you have been able to do this afternoon. A lot of time was spent on Libya, but anyway, it was important because what is happening there definitely affects us. But I think we cannot proceed to another major item now. We have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. to continue with business.    

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 March 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

