

Tuesday, 30th March, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).


(The Council was called to order).


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali):  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, Ladies and Gentlemen.  There have been several newspaper features and editorials that have expressed disquiet about the on-going implementation of the decentralisation policy before a statute is passed by the NRC providing the legal framework for the implementation process.  A number of you, hon. Members, have spoken to me complaining that we have started implementing the decentralisation policy without keeping the NRC informed.  A few members have even written open letters either to the President or to me posing the same question namely, whether we intend to implement the decentralisation programme before a relevant statute is enacted by the NRC or whether we want to delay the implementation of the programme until relevant laws have been enacted.

I would like to take this opportunity first to offer explanation to the House and set the record right; second, to allay Members’ fears; and third to request their understanding and continued support.

Allow me to start by giving a historical perspective.  The Decentralisation policy was first conceived by the NRM during the people’s protracted war.  It was at that time that decentralisation was recognised to be a necessary condition for democratisation.  It thus became a cardinal point in the NRM Ten Point Programme.  For that reason it features under point number 1 - Establishment of Popular Democracy.  This point has three main ingredients: Parliamentary Democracy, Popular Democracy and a decent level of living for every Ugandan.  Right from the start, NRM did not regard decentralisation as simply a policy goal meant to shift responsibility for development to local authorities but as a policy instrument aimed at improving local democracy, accountability, efficiency, equity, effectiveness and sustainability in the provision of social services countrywide. This created an imperative for Government, to proceed resolutely but cautiously with the development and refinement of the policy in such a manner as would not only transfer power and resources to the local level but also strengthen local authorities’ management and technical capacity focusing on the district level in the initial stages.  So, by the time NRM took power, the achievement of popular democracy through decentralisation was a key policy objective which the broad based Government has since pursued and which hon. Members have strongly supported.

The practical implementation of the Decentralisation Policy started in 1986 when Government introduced the Resistance Councils and Committees that were granted wide-ranging powers.  All Members are familiar with these powers. Hon. Members gave vital support to the decentralisation policy on two occasions of critical importance.  First when they passed Statute 9 of 1987, the Resistance Councils and Committees Statute (The RC Statute) that legalised the structures created in 1986 and extensively amended the 1967 Local Administrations Act.  Second, when they passed Statute 6 of 1989 which granted the RC III level (Sub-county level), the legal status of a body corporate and assigned it some powers of a local Government nature, thereby setting the stage for the probable establishment of a local government at that level.  The current measures which His Excellency the President announced on the 2nd October 1993, did not depart from the principles and logic which underpin the RC Statute that is, local democracy, citizen participation and sustainable development.  They were meant to refine and strengthen democratic decentralisation by introducing changes in institutions, practices and procedures which would facilitate the flourishing of local democracy, local institutional/capacity building and the emergence of local development that is equitable and sustainable.

It is incorrect to say that hon. Members have neither been consulted about not kept informed of the new measures aimed at strengthening decentralisation and local democracy.  The President’s statement took into account the views received during a long process of consultation that included among others, hon. Members of the NRC.  It should be recalled that in July 1990 I briefed the NRC on the policy proposal to strengthen democratic decentralisation.  On the 31st October 1991, I distributed to all Members of the NRC copies of the draft summary recommendations to strengthen democratic decentralisation for their information and comment.  Many of the Members made useful comments on the recommendations.  In my Annual Budget Policy Statement to the House for they 1992/93 which I presented in August 1992, I gave a detailed statement to the NRC Sectoral Committee on Local Government.

They subjected the decentralisation policy and its implementation strategy to scrutiny.  In a nutshell, the implementation strategy was two pronged, first that all matters that are administrative in nature or are covered by statute 9 of 1987 and statute 6 of 1989 should be implemented while those that require a new legal basis should go pending until the NRC passes the Bill (see Appendix 1 for the two categories).  Second, that financial decentralisation, meaning creation of district votes in the national budget, be phased, starting with 13 districts.  The Sectoral Committee was satisfied with the policy framework and the modalities for implementation that had been drawn.

As a direct consequence of that interaction, they were supportive of the Ministry’s request for budgetary provisions for both recurrent and development expenditure for the Decentralisation Secretariat.  The Sectoral Committee reported this to the House that adopted the report.  On the basis of this support the Decentralisation Secretariat secured an appropriation from the consolidated fund of Shs. 25 million for some recurrent costs for the Financial Year 1992/93.  DANIDA also approved a grant of US$ 430.000 both for capital and some operating costs.  This enabled the Secretariat to start work in January this year.  Currently the Secretariat is a department in my Ministry.

All along, we have been conscious of our responsibility and obligation to present a draft Bill to the House to provide for the changes in the institutions and structures of local Government.  Indeed, the Ministry of Justice in conjunction with my Ministry have been preparing a draft Bill, a Bill for a Statute entitled: ‘The Local Government Statute 1993’, intended to modify the existing laws relating to Local Government, to increase local democratic control and participation in decision making, and to mobilise support for development which is relevant to local needs.  The draft bill has been delayed because we had wanted to gauge the extent to which it is in consonance with the report and recommendations of the Draft Constitution.  We have had time to study the Draft Constitution.  We are satisfied that the draft Bill is in broad agreement with the thrust and guiding logic of the Draft Constitution which is to create a continuing process of decentralisation whereby functions, powers and responsibilities are transferred from the central Government to the Local Government, and from the higher to the lower Local Government Units in order that government decisions are taken as close as possible to all those involved.

Although the Draft Constitution is very much a Draft, which will be subjected to the exacting debates of the Constituent Assembly, I am satisfied that we have a common basis for presenting the Draft Bill to the hon. Members for debate and enactment.  I am confident that the Bill will be presented to the House before end of June 1993.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I have attached herewith the first implementation report covering the period 2 October 1992 - 15 February 1993, for the information of Members.  It bears testimony to the fact that our efforts are currently concentrated on:

(i)	Developing capacity of the executive and political leadership at the district level;
(ii)	Elaborating the concepts and procedures that will facilitate orderly implementation.
 
I would like to end this statement by thanking Members for the support they have given to my Ministry’s programmes in general and to the decentralisation policy process in particular.  I would like to reassure the House that every effort will be made to involve all Members in the implementation process of the decentralisation policy and that no actions will be taken that require a new goal basis until this House passes the draft Local Governments Bill.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  I seek clarification based on the statement of the Minister contained on page 4 about the last part of the second paragraph that says, we have had time to study the Draft Constitution.  We are satisfied that the draft bill is in broad agreement with the thrust and guiding logic of the Draft Constitution which is to create continuing process and so forth and so forth.  Then on the last paragraph he says, ‘I am satisfied that we have a common basis for presenting the Draft Bill to the hon. Members for debate and enactment’.  

The Minister I think is aware that there is a body of opinion in the country that favours the Federal system of Government, and in that case, the presentation of this Bill note the end of the discussion of the Constitution on the Constitution Draft.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I do not think there is any attempt to pre-empty what the hon. Member is referring to.  I do believe that the process of Government is a continuous process and as I have mentioned this is a process that started way back in 1986, it is not something that has come up right now.  I do feel that it would be proper when the Bill comes to this House so that the answer to the question posed by the hon. Member is providing by all of us hon. Members of this House rather than myself taking a decision in my own kitchen to present a process that all of us have been parted to on the ground that I suspect that there might be some elements of pre-emptying.  Again, when we bring the Bill, we discuss it, then there all of us can discuss the issue of whether we are trying to pre-empt any aspect of the Constitution making process.  Thank you.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1993

(Debate Continued).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWERO AFFAIRS (Mr. Kisamba Mugerwa):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, after a long time, I was almost giving up.  I will be very brief and dwell on two points and quite a number of points have been raised on it.  Because I find a political Bill very important and that is why it is taken all this long time.  One is the objective of this Bill.  As it reads in memorandum, it is fit to establish a Constituent assembly for the purpose of enacting a new Constitution of Republic of Uganda.  It is only on that basis that I support this Bill.  As a politicians who has been a representative of the people quite some time, and it is through voting, I remember when we were elected in 1989, in just a short time I had to go back to the people of Bamunanika and Luwero in general because I happen to be the National Executive Committee Member representing Luwero District to explain why we were extending five years for this House and the NRM.  The reasons given then, they were basically on the pillars of the Government, the police, that then we had 3,000 policemen and now we have about over 17,000 policemen.  I supported to extend for five years I can still talk to them with my neck up that actually something has been done to fulfill it.  The second was about making a professional army; the recent exercise of demobilisation has been in this direction.  All of us believe that it is not only the number of the army that matters but also the hardware that they use even if you have a few men.  

When I became Minister in charge of Luwero Triangle, my office was full of people who came to say please, most of our children who went to the bush did not go for the purpose of becoming army men, they went for a struggle which we think is over some of them were in higher classes, in Ndeje Senior Secondary School, and others we would wish them to continue their secondly education.  I had to say please, because there are still wars here and there, the police is even very small in the North, the army is still doing the work of the police, it may be difficult to get these people out of the army if I talk about it.  They were even worth still that those who deserted the army were illiterately forced and even charged militarily.  That put to the annoyance of the people in Luwero Triangle.  But the recent exercise in attempt to say, okay, those who could leave the army, could leave the army is another point with which I can go back to these people and tell them now look, the exercise is on, anybody who wishes to leave the army can voluntarily do so.  I am saying this that a politician who has my strength on the populace of the people I have - still have something to explain and support.  

The other issue was mainly on the civil service that I think was one of the reasons that you gave the extension plus the Judiciary and the Constitution.  Some attempt in all these fears have been done, now how can I go back to tell the people of Bamunanika in particular that in case the Constitution now has been made and I have to remain if there is any voice to the extent that we there is a need for another body to discuss the Constitution.  During the Constitutional process, I happened to accompany the Constitution Commission in my constituency and indeed in Luwero District and then in my capacity as a Member of NEC.  There were mainly two issues which were raised by the people, one, how can we ensure that all the good work which will have been put in by this Constitution Commission will not be turned so soon by the army which has been doing it?  Then we said, of course, the army would have to discuss these issues and understand that this is a people’s Constitution.  On that basis, I will take it.

MR. F. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you for giving me a way. I would like to inform the hon. Minister of State in charge of Luwero Triangle, that when he was listing the reasons why NRA extend itself, you omitted one, he did not exhaust the whole list.  One them was the Constitutional making exercise, now I do not know whether it was by design to forget it or it was just a slip of the tongue but if it was a slip of a tongue, I am happy to remind you. (Laughter)

MRS. R. KALEMA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, for me I would like to inform the hon. Member who has just given information to the hon. Minister of State for Luwero Triangle, and I would like to make this quite clear which I think a lot of Members here have misunderstood the programme of extension, it is true that we extended the period to satisfy quite a number of programmes.  The army of course has been mentioned, the Police, the Judiciary, will be in social and rehabilitate the social services and making Constitution but nowhere does it say that, this House itself was going to involve physically itself in stabilising the Police or stabilising the Army or this House itself involving itself in the social services and the rest of it.  So, we were - the extension was to be carried on so that by the end of four, five years, all these programmes will have been satisfied for that very reason, I think clarification is necessary.  So, I think it is really necessary for us to be quite clear that in as - just as this House was not going themselves to involve in satisfying and in stabilising all these other faculties and programmes in the same way, we were not going to do the Constitution.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Butagira for the information given, I thought I was boring the House by going through all the points we gave because this was not a secret I remember after discussing it in National Executive Committee, the same reasons were - there was a closed House, so when I mentioned Police for which I have realistic that police has grown strength from 3,000 to over 17,000 and army which is naturally a particular concern to the people of Luwero Triangle that there - because the majority of these boys came from Luwero areas and the people were concerned then I did not bother to narrate each point but I had mentioned that beside that there was judiciary, civil service and Constitution process and in fact there was economy though with economy I may not have much but still if you want - for the satisfying hon. Butagira, I could narrate that I can still go back and with my neck up right and defend my position at that material time that something had been done.  

Regarding the civil service, the retrenchment exercise has taken place to reduce the number of civil service, ministries have been merged and what is left is to see that these people are eliminated and become efficient, they give more out put.  Regarding the economy, it is now a general discussion in the Papers that is growing strength to strength that the Uganda Shilling is strong, well, the thing is, I have been telling people in Luwero Triangle in fact, in using a very simple example, that look, it may rain, if it rains, somebody who has a house with some gutters and with a tank, even it that rain is evenly distributed in certain area, would collect say, a drum and another one would just collect just say a jerrican, but if you left your house without tapping that water in any form or using the Kiganda way of having a pot and put on a banana fibre sort, you would end up by not even getting a small tumpeco sort of cup.  But still you would not deny that it has not rained, it would have rained.  

So, you can go on saying that -(Applause)- the economy is growing strong and strong, we could announce the GDP has risen from four to whatever will be announced in the next Budget, but in your pockets, since you will not be all that good.  It will not for fail to say that the economy is not growing strong.  It will depend on how you have tapped.  So, I think I can also defend this issue that it depends on how you tap, I have seen my friend Wanendeya, has come up with another proposal of how we should tap and come up with a project, industrial one.  I congratulate upon him there. (Laughter)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Minister of State in Charge of Luwero to the effect that is somebody is in a strategic position, he taps more than those who are -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know why Members are laughing at me, but what I am saying is that if you are a Permanent Secretary in charge of Luwero maybe you tap more than Wanendeya. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I will take the information but, you use the word ‘strategic’ it is a matter of making a strategy as is the word proposing not because we are Members of NRC, but because we are citizens who could, who know each other that we could work together.  If you make that strategy and it becomes successful, then we shall have put ourselves in a strategic position.  Similarly, I do not like you to take that information on the face value of it.  I have had opportunity to tour at least, some farmers, I can assure you there are some small farmers who have really turned out to be farmers, full scale farmers that they work throughout in their farms and really you wonder why you are wasting time in certain offices.  With just about 10 acres, somebody may be doing very well as long as they have placed themselves in strategic position of planting, growing and devoted on what he is doing.  I have a very good example of a certain man called Sserwada in Busunju, he is doing very well and he is better than some Permanent Secretaries, my friend Wanendeya is talking of.  

But anyway, the issue was that with all these points we gave to why we extended this House, if I could end up with the Constitution process.  It turned out that when I was accompanying - in fact that is what I was developing when hon. Butagira rose to give me the information, that I was saying that when I accompanied the Constitution Commissioner in my constituency,, and in some parts of Luwero District, I gathered that they were raising mainly two issues, one, they were worried whether these good ideas that the good work which the Constitution Commission would have done could not be thrown by the army, after that Constitution what will be done?  In fact, the Constitution Commission Members were asking them, what are you proposing?  Some of them were saying, we could write in the Constitution that the army will never overthrow the Government.  But that is of course all you know, so those were discussing the sued should the army really participate in the discussion of the Constitution process?  Now what I have been telling them now look, it is important the army participates in the Constitution process and they realise that this is a Constitution of the people, the voice of the people so that in future they are also part of the constitution which will have been passed.

Another area was worrying people who were going to discuss this Constitution.  You see, it may be in some areas some Members have been active and in other areas they have not been active.  In some areas at that material time, some Members of NRC have never bothered even to go back to their Constituencies.  You should remember that this thing came up about almost a year ago, secondly, if we are - there are some circles that there is any doubt about who should discuss this Constitution, I think it is important for us to put ourselves to the electorate to prove that if there is any doubt about me, okay, I am in for you, let us get this Vote and if I am a good person, representative, I would definitely be returned, the good thing is that this House - the Members in this House all will be free to stand.  So, if you are dressed however smartly, you will be dressed or not shabbily normally it is smartly, however smartly you may be dressed, you cannot be sure until you have gone before a mirror to see really whether your neck tie or your dress is properly done, for we politicians the mirror is the voter in case of any doubt, you have to present yourself to the voter, he is the one to see, whether really you have been performing to his expectation or not.  Now, if we are in circumstances where there is need for another body and yet we are not so eliminated, what is left is for us to face the music of the vote and try to convince that you have been performing well and I will continue to do a good job.  In fact, I understand according to this Bill, we are going to be delegates, which means you will be spokesman of those people to present their views.  It is on those grounds, - I feel that I cannot subscribe to those who advance that we retrench ourselves here and without going back when there is this element that there should be another Constituency Assembly to discuss the Constitution.  I will find it very difficult to tell the people whom I happen to represent, why we have to continue.  Because, we continued the other time, it was circumstantial; in fact they were accusing us that we did not even consult them enough.  

Now circumstances have risen that we do not need to continue to discuss the Constitution.  Why do we not go with our circumstances, as it was circumstantial the other time?  Afterwards the expansion of five years is still on, but this element.  And most of all is consensus.  During the war, I have come to learn from those who were physically there, they had respect for religious leaders of all generations including pagans so that the war can be won -(Interruption)- the idea was, even if one was says that if you slaughter this cow, I mean this sheep, the war will go well, even if you do not believe it at that material time, you accept to slaughter it in order to carry him with you so that actually you have his support.  Now, we are trying to carry everybody that the Constitution that will be made is really a people’s Constitution.  If there is any sector, however small it may be, doubting this House, it is important you carry it with us by proving to them that we need a - we can face the - we have shown it open even those who are outside, in fact, I support the amendment proposed by the Minister of Constitutional Affairs that there ordinary residents should be eliminated, because some of our old tractors are outside.  And they may not be necessarily ordinarily resident in these areas, let us challenge them and give them sufficient time to come back and really stand so that they are part and parcel of the document which will be - if we refuse them, we shall be selfish because if you have had all this time to be in your constituency, and now somebody is in London, he is only having three months to come and you still fear him, then one wonders why you do not like him to come.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to go on the second point. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up, try to wind up please.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I said, Mr. Chairman, that I had only two points.  One, on support this Bill on the Constituent Assembly and secondly Referendum.  On referendum, I have found that now there are two camps; one, saying that we should have a referendum now and the other saying we should have a referendum after five years which is the Constituency Assembly, I mean Constitution Commission subscribes.  Regarding having a referendum now, there are two camps.  Those who are partisan support to have a referendum now -(Interjection)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I do not feel ashamed to declare that I am a partisan and I would like to point it out that those of us who are partisans do not necessarily support the position of having a referendum now, in fact, some of us do not support a referendum at all. (Applause)

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  That is very good then, but that will not destruct me from developing my - that may be a fraction okay, that will not prevent me from developing my point.  Mr. Chairman, the issue is that there are some people, I think I should be careful on this, there are some people who are partisan who are supporting to have a referendum now, there are some people who are non-partisan, who are also supporting to have a referendum now.  My worry is, we are trying to pluralise the mass, the people, the electorate, because those who are supporting parties and want referendum now, they say, okay, ‘kamambaya mbyaya’.  Let us - we are going to win and those who are non-partisan, they are saying okay, let us silence them, those who support parties.  

My humble submission is that I do not subscribe to both philosophies; both schools of thought of silencing or winning it for all.  I think it is important that we develop a culture of forgetting this politics of whomever wins takes it all.  We should really go this Constituent Assembly without pluralising the population so that a person is elected according to his make as the people in his area judge him and comes and discuss in a National - with a National out look, the issues.  Because if now, suppose we handle a referendum now and those who do not support the parties happen to win, are we prepared to loose?  Those who supported the parties in this Constitution process and spoil it at this 11th hour?  Suppose the other side of those who support the parties win, are we prepared to lose that sector of the people?  Let us be patient and carry on and we do not pre-empt the Constitution making after all, what makes this issue contentious according to this Bill is a - during the Constituent Assembly an issue raised not two thirds, it will be regarded as contentious.  

Now, what judgement makes one of these issues contentious?  The Constitution has about 314 Articles, now you are picking one to think it is contentious and you have no even scientific measures whereas this Bill proposes a scientific way of going about it that when you are in the Constituent Assembly and you vote and that one does not carry two thirds, then it is contentious.  What makes it contentious?  Because you believe in parties or you do not believe in parties?  I think we are spoiling the process.  For me, I am prepared and Mr. Chairman, you will realise that all my contributions I have not said that the people of Bamunanika are saying as it has been the trend in this House because, I have been to my constituency more often on these issues and, in consultation there is a diversity of it.  Some just look for their things, others want parties, others do not like to hear of even any word about parties.  What I have been doing as a leader is to convince all the people I happen to represent that look, it is better we go together, we discuss and sort out national issues together and that is why I am telling them that don’t think I support the view but original issues, issues which caters for a certain sector should be discussed at that level.  Otherwise I give them proper guidance that I hope can take us through this slippery ground under which we are now treading.  I would like to appeal -(Interjection)

I am winding up by appealing to my fellow Members of NRC that this excitement that has come of late, I was in it in 1980 to 1985. We could see how things are and you take a stand no matter how logically; you see the point and you take that stand, it is not good for this country.  Let us be flexible, listen to others and also subscribe, you can even come with ideas but when you hear that what has been subscribed by others are better, please be bold enough to go back to your respective area and explain to the people.  People need leadership, they are in total confusion, and we should not confuse them more.  We should not confuse them any more, let us give them leadership because here we have opportunity.  

I was going to end up but because of that murmuring, I better clear one issue.  There is a person who is born in Bamunanika, who had his education in Bamunanika, who is working in Bamunanika, who is married from Bamunanika and who only visit Kampala once.  He has not had opportunity to mix with all different people from this country.  I have had opportunity to mix with people from Kisoro, people from Moyo.  I know Kotido, I know Kapchorwa, I know Arua, I know every part of this country and with this interaction, there are some people who will think that a person from such a tribe is cruel, it is not the issue.  You will believe it, it depends with whom you are dealing with, and there is no blanket cover.  So, I think we are more placed to give guidance to the people we represent.  I support the Bill.

MR. WAGWAWABI GWAIVU (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Thank you very much, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill before us.  It is at the same time an opportunity speaking after some one who has made his point very clear at the start and confusing at the end. (Laughter)  I stand here to support the Bill and people of Kagoma support the Bill.  But, the people of Kagoma would require the Minister for Constitutional Affairs to make a few clarifications.  First all, there is this question of funds.  We may think that it is a simple issue but it is an issue that needs serious consideration.  The people are asking Uganda being what we are and, of course, we know ourselves and we should know ourselves even better, we do not even need to wait for some one to remind us, do we have funds to run two General Elections in two consecutive years?  Or positively we shall again go back to the people and tell them you know, fellow Ugandans, the exercise for the Constituent Assembly took so much money and as it did because of this and now it cannot be and, therefore the elections will not be there.  This sounds very funny on the surface of it but it is a serious issue people are discussing and people need an assurance on this issue whether we are in a position to do this.  That is why even they have gone to the extent of saying; do we really know our priorities as Ugandans?  Do we?  And if we do, then I think we need to re-assure them that we do.    

Another clarification, is under Clause 6 sub-Section (2), NRC Members and Public Officers are being allowed to stand for the Constituent Assembly and the Constituent work will be full time for a minimum of four months and a maximum of seven months.  Supposing Permanent Secretaries and higher officers in the Government machinery come to a standstill?  Will it move -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Okay. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, these are assurances and clarifications that the general publics is asking because they are really very tricky issues and we do not want to be taken for a ride or taken unaware of these issues.

After discussing that, when we look at the Schedule, the people of Kagoma are saying that this is a very important role, the Constituent Assembly is going to play and the work of scrutinising the Constitution, promulgating it, is a very important responsibility that is should be seen to be very democratic and very fair and that there should not be any undue influence from whoever is there.  So, they are saying this issue of having as it is provided for the Bill, a Constituent Assembly of two hundred and thirty seven members and a quarter of these are nominated members, it does not sound very logical.  So they are saying, let the members there be elected members, no special groups because the special groups will have the opportunity, after all they have already had the opportunity to contribute in form of constitutional memos to the Constitutional Commission and their views have been incorporated in the Draft Constitution and they will have an opportunity to speak through their representatives of what they want emphasised. They do not think that certainly that one is certainly a very important thing.  Then also they emphasise that because this exercise should be seen to be very democratic with no undue influence from any quarter, the delegates that will have been elected are intelligent enough to elect their own chairman and deputy chairman for purposes of transacting business.

My next point, is on the issue of Clause 17 of the Bill.  Clause 17 of the Bill is talking of decisions will be by consensus.  I intend to move an Amendment at the right time when we are in Committee Stage on this very issue.  We have seen through experience that this issue of ‘those in favour say Aye to the contrary No’ and ‘Ayes’ have it or the ‘Nos’ will have it, is certainly very tricky and a difficult assignment.  With due respect to you, Mr. Chairman, -(Laughter)- with respect to you, a constitution making process is certainly a very serious process and if we have to be very serious and give the exercise that seriousness it deserves at that time, I want to make the Amendment and I am requesting Members to support me on that decision -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Dr. Magezi.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the floor that for some of us our Members are saying, we would like to know how our delegates have voted on some particular issues.  It is therefore important that there should be a record to show since these people are delegates, how have they voted and this can only be meaningfully done if people are ready to register their ‘Yes’ or their ‘No’ besides, the election which is most favoured in this country is by people lining up.  So they do not foresee any big controversy that will emanate from people being able to stand up and be counted for record purposes.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information which has gone a long way to strengthen my point and, Mr. Chairman, there is just one simple illustration in support of this point of voting by either when people standing up to be counted or putting up their hands.  We are talking of issues here to be contentious and we are saying if an issue does not come to two thirds, then I am asking, in this issue of saying ‘those in favour say Aye to the contrary No’, and people shout, how will you count the two thirds?  How will you know it?  So, Mr. Chairman, by simple illustration, therefore, there should be physical counting.  Let people’s hands or heads be counted to know that it is either a half or a two thirds or a quarter -(Interruption)

 MR. A.K. MAYANJA:  Information.  Mr. Chairman, according to the provisions of the Schedule on the Rules of the Bill there shall be counting, and people will go into the lobbies.  They will go into the lobbies and they will be counted and recorded in the Hansard that so and so voted for this because otherwise you cannot determine a half, a two thirds and, according to the Bill, if a proposal does not receive less than half, it is lost.  If it receives two thirds, it goes through.  If it receives between half but not two thirds, it is contentious and this presupposes that there shall be division and counting of the members.  So, the Member should rest assured on that score.  

MR. BARIGYE:  Information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the most exact way of determining how people voted without wasting undue time in lining up would be to computerise the voting system. (Laughter)  I am saying this with all seriousness and I assure you that I have no intention to tender for that should it be decided on.  However, this is a system which is followed in the United Nations and in many international foras and all, one would have to do in that situation is to press a button and there would be a computerised notice board where automatically it would indicate whether you voted yes or no.  I do not think such a system would take a lot of money or a lot of time to organise and if the government decides on it, I am sure they could even find some donor to help us to institute this.  And I think, if this was instituted it would serve the country well because there would be no controversy at all as to how any one has voted.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the hon. Member who has just given the information but I am also aware about out technological limitations.  So, when he talks of -(Interruption)- Okay, the issue earlier on, the information I had earlier on received from the hon. Attorney General is correct as per the Article I am referring to, but this real counting in the lobbies is after a controversy on the ruling and that is when that simple counting will be there.  We have seen at one time here, I do not need to remind you, one time here there were some quite controversy and the Chairman even decided okay, stand up if you feel there is a controversy, and I did not see anybody standing up.  So, there are issues, -(Laughter)- these are issues we really want to iron out so that we do not leave any loopholes. The Chairman manoeuvred us, and we were manipulated here and there.  Let the system be very clear and sincere so that if a decision has been made there are no questions or manipulations claimed.

MR. KANYOMOOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, just to help the hon. Member and the House, if you look at Section 17 of the Bill, Article 17 of the Bill:

(i) Every decision of the Assembly shall as far as possible be consensus.  And then it provides further that,

(ii) Where on any matter consensus cannot be obtained, I do not know when, how you will judge when the matter cannot obtain consensus.  It becomes a bit of a problem; I can see the problem the hon. Member is having. 

I think it is better if we actually voted on these issues as we proceed because anything consensus can be disputed and since we are making a document which will be a supreme law of this country, it is better that decisions are taken, they are noted, they are registered and they are known.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for that information.  My next point is the referendum. Someone has called it excitement, some may call it panic, name it, and this issue of a referendum I think we have to be very serious.  Someone said there are three camps, the first camp that he is not aware of, there is a camp that says, there should be no referendum on people’s human basic rights.  I think he should be aware that that third group is also there, but, okay, supposing there was to be a referendum, a referendum would require that people are deciding on an issue.  Now, let us take that now the people will be the judges, is it fair for a judge to give his judgement on an issue before listening to both sides?  Because now you know very well that the parties or the multi-party advocates have been silenced.  Someone can claim the administrators like the Citizen and the People being published but we know the leadership in Uganda, how many people are reading The People, how many people are reading the Citizen to know what is really going on?  People have been silenced for a long time and if anything, what they are now hearing is that multi-parties are responsible for the evils we have gone through in Uganda.  And this kind of statement has gone right down to the RC I, the grassroots -(Interjection)

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the other party - both parties have given evidence. The multiparties were on the platform for many years and the people were watching, and the movement has also been on the stage for only seven years and now we are asking the people; judges please give the judgement. (Laughter)

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information he has given though I do not know whether it has been useful. (Laughter)  But I just want to remind the hon. Member that the multiparty advocates, eh have had a very unfortunate experience all through, that the listening, that the time they have had to say what they think is good for multiparties has not been there.  I mean you are aware very well that most of our voters today are the people who were born after 66.  Most of our voters - we know the census, the population census, we know the age brackets of the people we have in Uganda and most of our voters are people born after 66 and the experience of these ladies and gentlemen born after 66, is of course, very negative, because of the experiences we have gone through.  Mr. Chairman, allow me to finish. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  So, I would wish to suggest that if there has to be a referendum, that of course will be very unfair, but if it has to be there, let the two parties be listened to.  Let the multiparty advocates put their case to the people and let the non-partisan also put their case to the people then, at that time people can be asked which is your judgement?  And that will be fair.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up, wind up please.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  I want to wind up with these following points.  I had earlier on started by saying that people are demanding for clarification.  Possibly it is at this time, that I contribute by saying that I think to re-assure the Ugandans of what is really lying ahead of us, it is high time Government comes out with a political programme to re-assure people of what is remaining ahead of us, because I feel, Mr. Chairman, that it is not just enough to say we are having elections in 1994; in which month, which what, and what will follow?  I think there needs to be a political programme.

Then lastly, it is this idea of having every district represented by a woman representative; it is very, very popular.  It is very popular and I support it.  But then, there is a question that is coming.  We are saying if an electoral college elects people, their popularity is questionable and their mandate is questionable.  How are we going to elect these 39 women?  Are we not going to use an electoral college?  Then if we are saying the electoral college method does not give us people with mandate, then what are we saying now?  How are we going to elect the 39 women?  Mr. Chairman, with that one, I thank you very much indeed.

MR. MUKIIBI (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here also to support the Bill and in so doing, I would like to pose three pertinent questions.  First, what is the background to this debate?  What do the people of Uganda want?  What is the political environment obtaining in Uganda now?  The people of Uganda have traveled a long way.  They have gone through despotic rules.  They have gone through colonial era, with all its oppressive nature and rules.  They have gone through the dirty politics of intrigues, skimming and trading in people’s interests for personal and selfish gains.  They have gone through reign of terror, under Amin.  They have witnessed the unprecedented stealing of votes in day light in 1980s election and under multipartyism.  They have seen the massacres and fragrant human rights violations under Obote II, again, under multipartyism.  They have also witnessed the indiscriminate killings and atrocities under Lutwa, sometimes baptised DP Government by some people.  They have also experienced the exodus by thousands and thousands in the various parties of Uganda, and they have also witnessed - they have enjoyed the seven years of the first Ugandan civilised Government under the NRM as witnessed by you, Members seated here; as the people of Uganda as well as international community.  

At this crossroad, what do the people of Uganda want out of this constitution-making exercise?  Mind you, not what you and me want, not what UPC, DP or any other political headquarters want.  Certainly, not what certain foreign powers want to make out of Uganda.  The beneficiaries of a good Constitution are the Ugandans.  They are also the one to pay the price, should Uganda produce a non-workable Constitution, they are the ones who have been paying the price for existing non-workable arrangements.  

There is a danger, a dangerous tendency in this country for some people in this country to assume that the people of Uganda do not know what they want.  And this was pointed here sometime last week or the week before when a Member pointed out that it is not the people of Uganda who are rejecting the multipartyism, but it is the seminars, the NRM Secretariat is the one which is pumping this idea into them and I rose on a point of information, that that was an insult to the intelligence of the people of Uganda because the people of Uganda know that they want.  But a tendency that tendency of some people both here in Uganda and outside, they believe that the people of Uganda do not know what they want and they must impose their trustship in the same way as foreigners are trying to impose their trustship in Uganda and on Africa in general.  Because they think the Africans do not know what they want.  

So, the people of Uganda want a democratisation process that would ensure the consolidation of the restored peoples’ powers under the RC System.  An arrangement that would ensure the consolidation of the restored democracy, an arrangement that would ensure the consolidation of stability and security, arrangement that would ensure the consolidation of restored respect for human rights and human dignity in this country, an arrangement that will ensure the continuation of the rule of law which is being enjoyed by everybody today, an arrangement that will ensure the consolidation of national unity and harmony brought about by the national, reconciliation and broadbasedness as witnessed by you and everybody in Uganda.  A process that would ensure sustainable development embarked upon today by Ugandans and non-Ugandans in the various fields.  The people of Uganda want a special task force code named Constituent Assembly and this has been expressed in many fora by the population and through the consensus expressed the Constitutional Commission.  They also want a referendum.  This has also been expressed by so many people in various quarters because the question today, is actually to be or not to be.  The people of Uganda are associating multipartyism with anarchy, with division, with destiny, because they have seen it, with violence, with antagonism, with enemity and that is why for them it is a question of to be or not to be and that is why they want this question to decide right away.  

There is a bizarre paradox in this country, because at a time when Ugandans have regained their basic human rights in the nearby bushes, at a time when Ugandans are no longer systematically subjected to brutality and raping as it was the case under Obote 11 regime, at a time when Ugandans have started living instead of existing or just surviving at this particular time, when there is stability and security, and some prominent politicians feel insecure.  Some of these politicians have cynically been calling CMs to dissolve this House and go home so that they may precipitate a political crisis that would plunge this country into turmoil again.  Some of them have even got the guts to question the very validity and necessity of this constitution making exercise.  These are politicians, who do not want to be subjected to the verdict of the people through a referendum on a contentious political issue, but want the population to be subjected to their personal views and those of their masters.  They are fed up, as you must have heard from their mouths, some of them said, they are fed up with the honey moon period because in honey moon, people have been peaceful, living together, discussing together as we are, and dealing with issues instead of personalities and colours.  Those are politicians who advocate ‘the winner take all arrangements, which means actually they advocate the system of eating alone.  Because now, we are eating together.  Everybody is eating. (Laughter)

When you go to election under multipartyism, one party will win and that party will take everything.  The Ministers will certainly be from that party, the ambassadors will be from that party, the parastatal body Chairman will be from that party, even scholarship will be given to the supporters of that one party, you saw it here in Uganda.  So, the winner takes it all.  So, these - the rest of Ugandans would collect money, they pay tax, they farm, they work everywhere, they collect money and that winner takes everything.  This is what this arrangement stands for.  These are politicians who were turning Ugandan youth into ferocious creatures to be unleashed on Uganda’s population. (Hear, hear!)

MR. CINEMAS:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to continue misleading the House, when he himself was an ambassador during multi-party Government?  Is he in order?  Further, is he in order to continue, is he in order to continue?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is entitled to his views.

MR. MUKIIBI:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for that information because it is also giving me an opportunity to give my clarification on that particular subject.  Yes, I was ambassador and I resigned in protest against those atrocities -(Applause and Laughter)- and everybody knows, yes, I resigned in protest against the atrocities which were being committed by that Government.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, there were buses which entered after answering the question ‘okakatahi?’, meaning ‘where did you put it’, and hon. Cinemas know that. Where did you put the vote, there were buses soon after the elections in 1981, where to enter the bus, you would be asked, where did you put the vote?  And Cinemas knows it very well. (Laughter)

MR. MUKIIBI:  Mr. Chairman, in my view, these are politicians who have out-lived their usefulness because, even when they were given an opportunity to be useful to this country, they just made a mess out of this nation.  On the other hand, I find it very strange and inadmissible that some politicians and foreigners doubt President Museveni and NRM’s intention about democracy and human rights.  In so doing, they are trying to be more Catholic than the Pope -(Laughter)- because when we hear of people who are suspicious that when the President nominates on the advice of the Cabinet, if he nominates the Chairman of Assembly, then the work may be hijacked of the Constituent Assembly.  Then, when we hear also  - when they suspect that the President may not be in position to nominate as far as special groups is concerned to make the right choice, who is responsible for this friendly, political atmosphere that has enabled us to undertake this exercise?  Who has initiated the constitution-making exercise anyway?  Who has?  Those who are suspecting the President or the President himself and NRM?  Who broke the dangerous culture of ‘winner takes it all’?  ‘Twalwana’ like some people said here, ‘oba twawangula, who broke that vicious circle of winner take all?  Is it not the NRM?  Otherwise, we would not be sitting here, DP, UPC, CP, everybody, you know, in such a harmonious atmosphere.  Who broke that dangerous culture of winner takes all?  I think these elements must be exposed now.  There is a dangerous consequence that I would like to point out here of the interference by foreign powers in our democratisation process.  I appeal to foreigners to refrain from a negative - they may interfere positively but from negative interference in our democratisation process.  We do not need lessons about democracy and human rights from countries whose record on human rights and democracy in Africa is so disgraceful and despicable. (Laughter) 

 Yes, you know the history of slave trade, you know the history of colonialism, you know the history of apartheid, you know the history of racial discrimination.  If they want to talk about democracy and human rights, then let us talk about these ideas not only in a cosmetic manner.  Let us dig out the heinous crimes committed by the Western democracy during the 300 years of slave trade.  The extent of damage in terms of economic retardation of this continent.  The moral agony as result of separation of families, physical suffering as a result of brutal, savage treatment of the slaves. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Hon. Mukiibi summarise your points.

MR. MUKIIBI:  The physical suffering as a result of brutal and savage treatment of -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of order.  Is it in order to turn this august House into a rally, Mr. Chairman? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not a rally, no. Proceed please.  You are right.

MR. MUKIIBI:  Mr. Chairman, I was saying the physical suffering as a result of brutal and savage treatment of the slaves - millions of whom were fed to sharks.

MRS. M. OKER:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to get so charged like that to the tune, so that he is even scaring we Members?  I think we shall walk out of the House and live him to talk. (Laughter)

MR. MUKIIBI:  Mr. Chairman, the dehumanisation as a result of keeping the slaves of their identity.  These slaves were just numbers known as numbers, no names, they were denied to use their names, they were denied to use their language.  Today any black in America, Caribbean or whatever, he does not know.  You could tell the origin of any white in the Northern America by his name Mc Donald, Reagan, you can tell where he comes from, but you can never tell where a black came because he is carrying a fictitious name and no wonder Malcolm dropped and just put X because it was not his name anyway.  Mr. Chairman, I was trying to finalise this one.  The record of those who are preaching to us on human rights. The massacres and atrocities committed against the people of Africa during the struggle for their liberation that they used to refer to as terrorism.  1,000,000 people died in Algeria when they were fighting for their freedom 1,000,000 and what happened in Angola and Mozambique and what happened in Suez Canal?  And in Zimbabwe and South Africa?  

The performance of the Western people was undemocratic.  Look at the record of voting when they were fighting for colonialism.  For whom they were voting, look at the record, the voting pattern in the United Nations, when Africans were fighting for their independence.  All these people were voting no - either they were abstaining or they were voting no.  We should go and look at them; they are there in New York.  The political system, this is the Bill -(Laughter)- I said, in my introduction that one of the pertinent questions is the atmosphere, the environment today in the Uganda, these are part of the environment.  If our friends in the West want to be credible in their concern for human rights and democracy, they must first admit these crimes against humanity, apologise -(Applause)- and accept to spend anther 300 years paying reparation both for the African Continent and to the individual black victims who are still around the world.  They must also assist the black victims to trace their ancestors and their names.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please. Turn to the Bill.

MR. MUKIIBI:  I am winding up, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WOGWAWABI:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it really in order for the hon. Member to waste a lot of time by turning the debate into a political rally because what he is discussing is not relevant to the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, he is giving his views.  It is quite in order, proceed please and wind up.

MR. MUKIIBI:  ‘Not all that glitters is gold’, as they say because we must also look into the type of life pertaining in the West.  We must look at the Mafia syndrome.  We must be reading newspapers these days.  This Mafia syndrome is great.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, concentrate on the Bill please.

MR. MUKIIBI:  Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, I would like to say that in debating this Bill, we should be guided by what the people want, by the aspirations of the people, by the wishes of the people.  We should forget about our own interests.  Some of the wishes of these aspirations have been expressed by the population.  Personally, I have heard a lot of them.  Someone may ask which constituency do you represent?  Although I do not have a particular constituency, some of you may go only to just one constituency - me, I go to the four corners of Uganda. (Applause)  Yes, my schedule takes me to the four corners of Uganda.  Therefore, I have been listening and I know what I am saying.  

In conclusion, during my debate I have touched upon department points in the Bill and I think we should as some people suggested, we should just listen to the people and go back and get their mandate.  Those who will be popular back, will be sent back to that task force because it is just a task force, they will still retain their seats here as legislators.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 
MRS. J. KAZUNGU (Women Representative, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this chance to contribute to this apparently most important Bill.  While I was watching this afternoon, actually I was wondering - watching and actually listening to Member’s contributions, I was wondering whether some of us are really genuine because it puzzles me when Members start pointing at each other, this is what happened in 1980 then what - these are the same people that some of us are saying that we are really tired of. There is a Member who contributed here and said that it is fortunate that most of the voters this time were born after 1996.  

What I would like to assure hon. Members in the House is that it is actually true that most of the voters were born around that time but that at the same time, we do not need to be told, because Members are complaining that some people, they complain against an NRM Secretariat especially, about these politicisation should not take place after all they are addressing young people born around that age.  What I would like to say here is that actually some of us do not even need to be told.  Some of us although we were young, we were able to see.  We know what has taken place.  Whether we are politicised, whether the NRM comes to state, after all, what they are stating are the facts.  Why do some of the Members not want people to know the truth?  

So, what I would like actually to affirm is that Members should not worry about what NRM is doing because what they are stating are some of the facts that some of us were although young but, we were able to witness and we do not need to be lectured at all to know what took place.  In the same breath, I would also like to challenge my fellow Members of Parliament, because when we come here really and say that we should go by the people, it is so sweet, everyone would wish to say that, but who are these people?  Who exactly are these people that we are talking about, because it is really hurting for some of us to say that I for one, I represent Iganga District, but honestly, I have been able to go to all the population which is about 1,000,000 and consult them and therefore come here and say that I am talking on behalf of the Iganga people.  Is that really being honest?  

Somewhere I was discussing this Bill with a group of youthful people and they actually challenged me and said that it is very interesting when we come here and say the referendum but others do not want.  They actually told me that please, when you get a chance to contribute in that hon. House, you should have a referendum or not should actually be decided upon by a referendum itself -(Laughter)- because they are saying that maybe you as hon. Kazungu have come here, you have held some meetings but how many of us come to those meetings?  Are you sure all of us attend those meetings so that when you go there to say people want a referendum or people do not want a referendum.  How many people are these who are saying we do not want a referendum and how many are saying we should not.  I think the best way really, if we are doing these things in the best interest of the people, let us go to the people and ask them whether they want a referendum and I think when we go there maybe we could also ask them a number of issues like what hon. Tiberondwa raised here.  He said, that after all who told NRM that the people want a Constitution?  Maybe these are the questions that we could go back to these people, when we go for a referendum, we firsts of all ask them that do we actually need a Constitution?  And therefore that would mean that if we really went to them, some of these issues would be solved in good time and I would imagine that when we come eventually to whatever body will come about to debate the constitution Draft.  It should be able to do that work in four months because a referendum will have been held over issues that we are really saying are contentious and therefore we should not have any problem.  

The Members also that I happened to have consulted were also wondering why we should come here and say that after all the Constitution is for everybody.  Now, if it is for everybody, if it is supposed to effect everyone, they were wondering why we should come here and say that after all, we should come here and use English because if we allow interpreters, it will be very expensive but then we are the very people who claim that actually democracy is expensive and at the same time, these people were challenging me and saying that do you know the illiteracy rate in this country?  It is over 53 per cent.  They said, if we have such a very high rate of illiteracy, how much have we done to make sure that all Ugandans actually get to learn this language we are calling the official language; that is English? They were saying that the more we emphasise, the more we stress this business of saying that we should use English, the more we are becoming discriminative, because honestly, many of our people who know what they want, do not happen to know English but is it their fault?  Whose fault is it that after so many years of independence, we have not even bothered to have a national language?  So, they are saying that some of us come here, we look at what we are calling issues, we emphasise this and we shall stress the English business.  We shall leave out many useful Ugandans in the name of this language.  They even went ahead to challenge me and say that after all at the present time how many of our young boys and young girls who are supposed to be going to school where they can learn this language we call English, how many of them are not able to go?  And is it their fault?  Whose making is it?  On this point, they were saying that after all, we are saying that there have been people of good will who wish us well, I think there is the indication that we are having people to fund this exercise and after all people are going to contribute by paying this 100,000/=.  They are saying that I think it should not be too expensive for government to look around for interpreters so that people push in a person of their own choice without being sectarian because they said that actually this language is sectarian.  

One hon. Member - I think it was hon. Zachary Olum alleged fears about DAs being returning officers and he was wondering because I think he expressed the fear that some DAs have shown that they are more NRM than neutral and I think he was suggesting that people who should be neutral should be the DES’ or something like that.  I think he also went ahead to oppose the fact that a political leader should not be a Chairman of our Constituent Assembly.  What I really wanted to inform Members here is that, whereas for him is saying that DAs should not participate, DAs should not actively participate in the elections because they might not be neutral, I would want also to stress that this is I think the reason why we are saying that after all there are only four political parties and therefore, these four political parties at present have only four leaders.  Honestly, if we cannot have four of these people. we are only stopping these four people from being Members of our Constituent Assembly.  I think the reason for that is again that neutrality.  Because I would wonder or I would want to challenge hon. Olum to tell us that these hon. Leaders of these political parties would also be as neutral as we would wish them to be.  I would wish to assert that these members should not be.  Because I think there are so many other Ugandans that could do the job other than these four leaders of the political parties.

This point has been raised time and again of the election of women and youths.  It ties us.  How these women and youths representatives are going to be elected.  Because we have said that we would wish them to be elected by electorate.  So the point that I would have wished to put across is that I have fears when we say that we are going to have our representatives of the youth and women elected through the Youths or Women Councils.  Because, it is only about one and a half months when we were debating the Youths council and women Council Bills.  They had nothing to do with the Constitution.  All that they were saying was that these bodies were going to bring together the women and youths and make them contribute to the economy of our country.  There was nothing mentioned about the Constituent Assembly or about politics.  Because my fears are that if we use these Councils, that is the Youth Council and the Women Council, to elect the representatives to this Constituent Assembly, then the tendency would be that we fail even to know the objectives of these councils and we shall start thinking of these councils and trying them to the Constituent Assembly.  So, I would urge the Minister to try and give us another method of having these women and youths elected and we leave alone the National Women Council or the National Youth Council.  We should not mix these two.  

Lastly, I think Members were opposing the appointments made by the President and I think their argument was that in most cases we were giving the President too much power and that how about if we get a President who is not sober?  So that is the question that I would want us answered.  Because many of us were saying that we should always guard against giving a President some of these privileges, because some Presidents are not sober.  Maybe they proved to misuse those positions.  But I would wish to challenge the Members here and of course maybe the rest of Ugandans that it is ourselves who are to blame if we allow such a President to come up.  Because in most cases, we are either the ones who allow ourselves to get confused and then the man manipulates us around and we give him the platform.  So, we should not start saying that because we have ever had Presidents who are not sober, therefore, we are going to encourage that lineage.  I think it is high time we should stopped Presidents or people who are going to misuse the positions in Uganda again.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DR. ZABASAIJA (Buhaguzi County, Hoima):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The moment this Bill was tabled, all of us Members of NRC and the population looked beyond it and we started seeing the future.  We started seeing what would happen after we have instituted a Constituent Assembly and I think we were all justified.  Because this Bill will decide who makes a Constitution and will decide what kind of election we are going to hold in 1994, whether they are going to be based on partyism or on a movement type of Government.  This is the crux of the matter.  When we have put a Constituent Assembly in place and it goes through the recommendations and makes a Constitution, is it going to say straightaway that the elections of 1994 will be based on a movement type of Government or elections or will it be multipartyism?  The people in my area are worried because they are not sure what this Constituent Assembly is going to say.  The people of Buhaguzi, 90 per cent of them, I have not been to every home, but I have used a method to gauge and I am convinced that they feel and say that they are not opposed to parties as such or they do not dislike parties.  But they say parties must continue hibernating for not less than five years.  After that, they can come back and play politics.  As of now, the parties must give a chance to the population.  Therefore, now they asked me, you as our leader, what are you going to do to ensure that our wishes are safeguarded?  How are you going to ensure that this Constituent Assembly is not going to turn our wishes the other way round?  I did not have an easy answer.  

But I would like here to say that in order to safeguard Buhaguzi, 90 per cent of the people say the parties should hibernate.  I do not know what others say.  If they say the same, then the question is to us all.  What do we do?  I would like to say that let this Constituent Assembly be and strictly be, a committee of Parliament so that should things go wrong, Parliament remains the supreme body in this country, that is the NRC.  There is no way at the moment we can say there is anybody else supreme.  We are the Parliament, we are supreme and there is no way we can see this country thrown to dogs.  Because we are afraid that somebody will say, we are NRM, that somebody will say we are Museveni.  I cannot see how we can leave this country to go to the drain because we are afraid we had influence on the making of the Constitution.  Parliament is supreme.  Therefore, as Parliament, as a body, that has been entrusted to take charge of the affairs of this country, it is in my views and my conviction that we must guide the Constitution making.  Who else will do it?  Here I must say that we should be realistic in this sense.  We cannot afford to say that if NRC is seen getting itself involved in the making of the Constitution that the future or posterity that 20 or 30 years people will say it is a Constitution of NRM.  This, I think we must get out of our heads.  We must look at the reality.  The reality is that if we allow this Constituent Assembly to be answerable to nobody but maybe to the population and then this Assembly derails the constitution-making and the country gets into problems, nobody else will be blamed but Parliament.  Therefore, Sir, I strongly propose that let us have a Constituent Assembly in place, let that Constituent Assembly be a committee of Parliament so that in the end, Parliament is finally able to reply to this nation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. KAYIIRA: Mr. Chairman, with due respect to hon. Deo Zabasaija’s presentation, I seek to get clarification from him how that Constituent Assembly, popularly and directly elected, and how possible it is for it to be a committee of this Parliament, this NRC?  I wish him to clarify to me on that one.

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, it is my view that even when we have a Constituent Assembly in place, there will still be a supreme body in this country and that will be Parliament.  I cannot see how we can have two bodies with equal powers in this nation.  Is it possible?  So, Parliament will remain supreme and Parliament is in the ultimate responsible for the affairs of this nation.  Having said that, I would like to say that I personally support the creation of a Constituent Assembly under those terms I have put forward.

Before I sit down, Mr. Chairman, I have a message for the Minister of Information and for the Minister of Works from the people of Hoima.  The information is that the people of Hoima are - despite the explanations of leaders like myself and others - convinced that there is a deliberate move to cut them off from the rest of the country and this is the reason behind it.  

Everybody else here knows that it is very difficult to reach Hoima through road; Kiboga to Hoima.  But as if that was not bad enough, it is difficult to reach Hoima from Fort Portal.  From ....... to Hoima it is almost impassable.  As if that was not bad enough, Mr. Chairman, there are no telephone services between Kampala and Hoima virtually there is no telephone service.  And as if that was not enough, the radio reception in Hoima is virtually non-existent.  So, we are actually virtually cut-off and people need an explanation.  That is a message to the Minister of Works, as well as to the Minister of Information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU (Army Representative):  Mr. Chairman, in terms of geographical area of course, I do not have a constituency that I represent.   I had no intention of speaking in the first place.  We had thought for us in the army that a matter like this was going t be automatically supported by the House.  To us, it is a matter that means life and death, because it is us who have died for quite a long time to settle affairs that have always been messed up because of mixed smell by those who legislate.  

Therefore, I would like to put some of our opinions across on this matter.  The establishment of democracy is a process.  There cannot be stability without democracy.  Even where there is apparent stability in a democratic situation, it is always temporary.  Without stability, there are always occurrences of instability.  Once they gather enough momentum, they will always tighten ultimately into explosive situations and, therefore, instability results.  To build democracy, the first step is to build a stronger and unshakable foundation.  This does not happen overnight.  Of course, is it a process, as I have already specified.  We have had a lot of struggles by our people to liberate themselves and be free to decide on their own destiny.  Not all struggles succeeded of course.  But there is already a step forward.  They give a foundation to the next stage of the same struggle.  In our situation we have had successful people’s armed struggle that culminated into capture of state power.  We have since been involved in a process of ensuring that the people exercise the right to decide their own destiny; to recover their dignity as a people.  Nor do I believe that when we captured state power the basis of the exercise of power was embodied in the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, paragraph 14(b) of the same Legal Notice specified that the Army Council and the NRC would act as a Constituent Assembly.  This was repealed in 1988.  The proposal for the enactment of the Uganda Constitutional Commission came after the Army Council sat and re-considered the original position and gave up that responsibility.  

So, what is the main reason behind this decision?  I attended the Army Council personally and I know the strong sentiments expressed by the officers in that council meeting.  The basis was trust and confidence that we had developed in our people.  We assessed over time that our people could no longer be easily manipulated like it used to happen in the past.  We had created stability.  We experienced a situation where our people could stand their ground and decide on matters affecting their lives without fear and without manipulation.  We decided that the people must take their destiny in their own hands.  We wanted a Constitution that would outlive Government, a Constitution that would provide for continuous stability, one that would provide for change but in continuous process of development where protection of democracy would be a permanent and continuous process.  That can only happen in a situation where the people could directly through universal suffrage elect representatives to the Constituent Assembly.  Let the people make their own choice.  Our mission has always been building up towards peace.  We trust and have the confidence that our people can now decide what they want and me as an army leader have specified that we shall follow whatever they decide.  We only as for some representation in the Constituent Assembly to be involved in an exercise to witness the most historic event that we believe will be the highest achievement of our sacrifices.  

So, we would request that if any of the Members were to support the involvement of the army in this exercise, it should be in light of that, but not in light of fear that the army would overthrow the Constitution.  We can only now ask that the NRC should take a position where the people were given that power to elect a Constituent Assembly directly, the result of which will be a direct representation of their will.  Of course, NRC Members can go and stand because they have the freedom to. For us Army men we have fulfilled our mission.  We have established conditions under which the democratic process can continue without hindrance, and we have established order through direct sacrifice, asking for the NRC to give people a chance to exercise their will.  I believe it is not asking too much.  Once we decide on this, the rest will be easy.  What examples would the NRC be giving anyway; it seems to have got stuck to power.  I am touching on sensitive ground, and I hope I will be forgiven, but we cannot erase history.  There are examples to be quoted in history; the image of many of our politicians in Uganda like possibly in many countries on the continent, in many cases is nothing to be proud of.  The majority of our politicians belong to a class of people whose character is always versatile; tending always to where they can serve their personal interests.  This struggle has pulled in a number of politicians who were out crawling in the mud, it brought them up and presented them back to our people in a new form, and fortunately quite a few retain a strong tendency to crawl back into the mud.  There would not be any problem if they do not want to be clean nor they could be left alone to mess themselves up, but the unfortunate part is they can trap the whole society into the mud with them like has happened many times in the past.  Our present politics should allow the individuals who want to mess themselves up to do so, but not to take the whole society with them. (Applause)  It is a practice of democracy that can guarantee that.  Please, allow the people the chance to exercise that democratic right.  There is an underestimation of our people’s ability to identify their interests and fight for them in a situation where they are not intimidated or manipulated.  There is an absolute underestimation to that.  Let them decide themselves, the fear that they will make mistakes is misplaced and should not be used as a reason to make short cuts.  That would be a fundamental error and a wrong beginning, the foundation would be quite shaky.  If we do not give way to a new Constituent Assembly formation, we will be planting seeds of violence and instability.  It happened in the past and we have said heavily to re-establish sanity.  Our people have paid heavily in that process.

So, what are we up to now if we hang on to this idea?  And in case the seeds of violence germinate and grow and come out, who is going to pay again?  Do we know what instability means anyway or have we forgotten already?  What kind of memories do we have, if we have already forgotten?  For us as the youths and patriots we have died enough, we have really bled, there is no area in this country that has not absorbed our bleeding blood.  I do not think any of the Members here can tell us any place in this country where we did not shed blood.  I would like any of the Members here to tell us that and all caused from mistakes made either in this House or in the other bodies of the past that were acting as legislative organs.  So, do you want is to keep dying for no fault of ours?  In any case, what examples are we being given if the decision to stick in here was to succeed as an army? It is ironic I believe.  

I have never imagined that there would be a time when an army man would be in Parliament trying to convince that there will be relinquishing of power.  We pulled out in the interest of having the people directly exercise their rights, we did so voluntarily and under no pressure, because we are patriots and are interested in establishment of democracy and permanent stability.  That is why we fought and bled, and the only payment for that kind of sacrifice to us, we believe, is for our people to be directly involved in deciding matters that affect their lives.  After all, we are part of this society and we will not die in the army, ultimately we will be leaving the army, we want to get into society that is stable.  Now, it seems some members are telling us that that was a stupid decision we took.  For us, we face bullets and you know bullets kill. But we are still ready to sacrifice where there is a national cause in the national interest.  

We are asking you, the few Members, to sacrifice the people as well and face the ballots. They do not kill after all.  Please, we appeal to you and we believe that once the people are given a chance to decide on this matter that will directly affect their lives, in many years to come, we would have established a foundation for future stability.  There will be change of course, but peaceful change and change within continuity, and it is only that kind of situation that can be worth payment for the lives of people that have died in all the struggles that we have had here, not only soldiers in the army or freedom fighters, but even the civil society that has supported those struggles.  With that, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill. 

MR. BUZABO (Kabula County, Rakai):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill and I agree that a new directly elected body is required to debate and promulgate the Constitution.  Many arguments have been forwarded to justify the need for the directly elected body.  Some of which have been valid, others I would say invalid, for example, the arguments that there has been a lot of confidence in the NRC by the population.  I believe that is an invalid argument in this case.  Some of these arguments have been more convincing that others but in favour of a new body. I say this, and I place paramount importance in handling the constitution-making process in a way that will ensure the acceptability and the durability of the resultant document.  I think this is the most important aspect, and the most important quality I would like our Constitution to have.  As you all know, however fair the contents of the Constitution may appear to be at the time it is made, in the future it will always be put to task, and it will always be a target for criticism. This is because a Constitution cannot favour all groups in society all the time, where the Constitution tends to favour says, the legislature, it may be sad expense of the executive arm of government, also when the President is given a lot of power, it may be at the expense of another body.  So, you find any of these bodies at one time or other might want to criticise the Constitution because of their own interest.  

So, what I am trying to say is that, however neutral the course the Constitution may attempt take, it cannot make everybody happy all the time, so we can expect it to be challenged, whatever the case sometime in the future.  In challenging this Constitution, if it is a good Constitution, the subject matter will be difficult to criticise, so naturally the course to take would be to challenge the qualification of the right to those who made the Constitution to make it.  I feel it is important not to look only at what seems fair to us at this time, but what will be unchallengeable at a future date.  Looking at our NRC, it is an indirectly elected Parliament of a popular revolutionary Government; unfortunately this Government did not come to power by the ballot.  In view of this, I think there will be grounds for discrediting a Constitution made by this House on the basis of inadequate mandate, I believe this will be valid argument in the future.  

So, as a result of this, I would say a directly elected Constituent Assembly would solve the problem created by the argument I have presented to ensure the acceptability and durability for our Constitution.  On the basis of the argument, I have presented in favour of the Constituent Assembly, I would also advise that the President takes a hand off approach to the Constitution making process.  However good a leader he may be in other matters, his motives in the constitution-making may easily be misunderstood and his involvement, however limited maybe, misconstrued in the future to be interference.  I am not trying to say that the President’s powers should be limited or something that is not my argument.  My argument is that since -okay, I have already presented an argument that by all means however, good a Constitution is, there will always be ground for criticisms and always be people who want to criticise it.  So, let us not give them any room at all.  However good our President might be at the moment, let him take a hand of approach to this.  So, what I am trying to say is that, I think it is important to say that it does not matter which individual occupies the Presidency, the President should not be involved in constitution-making at this stage.  

So, in view of this, I would suggest that the President leave the Chairmanship to the delegates and the commissioners to the NRC to elect and select respectively.  I however, feel that within this board recommendation, a method can be worked out to ensure a fair and reasonable choice my only quarrel is with the President being involved beyond the Constitutional Commissions stage.  I think there have already been a lot of doubts the draft constitution, I think those doubts are enough for the President.  Let him take hands off approach and leave the rest to the people’s representatives.  The composition of the Constituent Assembly is another matter that will greatly influence the durability and acceptability of the Constitution.  Although I will not make specific proposals, my belief is that, if we have a vast majority of delegates, say above 90 per cent directly elected, no one will be able to doubt the fact that the resulting to draw my own experience, though I must confess to be the most inexperienced Member of this House.  

In 1980, during the UNLF Government just prior to the removal of the President Binaisa, a situation quite similar to the one we have not prevailed, and we had, I believe umbra advocates or supporters as opposed to party advocates or supporters, just as we now have Movement advocate versus party advocates.  At the time as a young boy, but got an opportunity to sit in at one of the National Consulted Council meeting held at the International Conference Centre, there was a debate at the time and I can only generally remember the contribution of one man.  I think he is quite a famous man, that is Luwuliza Kirunda, because his contribution was quite spectacular and even scared me.  The man that is Mr. Luwuliza Kirunda using very harsh abusive and un parliamentary language, criticised the Government and President of the day, saying it had failed and should resign in order to let others who could do a better job come in.  Unfortunately, I am not a very good story teller, but I think some Members here were there, probably on that very day, because immediately after making that contribution, he immediately stocked out of the conference room and I was reliably informed, fellow Members that such outrageous outburst have not really shown the extent of the out burst, it was quite a terrible one, but I was reliably informed that such outrageous out burst were not uncommon in that House.  So, what happened after the period, and what followed we all know.  

Now, approximately 12 years later, I have listened to many Parliamentary debates in this House and this House is composed of both Movement and Party supporters, and I think we are in similar situation as existed at that time where criticism is tolerated.  However, I must observe that I have not heard a misfortune to listen to a critical contribution quite in the bad test of the one I had on that day, and I believe this indicates the soberness and progressing maturity of our Parliament in the comparable situation and I pray this will reflect in the outcome of the Movement or party now debate.  

Having made the above observation, I would now like to give my view on the question of a national referendum now, to settle the issue of the movemental multi-party.  I agree with hon. Bidandi Ssali when he says that political parties are inevitable in the long run, I say this, because I believe the Movement sort of Government can only be as good as its leader, get a bad leader and he may mess up the works while leaving you with no position as you are under him in the Movement.  However, at the moment, I agree with those who say parties are a greater evil, until we mature in politics.  This is because party politics tends to create division permit down to the work place and into homes causing confusion and suffering.  At least with the Movement kind of politics, you can now get a job and merit and not on party affiliation.  However, the point is that, dispute my personal views on the issue, I am only one of 17 million Ugandans before we go into debating the Constitution which direction to take and for how long?  I feel leaving this decision for the Constituent Assembly would have the following disadvantages.  One, the Constituent Assembly election would be adulterated by this one issue, if people are not elected on merit or ability but on what they support.  Two, this issue would eclipse other Constitutional issues, forcing delegates to compromise on other important points due to their allegiances.  We would have divided a Constituent Assembly on those grounds and I doubt the competence of a divided in making a national Constitution.  There will be a lot of politicking in such an Assembly and in such cases Members may lose sight of their conscious in handling such issues due to excessive soliciting by other delegates for their own personal interests probably.  It is easier for some one to challenge the decision of the Constituent Assembly but how does one say the whole country is wrong?  So, to ensure that the decision taken is final, let us ask the people.  Those who argue that the people do not know what they want might simply want to impose their will on the people.

I would now like to refer to the interim report of the Constitutional Commission.  This is in connection with argument on the issue of the National Referendum now.  It says on page 10, Chapter 22, ‘fear of the possibility of manipulation of the process, that is the constitution-making process, will only be laid to rest if the adoption process chosen by government convinces the people that manipulation by any social force will not be allowed’.  The concerns of one social force and the people of Uganda as a whole.  So, I think that if we had a national referendum now, that question would be allowed.  In conclusion, I would like to appeal to Members, let us make the right decision for Uganda and its people and avoid repeating some obvious past mistakes.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

MR. BASOGA NSADHU (Busiki County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity after forced leave of absence for one and a quarter years.  Permit me first of all to express in a few words what has happened to me during the one and a quarter years.  I have been passing through terrible moments in my life from as early as February when we were in recess very serious allegations were made against me and I was almost dragged in court.  I am not protesting against the going in court, but I want to draw your attention and this House to one scenario which I think was dangerous to my life, and very regrettable.  When I went to court, the whole courthouse was cordoned off by the police and the army.  I was out of the courtroom and armed policemen, four in number, came to the dock where I was and undressed me.  They removed my jacket, and they removed my coat, my shoes, my tie, and my watch, and ordered me to sit in the dock.  

I am an obedient servant of the laws, I accepted that kind of intimidation.  Later on at 2.30 when the Magistrate came back, my lawyer presented in a protest but up to today those items that were removed by armed policemen have never been returned to me.  That afternoon at 2.30, when I was granted bail, I was walking away with a number of Basiki who had attended court and we were chased away by armed soldiers numbering 50, armed with guns and some light machine guns.  There was a pandemonium in the whole place I managed to run and escaped but I should have been shot and I would be the late today, but I managed to escape.  An explanation was later given by the DA that, that was a case of mistaken identity that our NRA - tested NRA had had the imagination that Luwuliza Kirunda had been arrested and had been released by court.  

I am bringing out this scenario because I am a very staunch supporter of the NRM Movement, and I believe in its leadership. They are very sober - you are very sober, but up to today, I have never received any official explanation from anybody in Government as to what happened that day.  Politically, I did write to the Minister of Internal Affairs and I also sent a copy to the Army Commander and Chief of Staff, to the Inspector General of Police, but up to today no response has come.  What keeps me wondering is, if such a thing can happen to an elected Member of Parliament, even if he may not have a mandate to discuss certain issues, what would have happened to a local Musiki who has no status and yet we claim that we respect them and protect them?  I want this House to note what happened to me seriously and I dare say, I hope this story will not repeat itself.  Mr. Chairman, let me now come to the business. 


MR. NTIMBA JOHN:  Point of information.  Is it in order for the hon. Ministers and Minister of State responsible for Constitutional Affairs and Security to be absent when we are debating matters concerning the Constitution, and when we are being told about an apparent violation of human rights?  Are they in order, Mr. Chairman to be absent?

THE CHAIRMAN:  There is a Minister taking notes please.

MR. MBABAZI:  On that point, Mr. Chairman, that in the absence of the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs in this House, I hold that Portfolio.  Thank you.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I now come to the business of the Constituent Assembly Bill.  I must on the out set express my disappointment that the Commission did not address this matter very seriously so that the population whom we claim to represent give us a clear answer.  I do not know what came into their minds but definitely they knew well along that there was need to seek an explanation of views from the general public about who should finally debate and enact this new Constitution.  Why do I say this?  All the eminent Members of the Commission, knew that there was in position a Legal Notice which have already said that the NRC and the Army Council plus others, were going to debate and enact the Constitution.  It was therefore, a terrible oversight for them at a terrible mission for the most specifically right out questions that would have settled this matter and would have saved us all this rigging which we are involved in.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, in due respect to hon. Basoga Nsadhu who is holding the Floor, I would like to inform him that he should go back and read the report of the Commission on this issue.  He says that we did not - the Constitution Commission I mean, did not address this question, it did and that is why it wrote this report.  He goes ahead to allege that the Commission did not put specific questions to the population, in our guidelines, the Constitutional guidelines the booklet and the questions which we circulated, chapter number two specifically gives questions and to that effect, we have got a statistical date at the back of this report.  With due respect of hon. Basoga Nsadhu, I request him to go back and look at those differences and then he continues arguing the way he is saying.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU: I am grateful to that information, but let this House be informed that I have taken time to contribute and I have been doing a lot of research.  Nevertheless, if the hon. Members of this House would like to be reminded, they can look at page 18, paragraph 35 of the report that was made by all the Members of the Commission including those who are in this House.  I beg to quote and they say, ‘there is limited discussion of the NRC option in most memoranda,’ it was not an option mentioned in the guiding questions and I beg to stop there. (Applause)  It is now a matter of semantics and English. (Laughter)  

Nevertheless working on the good providence and my own understanding, I am the one of the last people who would want to deny the population an opportunity to exercise their democratic rights.  Even if it were said that in the name of democracy, let us hold elections every one month as long as I have the assurance that the logistics are available, I would go for that. The matter of allowing the population to express their thinking through the ballots has now become an International culture, and I do not want to dwell so much on that one.  I do agree that the population should exercise their rights, whether for a good reason or bad reason.  Why do I say bad reason?  Whether it is true, Basoga does not have a mandate or whether he has that mandate, as long as the people find it necessary that we should go back to them for a fresh mandate definitely I do endorse that one.  But, I have one worry which disturbed my mind, this is, if it is true that I have lesser mandate because I did not come to this House through suffrage and let it be, suppose that I do not participate in the Constituent Assembly elections and I remain here deliberate? I feel democracy has been cheated when the man who received the 130,000 votes of the Basic is finally sent back to Busiki after only four months and we pretend that his mission has been accomplished.  I feel cheated, I feel insecure, I feel unsure, I feel the very tenets on which I understand democracy is built are being undermined.  

To the extreme, if I were to have contributed a little bit earlier, this is what the Basic had wanted.  In their simple reasoning, they said, what has happened to you in Kampala?  We thought you have been doing quite well.  But you go, come back here, let everybody go back home, let us remain with some movement only the NRC should be dissolved, the movement remains and imagine that means the President and the Vice-Chairman and the Secretariat we hold the elections we come back here with a fresh mandate the Presidents elects a new cabinet out of those Members with the bigger mandate that everybody seems to recognise, they bring here that Constitution they debate it and continue.  This is an interim arrangement and it can work. We have carried out many experiments, and we started with a few, men, we added in value, we brought in more, and it is interim.  As long as we do not have that Constitution in place. (Interruption)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Member that the scenario he is trying to pursue which can easily misguide the House is that the President and the Vice-Chairman and whoever he thinks is in authority, has no authority from - of themselves it all springs from the National Resistance Council.  Once it is resolved everything is resolved.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Additional information.  Mr. Chairman, to add on the information given by hon. Kivejinja, I want to clarify more that the Chairman and all his cabinet members are also Members of this House, in fact, the Chairman is the Chairman of this House.  Therefore, I do not see how hon. Basoga Nsadu envisages the House going but the Chairman speaks -(Laughter)- so, what he is actually suggesting is abrupt end of the interim period of NRM which I fear might create chaos in the country.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I did not want to open up an academic discussion -(Interruption)- you want to inform me?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Yes.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Fine.

MR. MULONDO:  Point of information.  This is no reply to your question.  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to give more information and clarification which the hon. Basoga Nsadhu had earlier been arguing about the body to formerly debate the Draft Constitution.  There were two options as far as this point was concerned in the report and those two options should not be looked at separately because if you do, it appears as if the other option was not considered in the report.  If we were to read on page 20, there is the option of the Constituent Assembly both these should be read together that is how you can come to the conclusion.  In the actual fact, the establishment of an entirely new body mostly referred to as the Constituent Assembly whose main tasks would be to debate the Constitution has been proposed by many people and you should read it from there, you can see that both options were contributed to by the people who were asked.  

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr. Chairman, I did not want to open up an academic discussion.  I was simply giving the views of the Basic which I said if I had contributed in the initial stages before listening to a number of distinguished ladies and gentlemen here in this House, would have been the stand.  But nevertheless hon. Chairman, if this House did desire that we leave only the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, and we all go, we seem for the time being not to have that mandate to take such a decision if we think it proposed democracy to higher heights.  But I am not going to labour with that point, since it seems to raise people’s tempers just like the other one of telling this House that they have no mandate, also rise tempers, I would like both sides to take note of that.

Let me come a little bit to the referendum and the concept of multi-parties.  I would like Members of this House to note that I also share the view that the bigger fraction of our community did not at that time vote because they were under age.  What I wanted this House to note is that today’s advocates of the movement were one time in high profiles within the party ranks, and we know this and we also know that some of them participated in the crossing laws etc.  History has got some of these things on record.  

Therefore, what we are saying is that we should not take our population including the youths for granted, we are very mindful that those who want the movement type of politics on which we may also be subscribing, have had at one time very high profiles in the political parties.  What do we do about the referendum?  I do agree that we need a referendum being the best way in which we settle our matters.  The question is the timing of this referendum, should we have it now or should we have it after the Constituent Assembly?  I may be mistaken but this is the kind of scenario that I will see taking place if we say, we have the referendum now.  I dare say that it might be necessary to temporarily uplift the ban on the political party activities to give them another opportunity to explain to the population what they are talking about.  If I am assured that that will not happen, then, I will be happy, but if it does happen, this is what I see as will take place.  The moment you lift it, even for one week, the parties will reactivate their old contacts and this time, they have also learnt from the Movement, they will open up offices up to RC I level, and I dare say this time they may want to be exact and they will record who supports them name by name in one week, they can do it.  And when that happens, even if you have given them one week and you say, okay, close your activities, let us have a referendum and you get it and the Movement type of politics is accepted and endorsed by the population.  You shall have given these political parties a very good excuse in which Cecilia Ogwal can now stand up and say, my people, I feel this referendum has been rigged, do not participate.  She will have compiled a list, she will have opened up offices, she will have a bigger say than when she said, the UPC is not going to participate at the 1989 elections or later on a recent one in the RC system that we have just had.  That kind of things sheds a bad signal, it is a bad painting on the kind of Constitution that we want.  That is why, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor, how he visualises democracy if the loser must make it difficult or the winner.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am trying to illustrate a scenario that I think is going to happen and I am saying when it does happen, it is a bad scar on this Constitution.  Just like as we have accepted arguments that if this NRC was to debate and enact that Constitution, it would have a permanent scar which some other Ugandans could capitalise on in future to undermine this very Constitution.

MRS. MUGARURA:  Point of information.  I seek clarification from people who can interpret what is written on the last page of the interim report.  If we look at the last page, just to seek clarification when the Member is debating on that issue, on the last page and the bottom data about the views on the composition of a new Constituent Assembly by category of submission.  From this data we see two types of people, newly elected people’s representatives only against people’s representative and interested groups.  What is the difference between the first lit, the newly elected people only and the people’s representatives?  Because according to this status the RC Is, the RC IIs, the RC IIIs, RC V and individual memoranda, all show that the majority of the supporters 817 of the 1,424 favour people’s representatives and interested groups.  So, whom is this data addressing?  

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr. Chairman, I hope those who are in position to give the clarification will do it, and I also hope that they will take under consideration on hon. Sibo’s remarks that he made some time back.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr. Eriya Kategaya): Mr. Chairman, if I look at the last paper raised by hon. Mrs. Mugarura, she said that two columns one newly elected people’s representatives only, I think this would mean we do not have any interested groups at all.  It would mean we would have only elected people composing the Constituent Assembly.  The second column means we have elected people or representatives plus interested groups, this the different.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Those are my fears that if we do hold a referendum now, it is likely to generate confusion and I do not want confusion now.  Perhaps the other strong point which I think is necessary for us to consider is that a Draft Constitution has got a number of articles and inside those articles 268 of them, the one which we are plucking out is simply one of them.  I could have argued that why do we not pluck out No. 200 or No. 15?  In short, why do we single out this one only and say, let us hold a referendum.  And on the extreme, one could have argued that, why do we not hold a referendum on all the articles?  If we hold the belief that the Constituent Assembly is the legitimate body that will debate and enact this Constitution, let us not pick any single article from the Draft Constitution and say, we want a referendum now.  It is not fair, we have no mandate, it has been said to debate that Draft Constitution, let us leave it intact.  And I know, one problem that has brought up this matter especially on that one.  The Constitutional Commission says, there was no clear consensus as to whether we should be multi-parties or Movement type of politics and I have had proponents from both sides I think, and rightly so, saying if there was not clear consensus, then it appear the multiparties have support and if there was again no clear consensus, then the Movement has almost a 50,50 per cent support within the population.  So both of them are right.  

Now, if we are being fair and objective, we should not take advantage of either side by plucking out one thing.  Let the Constituent Assembly come, let it be placed in position, let them decide and rule out those Articles that require a referendum and those which do not.  Because by looking inside the Constitution now and pin-pointing Article 64 to 68 and subjecting it to this House, we have started discussing the Constitution for which Government has said we have no mandate.  If we have no mandate, let us not discuss any Article, therein a Draft Constitution.  Let us leave it to the people who will have the mandate to determine which one and confirm which one should go to the referendum as has been proposed by the notice from the Commission.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. speaker, the hon. Member contributing that the proposal under which we are debating this Bill was a proposal of the Constitutional Commission which has been plucked out for implementation, so, I think we can also look into it and pick what we want to do with it, we are legitimate we can do it.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  If it is true that the Commission did make that recommendation, I pray to this House that we can argue that I think that was a mistake, like we said, they made a serious omission by not putting the question of who should finally debate and enact this thing properly.  A fifty per cent, is close enough.  Let us leave it to those we have all argued are legitimate to take a decision and they will go to the people, whether we shall be involved, very good, whether we shall not be involved, too bad.  Mr. Chairman, with those remarks, I beg to move.

(The Council rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31st 1993 at 2.30 p.m).

