Wednesday, 30 March 2011

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I regret that we could not start on time as planned, but that was because most of our colleagues are members of Cabinet and they were holding their usual meeting on Wednesday.

Yesterday, there was a list, which was given to me, so that I could read the names of those Members of Parliament. It is not that they had offended or breached the law, but it was just to remind them that time was running out. So, the impression some of you got that they had breached the Leadership Code is not true. For some of you who are supposed to submit these returns, you have today and tomorrow, so you are still within time. But endeavour to file the forms with the IGG so that we do not have problems. You are expected to file these returns every two years.

3.04
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance. I am glad that I have been given an opportunity to make this statement. 

As you are all aware, our country is faced with a deepening environmental crisis of unimaginable proportion. Our farmers are confronted with increasingly unpredictable weather patterns, which is causing major strains to our food security and threatening the livelihoods of our people. Our fishermen and women are seeing the fish catches dwindle, threatening not only our fish export industry, but also the incomes and livelihoods of our fishing communities. 

Our pastoral communities have to travel thousands of miles to look for pasture and water to support their families and our national economy. Mothers and children across the country are spending a lot of time looking for wood fuel instead of looking after their young ones or spending time in school. All this is because we have failed to ensure effective stewardship of our environment and our permanent forest estate in particular.

Mr Speaker and Members, since 1990, we have been losing nearly 90,000 hectares of our forest every year. Of these, an estimated 85,000 hectares are private and communal lands. Across the country, critical wetland ecosystems have been decimated while important water catchment areas are being degraded. 

From Buda to Kigezi and from Buliisa to Mt Elgon, the evidence of our inability to confront this deepening environmental crisis is abundant land and mudslides, drying up water systems, escalating wood fuel crisis, environment-related diseases and a burgeoning cost in the form of land degradation and soil erosion being passed on to our children and grand-children.

The climate change phenomenon, which accounts for the dramatic changes in weather patterns that have confused the citizens, is an inescapable reality. And we know that because of our limited technological capabilities, our country has limited capability to mitigate the negative effects of climate change.

Mr Speaker, this is why I stand before you to argue out a case for this august House to rise up to its mandate to ensure effective protection of our forests and forest reserves. This is because our forests are our frontline defence to climate change; to a potential energy crisis; and to the escalating water stress, especially among our people across the rural areas of this country. 

Let me take this opportunity to remind you of our constitutional duty to be the guardians of the public trust over the natural resources of Uganda as stipulated under Article 237 of our Constitution.

In 2001, Government adopted a National Forestry Policy in which it promised the people of Uganda and committed to “…actively protect, maintain and sustainably manage the current permanent forest estate.”  The permanent forest estate is defined by the policy as, “land that is set aside for forestry activities in perpetuity.”

The permanent forest estate at the time the policy was promulgated stood at 1.9 million hectares of forests and forest lands located in forest reserves and forested parts of national parks and wildlife reserves. This land is held by Government or the local governments in trust for all the people of Uganda, according to Section 2(b) of Article 237 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The forests and forestlands have been set aside permanently for the conservation of biodiversity, the protection of environmental services and the sustainable production of domestic and commercial forest products.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, our protected forest estate is confronted by wide ranging challenges. The most outstanding ones are:

1.	The breakdown in law enforcement and compliance as elected officials and organs have usurped and effectively taken over the mandate of law enforcement agencies; 

2.	Encroachment from a land-hungry population and an agricultural policy that undermines effective integration of environmental natural resources in programme implementation;

3.	An apparent alliance between greedy businessmen and the political elite who are mortgaging our natural resources to win political support; 

4.	Perpetual underfunding of this sector agency as well as the district forestry services; and

5.	The absence of effective or failure of political leadership in the sector.

These challenges are clearly epitomised in the ongoing scandal involving Namanve Central Forest Reserve. Absence of effective or failure of political leadership in the ENR sector - and here we are looking at Namanve - the problem of this political leadership is the saga concerning illegal activities in Namanve perpetuated by Cabinet ministers and senior Government officials.

As you may be aware, Namanve is part of the area originally called Wankulukuku. In 1997, about 1,006 hectares of Namanve comprising of compartments 1, 2, 10, 13, 15 and 16 were de-gazetted to create space for the establishment of an industrial park. 

What remains of Namanve Central Forest Reserve today is located in Bweyogerere Ward in South Eastern Kira Municipality in Wakiso District, Central Uganda. This location is approximately 15 kilometres by road, East of downtown Kampala. Namanve is bordered by Seeta to the East, Namilyango to the South East, Lake Victoria to the South, Kirinya to the South West and Bweyogerere to the West and North West. It is one of the few public spaces and forest reserve lands that remain close to the industrial park, which we cherish. 

On 18 October 2010, hon. Maria Mutagamba, the Minister of Water and Environment wrote to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development offering the remaining part of the Namanve Forest Reserve for construction of houses, ostensibly for resettling the people currently living in Kisenyi slums, Naguru and Nakawa housing estates.

The minister responsible for the forest is the one who actually proposed to his colleague minister to turn a forest reserve into a housing estate without reference to the law governing forests.

Members will recall that when this august House passed the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003, we mandated the minister responsible for forestry to ensure the effective and full implementation of the Act. 

In his last Cabinet appointments, the President, exercising his appointing authority entrusted hon. Mutagamba to the portfolio of Minister for Water and Environment, which covers the forestry sub-sector. However, in the case of Namanve, like in other cases such as the management of kaveera, it has been surprising to the public that the minister continues to act contrary to the intention of this House as expressed in the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, which was passed.

It is unfortunate, therefore, that the very minister who this House enjoined the responsibility to superintend over our permanent forest estate has abused her honour and now works contrary to the mandate invested in her and against the commitment of her Government, which according to the NRM manifestos of 2001 and 2006, is committed to ensure effective protection of the environment.

I have been compelled, therefore, to give this statement because I detest the actions of the minister that are manifest in her correspondences regarding the issue of Namanve and at an appropriate time, I will lay these documents on Table.

In her October 18, 2010 letter to hon. Werikhe, hon. Mutagamba wrote thus, “If this is agreeable to you, a formal instrument to excise off this area will be prepared for gazettement.” The minister went as far as saying that the land was unutilised yet the minister should be the first one to know that the Namanve land is under the custodianship of the National Forestry Authority, an agency that falls under the docket of her ministry.

Today, there are also 75 known licensed Uganda tree planting farmers engaged in tree farming on about 510 hectares of the reserve.  These Ugandans have spent a lot of their retirement benefits and hard earned profit from small-scale businesses to establish tree plantations consistent with the objectives of the National Forest and Tree Planting Act as decreed by this very august House.

The complicity of hon. Michael Werikhe is evident in his acknowledgement letter the following day of 19 October 2010 in which he urged hon. Mutagamba to excise the areas mentioned. On 20 December 2010, hon. Werikhe directed the Secretary to the Uganda Land Commission to take appropriate action.

On 21 December 2010, Mr Mubbala, Secretary to Uganda Land Commission wrote: “To whom it may concern-” affirming the instruction he had issued earlier to M/s Wemo Consultant Planners and Surveyors Limited, to carry out demarcation and survey of roads as planned, to Kirinya and Bukasa Town Council.

Mr Speaker, since Uganda Land Commission is not charged with opening of roads in town councils, Mr Mubbala must have been referring to the areas in Namanve Forest Reserve. Mr Mubbala had issued instructions to survey even before instructions from his minister. He had done this without due regard to the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, which clearly lays out the procedures of de-gazetting forest reserves. And the National Forestry Authority, the body responsible for Central Forest Reserves by law, was deliberately kept out of this scheme.

When the surveyors started surveying the plots in the reserve, the National Forestry Authority promptly arrested them and took them to Police for legal action. On 22 December 2010, Mr Mubbala wrote to the District Police Commander, Kira Town Council, instructing him that the excision should be done without undue interference and requested the DPC to provide security to the surveyors against the illegal act against the NFA personnel.

In fact, the National Forestry Authority staff are now working in a state of fear because they have been threatened against actions like pinning a newspaper clipping on the issue on their notice board. One of the staff or many others, could be already intimidated.

As the private tree growers took on Government for unfair takeover of the land for which they had licenses without compensation, lawless elements, mostly army veterans, were moved into the reserve to cut down the planted trees, remove the tree stumps and they started constructing houses. They set up illegal road blocks and stopped the NFA staff from entering the area they had commandeered. 

They have set up administrative structures whose chair is now selling plots of land in the forest reserve at Shs 400,000 to Shs 800,000. At first, the Police were reluctant to help, but they have finally acted too late to save the tree crops that have been planted by individual Ugandans. 

As you may know, H.E. the President, in his July 2008 letter, directed hon. Mutagamba to halt the sale or licensing of forest reserve land to tree farmers. This directive, which has been in existence since then, is a major constraint to forestry planning and development in this country. 

As the political head of the ministry, one would expect that the minister should be preoccupied with ensuring that appropriate mechanisms are put in place so as to enable the lifting of this directive and allow aggressive replanting of our reserve forest land. 

On the contrary, the minister has failed to provide the necessary political leadership on this matter to ensure that this presidential directive is lifted.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am convinced that by their action or inaction, ministers hon. Mutagamba and hon. Werikhe and the Uganda Land Commission Secretary, Mr Mubbala, have failed the President who is their appointing authority, and this honourable House that entrusted them with the mandate to protect public property.

All in all, they have failed the people of Uganda who work hard every single day to pay the salaries and provide the comfort that we have this lady and gentlemen enjoy by virtue of their appointments.   

I implore this honourable House to rise to the occasion and discharge this responsibility as the guarantor of the public trust of the citizens of Uganda in the environment and natural resources of our country. In this regard, I call upon hon. Members to:

 i) 	Declare the existence of an environmental crisis and require that Government immediately allocates adequate financial and other resources to restore and secure the ecological and legal integrity of our environment and resources in this country.

ii) 	Condemn the actions of hon. Mutagamba, hon. Werikhe and the Uganda Land Commission Secretary, Mr Mubbala and demand for their immediate resignation, or call upon H.E. the President to relieve them of their appointment in public interest.  

iii) 	Demand that Government secures the integrity of Namanve Forest Reserve and restores the tree farming rights of licensed tree farmers. 

iv) 	Call upon the President to rescind his directive halting the selling and leasing of the forest to individuals by NFA as set out in his letter of July 2008.

v) 	Mandate the Committee on Natural Resources to undertake a full investigation into the management of Uganda’s permanent forest estate including the effectiveness of the current political leadership of the Ministry of Water and Environment as well as the issue of inter-ministerial and inter-institutional coordination. 


Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I know that the officials who are perpetuating the impunity that we see in the natural environment resource sector are our friends and colleagues in this House. I also know that this House can easily be paralysed on partisan bases given the state of the multiparty political system. 

However, my humble request is that there are times when men and women of goodwill rise above political partisanship to become statesmen and stateswomen. At that point in time, statesmen and stateswomen are separated from politicians and pretenders. I believe that today we are called upon to deliberate over a matter of national importance and to protect the common good of our country, for ourselves, for our children and for our grandchildren. 

We have been honoured by our people to serve as their representatives in this House. We have no right to be speculators of our environment in being decimated and our public resources exploited through greed and inaction. I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, I have the letters of correspondence that I referred to. I do not want to speculate. I do not want you to leave the House guessing as to what I was talking about. I would like to lay on Table these letters of correspondence. 

One, the letter dated 2 November 2010 from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The title is: “Land in Namanve Central Forest Reserve for construction of low cost housing.” 

Two, the letter from the Minister of Water and Environment dated 3 November 2010 entitled, “Land in Namanve Central Forest Reserve for construction of low cost housing.” It was signed by hon. Werikhe. 

Three, I also lay on Table a letter dated 20 December 2010 entitled, “Request for Land in Namanve Central Forest Reserve for construction of low cost housing for occupants of Kisenyi Slum, and Naguru and  Nakawa housing estates.” It was signed by hon. Werikhe.

Four, I also lay on Table documents that the Lands and Survey Department instructed to survey, and signed by Dr Yafesi Okia, Commissioner for Surveys and Mapping. 

Five, I also lay on Table the letter dated 21 December, 2010 signed by the Secretary to the Uganda Land Commission, Mr Mubbala – “To Whom It May Concern: Survey for Planned Road in Namanve and Central Forest Reserve in Kirinya and Bukasa, Kira Town Council” 

This one is from National Forestry Authority dated 22 December 2010 entitled, “Survey of Planned Road in Namanve and Central Forest Reserve at Kirinya and Bukasa” signed by the Prof. Muyinza. 

Another one dated 22 December 2010 titled: “Survey of planned roads in Kirinya Town Council” signed by Mr Mubbala. I lay it on the Table. 

Another communication dated 30 November 2010 from the Under Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Housing, “Deployment of Policemen to provide security to the surveyor at work.” I lay it on the Table. 

Another one, “Survey of planned road” dated 28 December, 2010.

Another one is from the management of National Forestry Authority, from hon. Maria Mutagamba, signed by H.E. the President dated 22 July 2006. I lay it on the Table. 

I also lay the memo entitled, “Directorate of Environmental Affairs” dated 12 October 2010.

The last one is to hon. Maria Mutagamba, “Land in Namanve for Construction of low housing estate…” dated 19 October 2010 and signed by hon. Werikhe. I lay it on the Table. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a case for this country. For God and My Country.  I thank you. 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Maria Mutagamba):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my Shadow Minister for this statement. I was talking to her before we came in, but she did not even indicate to me anything. 

Secondly, she brought this paper without my knowledge. So, I cannot answer her now. I beg to get time to look at it. I see that most of them are allegations but I will come back with a statement. (Interjections)  Yes, the letters are there and they are quite okay - they are showing the procedure, but I will come back with a statement on Tuesday. Thank you, Sir.

3.30  
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank my Shadow Minister for Environment for having brought out this eye-opener document. Many of us did not know that there were such kind of things going on in this country, but now our eyes are increasingly being opened. 

The honourable minister in her opening remarks before she asked for time to make her response said that these are allegations. We have had a series and a number of letters originating from her ministry which have been laid on this Table. I hope at an appropriate time she will come and tell us that these are forgeries which have been made by my Shadow Minister to, therefore, qualify to be allegations. But if these letters have really originated from her office and that of my friend, hon. Mukwasi Werikhe, I think the issue of saying that these are allegations should be done away with.

The issue which I would like the honourable minister to also bear in mind as she comes with this response that was made in this personal statement by my Shadow Minister, is about Barifa Forest Reserve. I remember last year in May, it was one of those forest reserves which were supposed to be de-gazetted and NFA having presented the environmental impact assessment report, came up and this Parliament made a resolution that Barifa National Forest Reserve should not be de-gazetted.

But from the month of November to-date, over 20 hectares of Barifa National Forest Reserve have been mowed down and Gen. Salim Saleh has established himself there. I do not know where he got the authority to go against the law. I wish you could give us this explanation.

Barifa National Forest Reserve is found in Arua District; it is within the municipality and last May, it was one of those forest reserves over which this Parliament debated and received an Environmental Impact Assessment report from NFA, which was to the effect that, that forest should not be de-gazetted; and we made a resolution to that effect. It was your junior minister, hon. Eriyo, who presented the documents to this House. But how come the General has gone there? The way Namanve Forest Reserve is being tampered with - I wish you could also come with that so that when we get your input, it leads us into a meaningful debate. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought we should give opportunity to the minister mentioned first in the letter to say something.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, it is also the first time I am seeing this statement from my colleague. I think what we would like to request for is to look at this statement, study it and then be able to respond to the issues enshrined here, on Tuesday. That is when we can provide a balanced submission that will guide honourable members for a better debate. I beg to submit.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. I thank the honourable colleague for taking time to raise the issues she deems pertinent to this country. She has taken time to lay on Table documents which most of us are not privy to and have not studied.

In her own statement, she prays that the committee is so empowered to look into the details. Wouldn’t it be appropriate that the relevant committee studies these allegations, listens to the ministers and we receive a report?

We are also aware that there are many other things we have read about the forest sector; we used to hear about money in sacks, people being arrested; it is something that a committee of Parliament can go deeper into and know what is happening other than reducing this into a ping pong between the Shadow Minister and the Cabinet ministers. 

I do not know whether I am not pre-empting the ruling, but I would find it appropriate for the matters to go to the committee and then we debate a report in future. Thank you.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important statement. I have listened to it and I have looked at the allegations contained in the statement. I have seen documents being laid on the Table, but I heard my colleague, the honourable member who made the statement saying she was bringing it as a statement on a matter of public importance.

I presume she was doing so under Rule 22(3)(j) which authorises a Member to make a statement of personal explanation or brief statements. But when we look at sub-rule (3), it says: “A statement by a Member under sub-rule(2)(j) shall be non-controversial on a matter of public importance or on an emergency and statements made under this sub-rule shall not take more than 15 minutes of the House’s time”.

Looking at this statement, first of all, we have already exceeded the 15 minutes, but that may not be very important. However, looking at the allegations -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, this statement has been read to us. Nobody got a copy, but the statement has been made and it mentions matters that affect us as far as forests and many other environment related issues are concerned. Now, the ministers mentioned in this letter want to make a reply and I think it is fair that they make a reply, and then we can debate and make comments on this statement.

So, I think the best we can do is that the statement has been made; nobody was aware of it and we cannot reject it. It has been made. So, I think it is fair to allow the people mentioned, first of all, to make their statements and then we make comments. (Applause)

3.39
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I took a lot of time reflecting on this and I thought it prudent that you just give me one minute to raise it. It is in relation to the extra-judicial killings of three Ugandans the other day at Ntinda stage by the Uganda Police Force. I know we may be having a lot of activities, but there are others who are planning for burial arrangements as we talk now.

The Minister of Internal Affairs is with us. There was an incident in Ntinda the other day where people were trying to lynch a boda boda suspected thief. The Uganda Police Force intervened in time and they managed to contain the situation, but two things happened, which did not amuse the public there and compelled them to almost fight the Police. [Hon. Members: “Were you with them?”] Yes. (Laughter)

The Minister of Internal Affairs should explain to this country what kind of training the Uganda Police Force undergoes, that in a simple situation like stopping people from beating a boda boda thief; we can have two people who are in a taxi on their way to town getting shot by stray bullets. This is very serious because the people who were shot and lost their lives, one was boarding a taxi; another one was getting off the taxi. What kind of training do we subject the Uganda Police Force to? They use force which is not proportional to what is happening at the scene of the crime. 

There is no way a policeman can get to a scene and shoot a bullet at a parallel level and not in the air. This is unacceptable. The training we give to the Police is as if their only responsibility is to disperse the Kiiza Besigyes and the Odonga Ottos of this world. This is to the extent that if we have a simple case of theft, they come with the same orientation of dispersing public riots and get people killed. I found a man lying in a pool of blood -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it should also be important for the minister to explain the circumstances under which individuals were recruited and given Police uniforms. They turned out not to be policemen. They quarrelled for their money and the Police answered by telling them, “Bring back our uniforms. After all, you are not policemen.” We do not know how many have not brought back the uniforms and are still parading themselves all over the country as policemen.

It is also important to add to this information from my colleague the fact that we received very disturbing reports from human rights watchdog indicating extra-judicial killings by the RRU, which is also a department of the Police. I would be interested if the minister was capable of shedding sufficient light on this fact. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean he is in position or is capable? The two are different. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, he should distinguish himself.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I equally want to find out whether the policeman who killed people in cold blood has been arrested. Where is he now? When is he going to be produced in court? We have many people being arrested and after two or three weeks, they are transferred to Karamoja and that is where the story ends.

Lastly, I want to know the burial arrangements because these were passengers in a taxi who were going about their own business. They had nothing to do with lynching the boda boda thieves. Today, they are being buried. Can the minister, on behalf of the Uganda Government, take full responsibility and give us a few details of where they can pick some bags of posho and beans to help bury Ugandans who happened to be unfortunate to be on that side of Ntinda and on the issues of compensation? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this is not a laughing matter. It is a very serious matter that has affected Ugandans. We have lost lives and, therefore, this cannot be a laughing matter. It is a very serious matter. 

Hon. members, I want to come back to this Floor on Tuesday to give you the full story. I got the report last night and I have not digested it. So, I do not want to come and give you half truths here. All I can say is that it is a pity that through the action of people who are supposed to enforce law and order, we lost two lives, innocent at that. 

My apologies for this, but I promise that next Tuesday, I will be here to give the full story of what exactly happened, including the report from the human rights watchdog. I hope I will be able to give you a satisfactory reply. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Tuesday. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was some matter of urgency in the issues raised by hon. Odonga Otto regarding the burial which may not wait until next week on Tuesday. I do not think the minister could have received the report last night, yet by yesterday morning, all of us were already aware of that unfortunate incident. Can he tell us the immediate action taken?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I do not want to make half-baked statements which I am not sure about. I appreciate this because I am being told. I was not aware that these people were being buried today. If they are being buried today, I am sure Police must have done something. So, can I bring a report on Tuesday and tell you precisely what we have done? [Mr Otto: “Have you arrested the man?”] Yes, the man has been arrested. That is for sure. (Interjections)  The man has been arrested, but you have raised many questions. You asked, “Where is he?” (Interjections) So, I cannot be able to tell you where he is now until I get the facts from my Police officers. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 BUDGET

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2010/2011 Budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee undertake a study and subsequently make a report.

ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE DESIGNATION OF A PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONER, COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS AND DEPUTY CHAIRPERSONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 10 AND 134(8) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.49
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION & NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, following the court ruling that affected some Members, some of whom were committee chairpersons and vice-chairpersons, the following have been designated to replace those who were affected. 

THE SPEAKER: You have to read the names? Give us the details.

MS KABAKUMBA: Commissioner David Guma Gumisiriza has been replaced by hon. Nathan Byanyima, MP Bukanga County and for the Committee on National Economy, the vice-chairperson –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we separate the two because this is a Commissioner and the other is a chairperson of the committee. Can I put the question?

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MS KABAKUMBA: Committee on National Economy, Hon. Erinah Wangwa Rutangye was the vice-chairperson and she has been replaced by hon. Frederick Mbagadhi Nkayi.

Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, hon. Peter Nyombi has been replaced by Major Sarah Mpabwa as chairperson while hon. Silver Bahane who has been the vice-chairperson is replaced by Dr Sam Lyomoki.

For the sessional committees; Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Juliet Kabonesa is replaced by hon. Stephen Kasaija Kagwera as chairperson, while hon. Grace Tubwita becomes the vice-chairperson.

Committee on Foreign Affairs, hon. Sauda Mugerwa has been replaced by hon. Hood Katuramu as vice chairperson. For the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. William Nokrach has been replaced by hon. Pherry Kabanda as chairperson and hon. Sarah Mwebaza Wasike becomes the vice-chairperson. Hon. Bukeni Gyabi of the Committee on Natural Resources has been replaced by hon. Faridah Najjuma as chairperson and hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi is the new vice-chairperson. On the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, hon. Stephen Bakka Mugabi replaces hon. Herbert Sabila as vice-chairperson while hon. Emilly Otekat of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government has been replaced by hon. Fred Badda as chairperson and hon. Mable Bakeine is the new vice-chairperson. For the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, hon. Mary Marion Tunde has been replaced by hon. Everline Tete Chelangat as vice-chairperson. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.53
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, in the same vein, I communicated to your office that hon. Charles Oduman, MP for Bukedea, becomes the new vice-chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, replacing hon. Rebecca Otengo. 

MS KABAKUMBA: What about the gender?

MR WADRI: The issue of gender means men and women; functional relationships –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I was not here. I was in Acholi inaugurating the tourism there, but there was a question by hon. Okupa who wanted to know whether I am aware that NUSAF II funds have not been released and that this is affecting the performance of NUSAF II projects in various districts. 

Obviously, I know that NUSAF funds come from a loan of US$ 100 million from the World Bank, and towards the end of last year, we followed all the instructions given by this House. We abolished the NUSAF Management Unit (NUMU) and decentralised the NUSAF funding so that it is the districts that initiate projects, submit work plans and we finance them. 

We allowed districts to recruit and train people who would handle NUSAF –(Ms Anywar rose_)- I am answering a query and I am informing you, my niece. So, listen. 

Between September and October, we gave them money to make sure that the people they recruit are trained. These people trained and eventually submitted their workplans by December last year. In February this year, every district under the PRDP region received money for NUSAF II. We have released Shs 15.861 billion to these districts - especially hon. Okupa’s which was allocated Shs 5.5 billion. He is aware and if he checks the district accounts, he will find Shs 557.674 million and very soon, we will again add a total of Shs 3.3 billion to various districts. 

We did this because we did not want the Office of the Prime Minister to be the one choosing work plans or things done in those districts and then claim that we are enforcing them. So, it is the districts to choose and we give them the money to implement. 

The details of this are that I have been directed that every six months, I must come here and give a report. So, for those who will be here in August, I will be here to make sure that –(Laughter)– if I am not the minister then, I will inform the minister who will be here, but I hope I will be here to make sure that these things are given back to you -(Interjections)– I am not campaigning. I thank you very much for listening. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the answer. It is a good answer and we have understood, but maybe some of the details you gave should only have come in the supplementary question. You should have said, “Yes; but so far to this date, this money was given…” and then you could have explained the delay. I am requesting honourable ministers to make their answers brief to the point. If somebody asks: “Are you aware…?” your answer should be “Yes, I am aware.” or “No, I am not aware, I am investigating...” (Laughter) Otherwise, as I said before, in some jurisdictions, 40 questions are dealt with within an hour. So, we should be precise and to the point. Do not give the background unless it is asked for. I thank you. 

3.59
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it a supplementary question?

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am not sure -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, with question time, a question is asked and arising from the answer, you may ask a supplementary question, but if you do not have a supplementary question, then there are no comments. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a supplementary question. Could the minister give, in writing, those releases to the Members of Parliament and all the stakeholders, to enable us effectively monitor our local governments?

THE SPEAKER: Can you give this in writing? You can say yes or no. 

MR WAKIKONA: Yes. (Laughter)

3.59
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I want to agree with the minister; I was in Gulu recently and they said that there were districts that had not submitted their workplans and that they would not be given money, and when I listened to Mega FM, they said that Amuria District was one of those that had not submitted. So, I was about to say that my brother district has not submitted. But how do you determine that districts should get this amount of money, because I could make a workplan to take the whole Shs 100 million? 

THE SPEAKER: The supplementary question to the minister is, how do you determine the quantity of money given?

MR WAKIKONA: I had explained this to this same House, but hon. Nandala-Mafabi wants me to repeat what I already explained. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi even asked me to clarify and I did, but there are many aspects that we consider such as poverty. If you have never been involved in war like in Sironko, we do not consider that; if you do not have IDPs, we do not consider you. There are many things we look at but all this will come in the written statement that I have talked about. Thank you. 

4.01
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Can I inquire from the honourable minister whether the municipalities are considered as we did with PRDP. 

MR WAKIKONA: Yes. (Laughter) (Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you asking a supplementary question again?  

4.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, how much of that money that you are disbursing is going to the vulnerable groups particularly the female-headed households and the widows in Northern Uganda?

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, it will be in a report, but since details are in this paper, I beg to lay this paper on the Table. Thank you.

4.02
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to know from the minister when he intends to bring that report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: How soon are you going to bring the written report?

MR WAKIKONA: Unfortunately, Kasese is not a member, but after about one month, I will come with a report -(Laughter)- although legally, you directed me every six months after the release, so that is August. But I have reduced it to one month to come with the report. Thank you. 

4.03
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister whether the survivors of the Bududa landslides are beneficiaries of that fund. 

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, Masindi is a beneficiary of NUSAF II -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I mean those people who remained up there in the mountains - those who remained home. After all, those in Masindi are also suffering. 

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker and my friend hon. Wamai, Bududa is getting Shs 2.1 billion for NUSAF II and the beneficiaries there will be considered like any other group in those areas affected. 

4.04
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister whether the share of the people from Bududa who were transferred to Kiryandongo has been transferred to Masindi District and Kiryandongo District because the first time their share went to Bududa District. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think the question is, “In view of the fact that people who were affected in Bududa are now in Masindi, do you intend to transfer what is due to them to Masindi?” (Laughter)

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda says you are free to settle anywhere in Uganda. Like now, I am in the North, but my salary is not paid in the North. It is paid to me. But I eat the food in the North. So, if people come to Masindi, there could have been some people from Masindi settling in Mbale. We do not want to confuse these ideas, but let us see how to solve the matter ourselves. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think the answer could be, “I will look into the matter and advise soon?” (Laughter) Next question.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 114/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICROFINANCE)

(Hon. Anywar and hon. Okello-Okello rose_)
 
THE SPEAKER: Question 114 was asked by hon. Toolit, who is asking it on his behalf? 

4.06
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Toolit is in Gulu working on an election petition so he cannot be here.  But I talked to him and he has mandated me to ask this question. 

So, Question 114/1/08;

i) 	“Is the minister aware that sub-county SACCOS in Gulu District have been denied access to Prosperity-for-All money on the grounds that they have not provided two years audited accounts, when they have not yet been operational for two years?

ii) 	Is the minister aware that because of the denied funding, members of SACCOS are demanding refund of their contributions, which money had already been used for registration, purchase of office furniture, payment of rent and stationery?

iii)	Would the minister inform this House about other sources of funding available for sub-county SACCOS that have not yet operated for two years?”

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, hon. Toolit wanted to know whether I am aware that sub-county SACCOs in Gulu have been denied access to Prosperity-for-All money on the grounds that they have not provided two years audited accounts when they have not been in operation for two years. I am not aware. 

Secondly, he wanted to know whether I am aware that because of that denied funding members of SACCOS are demanding refund of their contributions but which money had already been utilised for registration, purchase of office furniture, payment of rent and stationery. Since, in the first place, I was not aware that they were being denied, I cannot know the repercussions of that denial. 

In the third part of hon. Toolit’s question, he wanted me to inform the House about other sources of funding -(hon. Ssekikubo rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Let her answer and then you come in.

MS NANKABIRWA: He wanted to know about other sources of funding available for sub-county SACCOS that have not yet operated for two years. And I have this to answer.

The sources of funding for SACCOS -(Interjections)- can I be protected, Sir? 

THE SPEAKER: Members, you will come in later, please. 

MS NANKABIRWA: The sources of funding for SACCOS include members’ savings. First of all, SACCOS emphasise saving and credit. So, the funding for these cooperative societies begins with members’ savings which are accessible to them as and when they need them. And the SACCOS, therefore, must ensure that there is liquidity since anytime members can request to withdraw their savings. So, we always emphasise that before you go out to look for money or loans, members have to appreciate the culture of saving and the importance of saving.

The second source is share capital. We normally ask for the share capital portfolio when a SACCO approaches the Microfinance Support Centre for a loan. This is another source of funding for these institutions. However, unlike members’ savings, share capital is not refundable but transferable.

Formerly, the Microfinance Support Centre Ltd used to have a grant of Shs 10 million as a start-up loan for SACCOS. However, this has been stopped and the preference is to develop SACCOS’ capacity to borrow through business development services. It was found out that the grant was being abused because the SACCOS only looked up to this grant and normally after getting it many defaulted and stopped operating. So, we are now encouraging them to save and then we come up to give them the loan as they applied for it. I thank you.

4.09
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for the answers. I have only one supplementary. Can the minister give the House an explanation of the logic of providing two years audited accounts as a condition for accessing the money? You groom your SACCOS and you have to wait until after two years?

4.10
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the written responses that were at variance with what the Minister was talking about verbally. 

4.11
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I would like to know what the minister means by audited accounts because lack of any accounts is the same as having audited ones. If I have not done any business, then I do not need to have audited accounts. This means that people who have not done business for two years cannot access funds yet there are people who deserve this money and they fall in this category.

We would like to know from you if the Microfinance Support Centre has provided its own audited accounts for the last three years.

4.12
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): I would like to inquire from the minister what her ministry has done about the SACCOS in Gulu considering that the question by hon. Toolit was supplied in 2008? What has the ministry done since that time up until now? 

4.13
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): The supplementary question that I am asking the minister is, what advice or assistance could you give to ordinary citizens of Uganda who heeded the call of saving money with SACCOs but the money was eaten by managers? For example, in my constituency, the manager embezzled the money by conniving with the board chairman and disappeared. What assistance can you give to such people to restore their confidence of looking at SACCOs as sound financial institutions?

4.14
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Can the minister tell this House why the legal status of the Microfinance Support Centre is limited? In hon. Toolit’s question 5(2), you said that you are not aware. I thought that these questions were given to you well in advance to allow you inquire about them.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Hon. Okello-Okello, you raised a question about the audited accounts. This was a requirement as Government was building the capacity of SAACOs in financial management. We have since then reduced it to one year, but it can even come to six months if the books are kept well. We have made major amendments in the eligibility procedure which existed in 2008.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi wanted to know what audited accounts mean. I know that as chairman of PAC he knows it. This requirement was to make SAACOs behave responsibly while handling finances. You do not just walk in and ask for a loan when your accounts are not proper. The Microfinance Support Centre Ltd is a Government company and the board members are, the Minister for General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister; the Minister of Finance; and the Minister of State in charge of Microfinance. So, we have to make sure that we follow procedures that we established.

This was established to help Government pass money to SAACOs. SAACOs are taken to be financial institutions which are supposed to be at every sub-county in this country.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, since this is a Government institution, where are the audited accounts of the Micro Finance Support Centre Limited for the last three years.

MS NANKABIRWA: I have taken note of that and I will make sure that I do the needful. 

Hon. Tumwebaze talked about misuse of members’ savings. After being notified, we order express auditing and then look for those who are responsible for the mismanagement. If you have such a problem, then just inform us and we shall order for an audit at our cost. 

We have changed the eligibility procedure and we have opened zonal offices. We now have a regional office and this eases accessibility. We have intensified capacity building and I am happy that the number of SAACOs in the country that have accessed money has gone up to 735. We shall serve about 926 by the end of this year. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 115/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

4.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): 
i)	“How many children are under detention in remand homes awaiting the minister’s order under Section 105(2) of the Trial and Indictments Act, Cap 23, Laws of Uganda?

ii)	How many orders has the Minister made since 2000?

iii)	Is the Minister aware that children are being detained with adults in Prisons and Police cells?

iv)	What plans does the Government have to provide child-friendly and functional detention facilities?

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, in response to these questions, I have prepared some written texts which are being circulated. The first question is: “How many children are under detention in remand homes awaiting the minister’s orders under section 105(2) of the Trial on Indictments Act?” 

There are no children detained in remand homes awaiting the minister’s orders. Historically, the minister responsible for justice had a role in juvenile justice by virtue of the Trial on Indictments Act whose Section 105 is reproduced for your reading. But the most important part is sub-section (2) of that reproduced section, which states, “Upon consideration of the record and of the report transmitted to him or her under sub-section (1), the minister may by order under his or her hand, direct that the person convicted shall be detained in such a prison or other place of custody as may be specified in the order.”

However, in 1996, perhaps in recognition of the fact that the above provision was a colonial relic by which the Executive got involved in the judicial process, Parliament enacted the Children Act, whose Section 100(3) provides as follows: “Where a child is tried alone or jointly with an adult in a court superior to a family and children court, the child shall be remitted to a family and children court for an appropriate order to be made if the offence is proved against him or her.” 

The above provision of the Children Act, being a specific and later enactment on children, consequentially overtook the Trial on Indictments Act and, therefore, presently, convicted children are remitted to the Family and Children Court for appropriate orders and not to the minister responsible for justice. Indeed, this issue is being given appropriate attention within the Justice, Law and Order Sector. In August 2010, the Justice, Law and Order Sector senior technical advisor wrote to the Chief Justice requesting His Lordship to urgently give guidance in form of Practice Direction to the courts on the above provision of the Children Act. 

It is worth noting that Section 100 of the Children Act is actually broader in application than Section 105 of the Trial on Indictments Act, which was only relevant in cases involving the death sentence. 

Some time in the second semester of 2010, the attention of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was drawn to Miscellaneous Application 420/2010 - Geoffrey Agondeze and 11 others vs. Attorney General, filed by the Uganda Law Society on behalf of the 12 persons who were said to be detained awaiting the minister’s orders. While noting that their detention “awaiting the minster’s orders” was erroneous, the Attorney-General nevertheless entered into a consent settlement with their representative and the 12 were released in December 2010. The Ministry of Justice is currently not aware of any similar pending cases. 

The other question was, “How many orders has the minister made since 2000?” The minister has not made any orders since 2000 because it ceased to be his mandate in 1996 with the enactment of the Children Act. Indeed, no files or cases have been referred to the minister during the period. 

The other question was, “Is the minister aware that children are being detained with adults in prisons and police cells?” The minister is not aware that children are being detained with adults in Prisons and in Police cells. Detention of children in facilities for adults is expressly prohibited under Section 89(8) of the Children Act, which states that, “No child shall be detained with an adult person.” In all cases, the Police and the courts are guided by the Children Act, Section 91 which is produced hereunder for your reading.

The other question is; “What plans does the government have to provide child-friendly and functional detention facilities?” Government is already implementing a programme exactly aimed at addressing this issue. Working with UNICEF and through the Justice, Law and Order Sector project, Government is implementing a scheme whereby every Police facility will have a juvenile section to cater for children in conflict with the law. So far, 60 percent of Police stations around the country have been covered and the plan is to cascade the programme up to sub-county level. 

In addition, Government has constructed regional remand homes in Arua, Gulu and Fort Portal, and rehabilitated the one at Mbale. The plan is to cover all the regions. Working with UNICEF and, again, through the Justice, Law and Order Sector project, Government will soon embark on the refurbishment of the National Rehabilitation Centre at Kampiringisa and equip it with schools and vocational training facilities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.28
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask a supplementary question to hon. Ruhindi, especially when he says that he is not aware that children are being detained with adults. Moreover, he has gone ahead to say that there are four regional remand homes – in Kabale, Fort Portal, Gulu, Mbale and Arua. The answer he has given on page 3 that is dealing with remand homes, talks about safe custody. And in the spirit of the Children Act, a “safe custody” implies either a remand home or an NGO home gazetted by the ministry responsible. In regions where there are no such facilities, where else are these children kept? 

The second question is, “With regional facilities in place and knowing very well that the line ministry responsible for children is ill-facilitated, aren’t such children denied expeditious trial by virtue of being remanded faraway from the trial courts?”

4.29
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to ask a supplementary question to the minister. Do the children who are under custody with their mothers have different laws governing them or arrangements for their welfare? I was in Luzira Prison in 2007, and found children who are together with their mothers under custody by virtue of their age. Sadly, they were not being catered for; they were not being given enough food and were crying all through.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response. The supplementary question that I have – first of all, premised on the fact that the Constitution, under Article 34, envisages that if our children commit any offences, they should not be put together with hardcore criminals - it makes them lose their future; we also lose the opportunity to reform those children.

It is on that basis that I would like to seek further clarification. One, is that I want to state, for the record of this House, that time has been of essence for this question. I am saying this because as you recall, some of the issues are overtaken by time. For example, this response is being made in 2011 yet the question was raised in 2008. That is just for the record; but you also know that by 2010 there were only 12 children who caused us to start this investigation.

Anyway, the minister says, “Erroneously, these children were being detained on the assumption that the process required the minister’s order for them to either be put in a proper place or freed” or something like that. The clarifications I would like to seek from the minister are: “Does the ministry have a tracking mechanism in place, which helps them to know that in such and such a facility, we have only adults, we have children or we do not have them at all?

Secondly, since the enactment of the Children Act in 1996 – the minister is now saying that children are erroneously being detained – assuming they were waiting for the minister’s order - but in his answer, he then says that consequentially, the Children Act should have overtaken the provisions of the Trial Indictment Act. Now, based on that, has the minister issued directives to Police, Prisons and whoever is in authority in this country, stopping them from doing this erroneously as they wait for the minister’s orders?

Three, if the provisions were overtaken by that other law, has the minister moved in such a way to amend the provisions of the Trial Indictment Act so that people do not make erroneous judgment that put children under detention presumably awaiting the minister’s orders?

In addition, the minister says they now have facilities for 60 percent of the Police stations in this country, which means the other 40 percent do not have. It also means that you still can go to Serere District and find children detained together with adults. The same could be taking place in Soroti District. I would like to say that we are concerned that our children are detained together with adult offenders, which makes us end up with children who are very difficult to reform.

Lastly, let me say something on the issue of the remand homes –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Alaso, I think the advantage you have from this answer, which was presented in writing, is that it facilitates you to get to know the law so that you are able to notice that wherever these cases are taking place, they are illegal acts.

The minister talked about the Children Act, but the question is: “Is it the Ministry of Justice that is supposed to administer this law?” You have to find out whether it is another ministry so that you are able to ask whether that ministry is ensuring compliance to this law. 

So, if you ask the Minister of Justice, when he is not responsible for the enforcement of the Children Act, he will say, “No, that responsibility falls somewhere else.” Therefore, I think it is for us now, having been given these different sections of the law, to sensitise people and talk to the authorities that deal with these cases; hold them responsible and question them as to why they are doing the contrary. For example, if there is no proper remand home, then you do not remand or you remand to such a place where the facilities are.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, maybe I did not say it well, but I thought I was asking a similar question: Is there such a directive? Can someone go to Police and find any written document from the custodian of these laws telling say, the Police, how erroneously they are keeping the children in custody? That there is no need for a minister’s order and that please make sure –(some hon. Members exit the Chamber_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I request that you stay on because there is a very important matter, which we have to decide on. So, do not go away; it concerns tomorrow’s business on the Public Accounts Committee’s report on CHOGM. I request you to stay behind and we make a decision. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, like I was saying, I agree with your guidance, but since this has continued to take place, in spite of the fact that a law was put in place, it simply means that somebody should take action. And that is what I am asking for.

But lastly, I want to talk about remand homes, most of which are in a sorry state yet we need to give our children the opportunity to study while they are under detention in Kampiringisa, for example. However, this is not possible because the facilities are in a sorry state. I hope that Government will take note of this concern so that while the children serve the reformatory period there, they also have the opportunity to grow. Thank you.

4.38
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that in the whole of Kigezi, there is no remand home because none has been constructed there. The nearest is in Fort Portal. So, what kind of advice would the minister give to the judicial officers in our area on how to handle issues of child offenders? Should such children be freed into the community or should they be transported to Fort Portal, and if so, what does that mean in terms of justice for such children?

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members who have raised concerns and made contributions to this very important topic.

As you rightly put it, this response and the question raised by hon. Alaso provide reference points from where we have to begin and know how to move on to the next stage.

On matters, for instance, of amendments, I agree with you entirely that where two provisions are in conflict, there should be an express amendment to the law. I would like to inform the House that this will certainly be attended to.

Otherwise, certainly, the Ministry of Gender would have answers to most of these issues. Anyway, the only good thing is that the Ministry of Gender, as far as juvenile justice is concerned, is a member of the Justice, Law and Order Sector. I would like to say that most of the issues that you have raised will further be taken up in that other forum of ours.

I will take the liberty and the pleasure to invite our colleagues who have raised very sensitive issues, to participate in a dialogue with us when these matters will be ready for discussion. I know that we shall benefit from, for instance, the former commissioner’s contribution on this most important matter. So, I will take it up at that level.
         
THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

QUESTION 116/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

4.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): “(i) What plans does the ministry have to restore/rehabilitate the old power line from Serere to Bugondo? 
(ii) What plans does the ministry have to extend electricity to the rural areas of Soroti District? 
(iii) Is there any plan in (i) and (ii), what is the timeframe for the implementation of those plans?”

4.41
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hillary Onek): Mr Speaker, hon. Alaso raised a question for oral answer and I wish to respond as follows: 

On the restoration of Serere-Bugondo power line, my ministry signed a turnkey contract with LTL Projects Limited on 8 October 2010 for the engineering, procurement and construction of Serere-Bugondo power line. It is 45kms of medium voltage to serve the following centres: Kidetok trading centre and primary school, Pingire, Kasilo, Apapai trading centre and primary school, Bugondo sub-county headquarters, and Bugondo ginnery and trading centre. 

Progress of works

The contractor completed the detailed surveys and engineering designs and submitted the output for review and approval, which review and approval was accomplished in December 2010.

Procurement of materials is at an advanced stage. Delivery of poles and overhead lines, materials, will commence in the second week of April 2011. 

Manufacturing of imported materials is complete and the Rural Electrification Agency engineers are going to carry out factory acceptance tests within the month of April 2011. Wayleaves sensitisation was carried on 7 January 2011 and the area Members of Parliament were invited to attend. 

Commissioning 

Expected date of commissioning this power line is October 2011.

Projects in Soroti District and Teso sub-region

As regards plans of the ministry to extend power to Soroti District and the timeframe, I wish to advise my colleagues that extensive plans were made and they are under implementation. 

We are not only focusing on Soroti District, but the entire Teso sub-region, and indeed the entire country. The details are given in the attached annexes, which you can see overleaf.

I would request colleagues to study it and if there are any areas of concern or clarification, I am ready to discuss the subject matter for the benefit of our people in Soroti District in particular, and Teso sub-region in general.

If you flip over, you can see the projects and the costs entailed for each of those projects. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

4.45
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Mr Speaker, the minister made similar undertakings to some serious concerns that I had raised about rural electrification in the West Nile region. I would like to know what magic he is now going to use to fulfill the very elaborate answers he has given in respect of the Teso sub-region because these are similar matters. 

Since the former one was not done, I am taking this with a pinch of salt. What assurances can the minister give with respect of Teso sub-region, before we come back in respect to West Nile? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wish the Teso programme success if there was failure in West Nile?

4.46
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for this response. I have just received this response and I will be studying it. I think I will have to go back to the minister with some of those issues much later. But I just want to observe that these lines, like the Serere-Bugondo power line, is only on the main road and I want to tie it up with rural electrification work in the entire Teso sub-region, as has been pointed out by the minister. I am thinking that if the region has to develop, this power has to get to people’s grinding mills among others. So, it just does not have to follow the main line only. We cannot call that rural electrification.

The rest of the projects, I will look at them, but I can only hope that they will be implemented, because previously, we had cases of poles dropped in the same places and withdrawn after the campaigns. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you Members of Parliament are expected to monitor Government programmes and this is one of the exercises you should do. 

MS ALASO: Exactly, Mr Speaker that is why I know that previously there was a time they put poles and then they removed them after campaigns. So, I have been monitoring. And I am hoping that this time the electric poles will stay and be actualised. Thank you very much. 

4.48
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I want to ask the minister whether he is aware that in villages - rural electrification by the way means power going to the villages. And to install power in a home, you need a minimum of Shs 500,000. What has happened is that because they cannot raise the money, they have resorted to tapping power by hanging wires on the power lines, and this is a loss to Government! 

What does the minister have in plan to make power cheaper for Ugandans so that instead of tapping power from the lines, they get it officially? And hon. Werikhe knows what I am talking about very well, and that is why he is smiling. (Laughter)  

The second thing –(Interruption)  

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether hon. Nandala-Mafabi is in order to insinuate that I tap power using wires. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I come from Bugisu and so does hon. Werikhe. He sees what I am talking about even on his way to his home. And as a former Minister of Energy, he would have been best suited to have come up with a solution before hon. Onek came to the ministry.

On the issue of transformers, in villages, if a transformer blows, replacing it takes years. The reasoning is that it is not cost-effective. If we go by that statement - the reason why power goes to rural areas is for purposes of saving our forests, which is a very big benefit; saving water and many other things including life, because electricity is more environment-friendly than smoke. What measures is the minister putting in place to make sure that when there is a fault on a transformer or it has blown, it is replaced within 24 hours?

4.52
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora Country, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the responses. He did say that the commissioning of the Serere-Bugondo power line will be done in October this year. I want to find out whether that is the same timeframe given to other areas. 

I am aware that on the 15th and 16th of February this year, poles were delivered to Ngora specifically for the extension of power from Ngora to Kobwin and then Mpongoro to Ngora. I wanted to know whether that is the same date we should be expecting the commissioning of those power lines. 

Two, I just wanted to allay the fears of my colleague, hon. Alaso. In the case of Ngora, we have put our foot down. Nobody will tamper to remove a pole that has been delivered lest he risks some action from the masses.

Lastly, I noted that there are a number of errors in the annex that you have attached in terms of naming or topography, but I wanted to draw your attention, Mr Minister, to the last page. Kadami Hospital is under Kumi District and not Bukedea. I hope the project will not be considered a ghost because we do not have Kadami Hospital in Bukedea District. Thank you.

4.53
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to find out from the minister whether he has statistics of people who have lost their lives because of tapping electricity, and this is all over the country. If he knows, what action is the ministry taking to reduce the costs so that people can afford electricity instead of resorting to tapping and stealing electricity and they end up losing lives?

4.54
MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister whether he has a comprehensive rural electrification programme for the whole country with maps, because during the campaigns, some politicians were saying, “If you do not vote for so and so, you are not going to get electricity.” So, I wanted to know whether there is a comprehensive programme for the whole country.

Two, whether he is aware that in most areas where electricity has been supplied, it is now called road electrification programme instead of rural electrification programme? People who are benefiting from this electricity are those who have homesteads along the main roads where the power lines pass and you know the settlement pattern of Uganda is not along the roadside, but people are actually in the rural areas and they are not benefiting from rural electrification.

4.55
MS CAROLINE AMALI (Independent, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and the minister for the comprehensive statement. I can see in the minister’s report, the summary under the large schemes implemented, the lines from Lwala, Kaberamaido to Amolatar District, but when I check the load centres, I am not seeing any place in Amolatar District. The minister knows about this project very well. 

I would like to bring to his attention the work that is going on in that very district. According to the letters that were sent to you, hon. Minister, the lines of power were supposed to be extended up to Namasale but the engineers were there on the ground and they were doing the work - cutting off Namasale, which is very important in this project. I am also very surprised that I am not seeing any place in your report concerning Amolatar District. So, I want to get clarification from you as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you very much, colleagues, for the supplementary questions. 

Hon. Arumadri mentioned that there were promises for West Nile, which up-to-date are not yet implemented. It is true the West Nile project has been slowed down because of the source of power. As I speak, we are planning to install a thermal power generation station in Pakwach to supply power to Nebbi and then reinforce Arua power systems. This will involve putting five megawatt power generation in Pakwach for which we have the money and the contractor is still going through the set procedures. We shall also put a transmission line from Pakwach to Nebbi up to Arua. Along the way, there will be transformer stations at among others Madi-Okolo centre, an Army barracks along the way and so forth. I have toured those places.

I am really very sorry for the delay but it is coming. The unfortunate part has been Nyagak Power Station. The contractors there messed us up and we had to change and get another contractor. We hope that Nyagak will be complete maybe in the next six months. That is the promise we have from the contractor.

The long-term solution for your area will be to extend power from the main grid systems in Lira, and I think if Karuma is completed within the next four to five years then the problem of power in the North will be completely over. We are struggling to complete Karuma within the next four years. We are, at the moment, tendering for the contractors and if that is done, then the headache of power in that region will be over.

Hon. Alaso said previously, poles were dropped there and then removed. I do not recall that because I was not the minister. Maybe at that time those poles were being dropped. When my poles are dropped, the power will be connected, we do not lie.

Similarly, the poles which were dropped in Ngora to go to - that contract will be done and no pole will be removed from Ngora. We dropped poles there at Kobwin. Those poles are there and will not be taken away. Even in our areas in Kitgum, there are poles dropped there but because the components that go with the poles, the wires, are ordered from abroad and the factories have to manufacture and supply them before we start erecting the poles. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s question was that the cost of power connection is high. I fully agree that it is expensive and that is my battle with the power companies and the bureaucrats that want to keep the price high up.  I am fighting with them; you have seen them going to the press fighting me, but I am not bothered. I am not going to fight in the press. I will fight in the office to ensure that we get it right. 

About transformer replacements, those are the management weaknesses, which we have in the ministry. I cannot deny it. And we are also fighting to see to it that it is streamlined and there is efficiency in the management of the power sector. 

Hon. Wamai was saying, “How many lives are lost?” Well, we normally put on those poles a warning that there is danger and if somebody climbs well knowing that he could confront danger, then we cannot be blamed. There are others who go to steal transformer oil and end up getting hooked up on the wires up there. So, I really want us to be responsible by not climbing poles and then keep blaming Government or the power company. 

On whether there is a comprehensive rural electrification programme, we have a comprehensive rural electrification programme for every region and I will invite you, my colleagues to come to the office and ask for information about your regions. We shall give you all the information. 

Our bottlenecks at the moment are around power generation. We do not have enough power in the system for distribution and that is why things are going slow. But once we get Karuma on, and we complete Bujagali by the end of this year - I think during the last quarter of this year we shall commission the first turbines in Bujagali and have about 50 megawatts on, and within the next two to three months, another 50 megawatts should be on. We should be able to improve the power situation in the country and improve on its distribution. 

My friend talked of rural electrification being along the road. But you see the challenge we have here is that having a power line up to somebody’s house deep inside the village where our homes are scattered makes it difficult to plan for a scattered development. So, rural electrification here makes it difficult to plant poles like trees in the village. We have to follow orderly and planned settlements. And we are starting with the growth centres. We are encouraging people, particularly in our area in the North where I used to talk to people that those in IDP camps should not uproot themselves completely because they are growth centres. They could always go to their villages and have some other places there for development but not to completely leave the modern amenities like power and water which are coming to the growth centres with many people. This makes economic sense; anywhere you go it is only in growth centres where power goes. (Interruption) 
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Minister. I just want to seek clarification that where you have a line going along the road like the honourable colleague has said, and we have a group of say 40 or 50 people within one kilometre away from the road and they can afford electricity, what policy do you have to enable such people to access the power from the main line?

MR ONEK: Thank you very much. That is easy. Considering a group of people of let us say ten homes, and you want power, you can have a small transformer dedicated to that settlement and we have you connected to power.  But it does not go free; you have to pay the costs to get it connected. 

Now, the power line to Amolatar -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, hon. Minister. I have been battling with the company on that point. This is because when someone or a group of people contribute and they put up a line, they immediately start charging them and yet when you put up a line, the property belongs to the company. I thought the best alternative would have been for the people to contribute and then they make good their contribution so that they can offset the deductions from the bills for some months. 

So, I do not know what arrangements you have because we have had serious debates with them, but they say that according to the current arrangement, it is not possible and yet someone put in his money. Someone could have put in two to three million or even 10 million but immediately the line is ready, they start charging them. I would have expected that they would take that as part of the bill so that people can be motivated to contribute towards that investment. 
 
MR ONEK: Yes, hon. Member, that is the ideal situation. It is an idea which is good because when you pay for the poles to be connected to a cluster of about 10 or so people, those poles automatically become the property of the electricity company. So, I definitely support your idea that it should be factored in as an advance payment for electricity consumption and then it can be deducted over a period of time, unless you want to possess the poles. But those are things that can be sorted out. We are still trying to streamline the sector. 

The question raised about the power line from Luala to Ochero to Amolatar, the line is supposed to go to the landing site, which is another 20 kilometres from Amolatar. So, that plan is still on; it has not changed. But if the work is not going on, I will find out why they have not moved because we are also limited with funding, but we are working it out.

THE SPEAKER: This question must end. 

MR ONEK: Okay, thank you. 

MS AMALI: Just a small clarification. Hon. Minister, I just want to inform you that the work is actually going on; the poles have been lying there for about three months but the manpower to put them up is not there right from Amolatar, where we went with you, to Luala. The Namasale part is supposed to come on. But I do not know whether it was just a mishap or what; I am not seeing any name of a place located in Amolatar District. I do not know whether it was just an oversight. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I thought that this answer was in respect of the Teso sub-region.

MR ONEK: Exactly, that is what I was trying to answer. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why the answer is about Teso sub-region.
  
MR ONEK: I think let me wind-up there. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for answering her on my behalf because the question was about Teso.
 
PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the ministers who have answered the questions very well. Yesterday, many colleagues were saying that the frontbench is lazy. Of course, you are not. I thank you for your performance. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, when I look at the Order Paper for today, there are two items remaining. One, is the second reading of the Bill entitled, “The Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2010.” We started on this Bill sometime ago, but because of a motion which was moved by hon. Epetait, and generally accepted by all Members, they wanted to stop the consideration of this Bill until the liberalisation Bill in question is tabled. So, the Executive asked for time to go and make consultations. I have been advised that these consultations have been concluded and they have even discussed this with hon. Epetait who was the mover of the motion that gave us a break.

The second item is No.7, “Consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting”. We handled this business sometime before we went for the campaigns and the elections. We finished certain items and left others pending. Actually, it has been pending before the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. Now, they were put on the same day and immediately, I was told that we consider the CHOGM report tomorrow.

I realise that we may not be in position to finish the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill if we start on it today and so, we shall continue with it tomorrow. The reason they were asking to consider it tomorrow is that according to the Prime Minister, a number of people affected or mentioned in the CHOGM report may be travelling and may be away for some time and this may cause us a problem.

So, I think we may have to consider the CHOGM report tomorrow. But if we consider it tomorrow, does it serve any useful purpose to start on the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, which you realise we may not be able to finish? Should I allow you time now to go, get your reports on CHOGM and study them so that tomorrow when you come, you are conversant with what is there? Please, look for relevant evidence because our concern in that report should be evidence supporting these recommendations so that we take time; study and mark the kind of evidence you are going to use for your argument.

So, I am seeking your view about this so that we decide what to do.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Retirement Benefits Authority Bill - we had already reached the discussion level and the various amendments that the committee is raising have already been agreed on virtually and we think that it will not take a long time once we come to committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: How many clauses are there? Do you think we have finished the general debate on the motion?

MR OMACH: There are 94 clauses and most of the proposed amendments are very brief. We are also under pressure from our development partners to pass this particular Bill and one other Bill, the PPDA Act. So, I pray that we start on this and finish it this week. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are saying that some of this work should be pushed to tomorrow and maybe some to next week. To begin with, on the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, I do not think there is any reason for hurry. The only reason for hurry we have is to liberalise the sector and in the sector, when we talk of liberalisation, we shall be talking about organising a law to create an authority to regulate the liberalised sector. That is No.1 and we should look at it in that context.

Mr Minister, we have 94 clauses. It cannot take us only 10 to 15 minutes to finish them. Well, I know that you have agreed with hon. Epetait, but he brought it for us here, we are the ones who supported him and he has no authority to agree behind our backs -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, yesterday, the hon. Minister of Finance had some discussions with me on the motion that I put on the Floor and the issue was to update each other. I noted with concern after sharing with him that there is a lot of inter-linkage between the two Bills; the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill and then, the Liberalisation of Retirement Benefits Sector Bill. Because in the second Bill of the liberalisation of the sector, there are a number of functions and roles of the authority that we intend to create and I was pleased to note that the Ministry of Finance is fast-tracking that second Bill.

From the dialogue yesterday, before the end of April, we will be done with it as well. Since this was a motion adopted by the House, I want to correct the impression that my honourable colleague is developing that I have decided to agree with him. The Ministry of Finance is doing the right thing now; to fast-track the Bill as Parliament had observed. I think, since they are moving that fast, in my opinion, it would better that Parliament handles the two together. I have really looked at the two, the situation would be better for us to handle —

THE SPEAKER: No, we cannot handle the two together. There is no way. You see, we can say, “After this one, we handle the other,” but there is no way we can process two Bills at the same time. But I think what you are saying is that the other is formulated and published so that when you finish the other one, we handle the other.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all on that -

THE SPEAKER: Since there is this disagreement, can we decide on CHOGM and this one? What do we handle first? (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Are you on the Floor? Was it just an interruption? Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, he gave me information because we thought he had double-crossed us, but he has confirmed that he never did so.

Of course, you have brought up the issue of CHOGM; I came prepared for CHOGM because I was supposed to have gone, but unfortunately, you are saying that it cannot be today. Likewise, if the ministers are travelling, it cannot be possible for me tomorrow because I have very serious issues of Bugisu Cooperative Union which I must deal with.

THE SPEAKER: No, as you see the line up on the Order Paper, it will only come after we have disposed of the Authority Bill. The question is, can we really finish that Authority Bill today to be able to handle the CHOGM report? If we do not finish it, don’t you see that we will deal with the Authority Bill tomorrow when actually they have indicated that some of the people in the CHOGM report may be away for some time and that will delay us?

That is why I am asking, what do you think? Should we proceed with the Authority Bill and if we do not proceed today, should it be tomorrow? Which one should we handle?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, there was a request today in Cabinet that we handle CHOGM tomorrow because many of those ministers affected may be travelling, like hon. Kutesa.

But now, the dilemma is that I have been informed by the Minister of Finance that the development partners want us to complete the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. (Interjections) They help us. If people give you money, you cannot ignore them. (Interjections) So, under the circumstances, what I suggest we do is that we expeditiously handle the Retirement Benefits Authority Bill and then we shall do CHOGM. I think we should not end at 6.00 p.m., we could go up to 8.00 p.m. You see what I mean; so that we get rid of CHOGM? That is my view. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the humble plea that has been advanced by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I know there are a lot of interested parties as far as this law is concerned. Even those of us, who may not be beneficiaries now, are also heading towards that. Therefore, it is going to be in our interest to put in place such a law. 

However, last week when Dr Epetait moved the motion, the motion attracted support from both sides of the House. In unison, we agreed not to waste time going through these Bills in piecemeal. We decided to let one follow the other. On that day, I vividly recall, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business came up and made a commitment that they were going to expedite the liaison of retirement with the liberalisation Bill so that the two follow one another. That was the position we agreed upon as we left –(Interjections)- the House that day –(Interjections)- That was the position; I stand to be corrected. We still have people who were here –(Interjections)- they will refresh our minds. If you want some clarification, I will give you the Floor. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Hon. Omach made it clear that the liberalisation policy can only be made in two months. Am I right? So, that was the position. They are handling it and you have to interface with a number of stakeholders. It takes a bit of time. So, I could not have made that statement and I did not.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I vividly recall you were the last person to talk about that issue. Your minister never talked after you. You talked last and it was on that basis that we not only gave you that respect because it had passed through your hands, but because you presented it so well that we said, “Okay, let us leave it at that. Let the two come together.” You were the last person to talk. Actually, you had gone out of the House and immediately after watching from the monitor that this was a heated debate, you walked back. You were the last person. We can get the Hansard to that effect. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you hon. Wadri for giving way. When the debate on the Bill started, I was out of the country and I got a lot of calls from workers and their organisations. Later on, the workers were monitoring the debate and they told me that the debate had been suspended pending discussion of the liberalisation Bill. That is what I got. 

Before I came here - because I came back this morning - the workers told me – right now, they are attending a workshop organised by the Ministry of Gender handling the same Bill with the right stakeholders. The Ministry of Finance did not use the right stakeholders. They are pursuing the agenda of development partners, not the beneficiaries of this Bill. The workers were not involved at all and the stakeholders, including the Ministry of Gender, continued – there is even this letter, which I found in my pigeonhole talking about the same debate.

Apart from the point of the liberalisation Bill, you know very well that some time last year, Parliament made a commitment to come up with a law amending the NSSF Act. (Interjections) No, I am giving information. Apart from the debate on the other important Bill, even before you talk of liberalisation and of this other authority, there are very strong issues within the current NSSF Act, which we thought – the workers want amended – before you liberalise and you allow an authority, which has a lot of issues -

First of all, the approach to this Bill – the Ministry of Finance is handling it as if it is an insurance law, disregarding the workers’ sentiments because there are two aspects to this Bill. Of course, there is the insurance aspect, but there is also the aspect of retirement which the Ministry of Finance has ignored. 

Because of that, I suggest that we handle CHOGM and allow consultations to continue. I do not know why we are rushing. What is the reason -(Interjections)- for you to rush and say that we should expedite the process today and finish the retirement, which has a lot of concerns of the workers? The purpose of the law is to improve the situation not just to bring something where the stakeholders have been ignored. Even some time ago, about three months ago, workers marched out of a meeting with the Ministry of Finance –(Interjections)- because of certain issues and the ministry ignored them. They just said, “We do not care.”  (Interjections) So, why is the Ministry of Finance mismanaging issues of retirement without involvement of the rightful owners; the rightful stakeholders and the people who have the issues that must be debated?  

So, Mr Speaker, the information I am giving to my colleague is that this Bill is being debated and pursued on a wrong premise with the Ministry of Finance that has no locus in terms of retirement issues, to represent the workers, and is ignoring all other stakeholders who have issues pertaining to this retirement.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Dr Lyomoki. I think hon. Kabakumba made the right choice for your new position as the chair for discipline. You are really doing the right work. (Laughter) You have started it on the right foot by bringing some sanity. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Wadri. I think it is good that sometimes the House goes back on its own memory and there are precedents in this House. Once, we prayed that a certain Bill – the debate on one Bill deferred for a while as we considered the other. I remember vividly when the Bill for the benefits of the Prime Minister and the Vice-President was brought in the House; a similar debate arose and we said that we needed the other Bill for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker’s emoluments. The House was agreeable and we worked very peacefully and passed both pieces of legislation. How I pray that that precedent will be evoked tonight to help us handle these other two pieces of legislation also -(Interjections)- which was good for us as an institution and for the Executive, and should also be good for the workers. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at the report of the committee and the people that they consulted - the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Public Service, the National Organisation of Trade Unions and the National Social Security Fund, the workers were consulted. Secondly, -(Interjections)– when I wanted to give you information, you did not accept. So, I am not accepting yours. 

Secondly, the workers’ representatives in this Parliament gave their submissions in writing in regard to this Bill that is now a subject of discussion, and most of the things they are raising fall under the liberalisation Bill and not under regulations, and this was clearly indicated to them. 

Thirdly, in consultation with the mover of the motion, hon. Epetait, we have gone ahead to fast-track the finalisation of the Liberalisation of the Retirement Benefits Sector Bill, 2010 and on Friday of this week, we called a stakeholders’ retreat to look at it and when they come out with their position, this will go to strengthening the draft arrangement of the liberalisation Bill. 

So, we believe that instead of the two months that the Prime Minister mentioned last week, we think that within one month, the Bill will be here for the first reading. My submission is not that we should not handle the CHOGM report, but we are praying that the issue of the Regulatory Authority Bill be debated first tomorrow and then the CHOGM report debate can follow. I have mentioned both to the – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are the ones who said that a number of people mentioned in the CHOGM report will be travelling and that is why we wanted it to be disposed of this week before they travel. He wanted to be given a day - that is tomorrow – to complete it and then they can travel and maybe next week on Tuesday, we can handle this Authority Bill. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I was still on the Floor and I think we are coming to a point of agreement further enhanced by the minister’s statement that when he held a discussion with hon. Epetait, they agreed that it would take them a maximum of one month to fast-track the liberalisation Bill, and as I said earlier in my opening remarks, all of us are beneficiaries to these two Bills in one way or another. We are workers and there are other workers out there who are also interested in these Bills being enacted. Therefore, now that we have all realised that it is important that these two Bills follow each other, my humble request is that we keep our fingers crossed and wait for this one month. One month is not too long to cause unnecessary despair in our society. We can wait for this one month, consult and bring on board all the stakeholders in which case we can, in the meantime, commit tomorrow to considering the CHOGM report since some of the people who are alleged to have been involved in the mismanagement of resources that has been investigated by both PAC and the Auditor-General’s chambers are going to be out of the country on official duties. We can give them tomorrow to debate the CHOGM report. Meanwhile, the minister can network with his other colleagues in Government to fast-track the Bill and then within a month, they bring it back to us. I thank you. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the Minister of Finance is asking us to do is to allow him take a short-cut and the short-cut is that we first bring this Bill of the retirement benefits and finish it and then later, we come to liberalisation. The reasons which have been moved are that one, the donors are pushing us. We cannot have that here.

Secondly, you will notice that if we deal with this matter anticipating another Bill which should have come first, we will be left in a clumsy position if Government does not agree. We will be legislating in anticipation. 

Mr Speaker, we need to borrow the experience of other sectors in the past, which were liberalised. Some of them are the telecom and electricity sectors. I remember very well that the matters of unbundling UPTC and the matter of creation of the Uganda Communications Commission – (interjections)– yes, which one followed the other? You cannot say we want to have a regulator in a sector which is not yet open to competition. The minimum you can have is to have these move together because if you bring in a regulator in a sector which will later not be liberalised and if you do not amend the NSSF Act, it will mean that you will have passed an irrelevant Act of bringing in a regulator with no competition. So, in order that this House may not be left in a clumsy position to legislate now and to bring in a regulator before you have competition open, before you amend the NSSF Act, before you open the door to other players and if the liberalisation Bill cannot come first, as a minimum, let us have these Bills move together. 

I suggest that since this Bill has no more serious contention, let us have the Bill read for the first time and the moment the first reading is done, the information contained in that Bill will already be available to this House and we can synchronise these Bills. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Oduman, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is currently handling the Insolvency Bill. In fact, it is not even a request that the two laws move concurrently but there is even collective binding of the bankruptcy and Companies Acts. In fact, they are combining three legislations into one book to make easy reference. You do not have to run to the Companies Act or the bankruptcy laws. So, in this particular case, you would actually need one law. We can have one piece of work other than leaving it to the people of downtown like the Kampala Law Reports which are being stressed with collecting legislations related to family, binding and printing again. We could have one legislation with one name for both - the retirement benefits and liberalisation of this sector Bill - and move once and for all. 

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the additional information that I would like to give to colleagues is that we have been analysing the proposed Bill and the NSSF Act and you cannot come up with this Bill without amending the NSSF Act. There is a lot of confusion. So, the problem here is that the Ministry of Finance is doing things without even looking at the way the legislation has been operating in the labour sector because they have not involved the Ministry of Labour. So, you will have a lot of clashes in interpreting this Bill. So, what happens to the NSSF board, because according to the law they have authority? Now, you are bringing another Bill before you amend the other one. You will bring a lot of controversy. 

And those are the issues that we wanted to sort out. Why do you rush a law? For us, we know about laws relating to retirement that will clash with this Bill, but Ministry of Finance has gone ahead without looking at those laws and this is the information that we want to assist you with. Why are we rushing to bring controversies and a lot of clashing of laws and that dilemma? 

And the workers who the minister says came to the finance committee, came to push this position. You cannot include workers and say that they were consulted by the committee and they claim that they came to support what the minister was saying. That is wrong because the workers, according to my information, the presentation was that they were giving the position I am giving right now, which position has not changed. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- [The Speaker: “Conclude.”] Thank you. As you can see, this House is unanimous in the need to complete legislation -(Interjections)- no, we are unanimous in the need to complete legislation in order to regulate the sector; in the need to unbundle the sector and open competition. We are unanimous in that. Nobody is opposed to liberalisation. Nobody is opposed to opening up competition - that is liberalisation. We are unanimous on that. 

The only thing we need to come together on as different parties is, what should come first? The minister wants to take a short-cut but what we are saying is that that short-cut is dangerous. That is all we are saying -(Interjections)– it is a short-cut because it is going to make this House pass legislation hoping that the minister will come with another law. Why don’t we take the minimum? Let us have that liberalisation Bill here so that it is read for the first time and then we come and we deal with the Bill which is here. In that way we shall have both pieces of proposals in our domain. They will be in Parliament. We will not have any reason to regret later,   “Why did we have to pass this one first before the other one?” Because of any contradictions. 

But now we have one piece of legislation and yet there are obvious linkages that should be put together in one debate like it was done in the UPTC unbundling in the communications sector; like it was done during electricity regulation. Both proposals moved together and were laid here. So, Mr Speaker, I think we should wait until the first reading.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The debate on the CHOGM report was started more than six months ago. The debate on the Retirements Benefits Bill started just two weeks ago and given that we still need to get some consensus, I would propose that we can move and debate the CHOGM report tomorrow, dispose of it and then we go for the Retirements Benefits Bill.  

But also, I think it is wrong for the Minister of Finance to come to the Parliament of Uganda, a Parliament of an independent country, and say, “Donors are setting agenda for this House.” I think we are not really being dictated to by the donors. I want to -

THE SPEAKER: I think tomorrow, we shall handle the CHOGM report and because of this, I want you to go and read the report. You should debate it basing on facts. You should debate it basing on evidence and then we complete this.

I adjourn so that you take time to study the report and you come prepared. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.46 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 March 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

