Thursday, 31 March 2011

Parliament met at 02.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I continue to urge you to find time to come so that we clear the business still on our table.

We agreed yesterday that today we should concentrate on the Public Accounts Committee report for CHOGM. We started on it last year but because of events that followed, we could not complete it. A lot has been said about it and I think it is high time we completed dealing with this report.

We had planned to have questions every day, including today. There are two questions but I suggest that we take these questions on Tuesday so that after the minister has dealt with the National Budget Framework, we go straight away and deal with CHOGM but these questions cannot be answered today. They shall be dealt with on Tuesday, please bear with us.

3.00
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a point of national importance. As you may have read in the press today, part of our oil, worth US $3 billion has been sold by Tullow to the Chinese and the French and yet we, the primary owners of that wealth, are not in the know.

When I saw this I thought that since we have Cabinet fully represented here, could we be told when this Parliament shall be availed the copies of these agreements so that we know what is happening? It is very disturbing when our wealth is being sold by the inheritors when you are still around and we are not put on board. Could we be allowed to know what is happening with our oil and the status of those agreements?

3.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter that is being raised by hon. Ssekikubo appeared in the papers. I have been directed by the Prime Minister to contact the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development so that he comes up with a statement on this transaction. This is a transaction involving companies and, therefore, they should bring Parliament on board in regard to what is happening in the sector.

THE SPEAKER: Is it your undertaking that you will make that statement on Tuesday so that we find out the position?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the minister will be here on Tuesday.

3.02
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, regarding this case which my colleague is raising, I am speaking as the Chairperson, Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. All these problems we are talking about could have been solved if we had an oil revenue law. So, when the minister comes, maybe he should explain how far the Cabinet has gone with tabling the Oil Revenue Management Bill because if we had such a law in place, we would not be having these problems. 

Now that I am up, there is another issue of national importance that I want to raise regarding the scandal, which has been reported today in The Observer on Bwindi Impenetrable Forest.

This issue started here in the House and was raised by a member from Kisoro. You realise that there is no Member of Parliament from Kisoro district as they were all affected by the circumstances. Being their immediate neighbour, I am doing the needful and I will ably represent the district and the area. (Laughter)

There has been a report on an issue, which has been investigated about gorilla permits and the hotel in Nkuringo in Bwindi Impenetrable Forest. This hearing was being conducted in public. The committee was appointed by the Minister of Tourism but the outcome of that probe has not been made public. The public and the community in Kisoro, Kabale, Kanungu and Kigezi in general where these gorillas are, are not benefitting at all.

I am seeking your indulgence, Mr Speaker, if the Ministry of Tourism and Trade could come and make a statement on that issue. Also, now that I have seen the Minister of Works, the roads are very bad, and so is the revenue that is coming out of that sector. The local communities do not see any benefit at all in regard to this sector. 

I beg that the minister comes here and gives a statement on this probe that he conducted and a report on what next. How should the business surrounding Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and specifically gorilla conservation be conducted, what should the local communities expect and what is going to happen?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Banyenzaki for raising this issue. The additional information I would like to give in the House is that our own Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry went to Kisoro and Kanungu in 2008 to study this very matter. We have never received a report in this House. 

So, in addition to the minister giving us the facts and the details, we also want to request the chairperson of the committee - because there were also issues concerning my area in Kanungu but the report has never been brought to Parliament. We would like to know whether by the end of this Parliament, we shall have that report tabled and debated.

THE SPEAKER: Who is that question directed to; chairperson of the committee? He should also avail us with the report.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, concerning the matter being raised by hon. Banyenzaki about the levy due to the local communities from earnings in Bwindi Impenetrable Forest Reserve and gorilla area, he has clearly indicated that there is a report about this. As to whether the money has been passed on and its utilisation, we shall request the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to come to the Floor of this House and provide us with a report on Thursday. I thank you.
 
3.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your indulgence to raise a matter on education and seek that Government gives us an explanation next week. 

In the media today I saw a report that Makerere University has come up with a new policy which is going to affect over 1,000 students who will be discontinued because of failure to fit within the schedule for their various courses. I think that being a new policy, we need Government to explain to us how it is going to affect the students. Are they going to be discontinued retrospectively? Is there a grace period? What is going to happen to these over 1,000 students owing to the fact that the university has come up with a new policy? 

I am bringing this well aware that education in Uganda is very expensive. So, seeing you getting to the university and then you fail one paper and then you need some time to work and look for more money in order to continue with the course - that is why I would like to ask Government to explain the policy developments going on in Makerere and how they plan to ensure that students are not affected or drop off - out of a situation in which they were not initially informed about. Thank you.  

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the matter concerning Makerere and the students who are likely to be discontinued as a result of the new policy is a matter we shall bring to the attention of the Minister of Education and she will be requested to come here with a statement on Thursday. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in line with Section 3(2) and (4) of the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay before this Parliament the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2011/2012 to 2015/2016 covering the following:

Part one covers Government’s Medium Term Micro-Economic Plan and Indicative Revenue Framework; part two covers Government’s programmes for Social and Economic Development and Indicative Expenditure Framework; and part three gives details of the proposed sector plan and expenditure allocations. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Budget Committee should undertake to study and make a report in time because there is a timeframe within which we have to do certain things especially matters affecting next year’s budget. We have to submit our views to the President some time in May. And since we are concluding by 12th May, this should be done earlier than that. So, I am appealing to the committee to take up the matter and all sessional committees to study their sections in the budget so that the report is forwarded to the President in time.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you remember last year the report from the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report was tabled and we had started debating and taking action on it before we went for the elections that interrupted its flow. It is our duty that we complete it and that is why it is here. I am asking those concerned to make up their case. 

I remember a number of persons mentioned in the report made their submissions last year and in two cases, the “court” decided on what to do with the recommendations. But there are others who did not make their case who we should allow to do it today so that we dispose of this report by latest next week. 

3.14
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kinkizi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed, it is true that it is a long time since we debated the CHOGM report. At the time when we closed, we had listened to a number of ministers and other individuals who were affected and I think we had agreed that we take decisions on some of those who had already completed their submissions. 

Indeed, we took decisions on two Members but there were other Members who had not yet made their submissions. I wanted to suggest that we continue with what we had started, that those who had made their submissions and we had debated their cases, we conclude on them and then proceed with those who have not made submissions and then we debate until we finish all those who were implicated in the report. 

If that is agreed upon, I would suggest that we handle the matter of the Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya because from my recollection, he had made his submission and Members had also made their contributions. So I would like to request that we consider his case, put it off and then proceed with the others who had not made their submissions. 

3.16
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is indeed a while since we handled this report. We went for Christmas and then after that went for elections and most of the facts could have gotten out of our minds though we read the report. 

But I have stood up to seek your guidance in regard to the manner we are proceeding: have we converted ourselves into a jury where we debate and then say, “we have cleared this one?” In case we have not, then some of us want some ministers recommitted to this House starting with hon. Amama Mbabazi. We feel we cannot say that this Parliament has cleared hon. Mbabazi and hon.  Mwesigye and yet there could be some facts, which we feel they should have been probably here and others here should not have even been probably where they are. 

So, I am seeking your guidance as to whether we could recommit certain glaring cases like that of hon. Amama Mbabazi and Mwesigye so that the House can be enjoined to debate them again? In fact, those who are more dangerous have already been cleared. So, I beg your indulgence on that, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I told you before, the Public Accounts Committee did its work. We assigned it to handle the Auditor-General’s report and it made its report to us with recommendations. 

I told you that the Public Accounts Committee is a committee of Parliament. It is the Parliament to adopt a report of any committee, maybe save for Committee on Appointments because the recommendations of the Committee on Appointments do not come here. They just go to the appointing authority but with the Public Accounts Committee, it makes recommendations and the recommendations become final after Parliament has considered those recommendations.

When we handled this report last year or early this year, we started dealing with the recommendations one by one and they had made recommendations in respect of a number of Members. We dealt with that of hon. Omach of being overzealous and we found that, that should not stand.

The recommendations must be evidence based, that is important. It should not be a question of emotions but it must be evidence based. So, if you make recommendations which are not evidence based, definitely a respectable authority will not act on that. That is what happened.

When hon. Mbabazi’s case came up, I remember one of you asked for evidence and the chairman of the committee said it was circumstantial evidence. This is what is on record. Having considered that that was circumstantial and apparently you did not see the evidence, you cleared him and you said, “No, the recommendations in respect of hon. Mbabazi cannot stand”.

Now, we go to another and finally, we shall see whether we adopt the report or not.

3.20
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. The issue of the CHOGM report I think has been widely talked about in the public domain. In my understanding, the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament is the second institution of Government that has looked into how the resources which were appropriated for organising and managing CHOGM were utilised.

The first arm of Government that looked at the audited books was the Office of the Auditor-General and the Auditor-General, in my opinion, did his professional work. You realise that there were others which needed to move forward and, therefore, required the input and the support of the political arm. Hence, as per the constitutional provisions, the Auditor-General brought his audited books of accounts into this Parliament and we also need to know that the audited reports of CHOGM funds were a special request by this House. It was this House, after His Excellency the President sounded out and said, “Look, let the CHOGM accounts receive a special audit”. It was on that premise that the Auditor-General carried out his professional work and that work has now come before us. 

The Public Accounts Committee, in my own understanding, is not re-inventing the wheel. It works on the basis of the report of the Auditor-General in which case, therefore, it responded to issues of financial impropriety as raised in which many civil servants and politicians were implicated in the misappropriation of these funds.

I cannot take it that the Auditor-General made an error on all these people. In one way or another, others could genuinely get off the hook but at least one or two certainly will have a question to answer. When I look at the general report and the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, it has not made itself the alpha and omega of this whole arrangement. It has made recommendations referring some of these “suspects” if I may call them that, to another level of inquiry and investigation hence saying, “Look, we are incompetent to dispose of this matter, we feel there are some questions to be answered, we refer you either to the office of the IGG, the DPP or the courts of law” and if those investigative arms find that these people are innocent, obviously they will get off the hook.

I cannot say that PAC and the institution of Parliament are competent enough in carrying out these detailed investigations. That is the responsibility of other investigating arms of Government. So, I think we should really receive this report in that line but if we are going to say, “You see, this thing is not evidence based”, we are now saying, let the other third arm interest itself in it and if it finds that there is no evidence, fine. But to just come up and say, “My friend, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Ceausescu, you are free because the recommendation does not have evidence” and yet as lawyers, they will say, there is prima facie evidence meaning that there is something -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, as we were debating that report you remember that hon. Cecilia Ogwal at one point said, “Let us stop here and refer the matter to … I think, CID. But the House rejected that and said, “Let the House also do its work and then eventually” - you see, doing our work here does not mean that other agencies of Government cannot also do their work. We are not acquitting anybody. What happened as far as the two ministers are concerned was that the recommendations made in respect of them did not have merit. That is what we said.

Eventually, after having considered all that, a question will be put as to whether we are adopting the report subject to this and the other. This is what is going to happen. We are not throwing away the report. We are still considering the report but it happened that there were certain specific recommendations that were made that were handled and the House did not believe or accept them. That is what happened.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I want to make an appeal to this House -(Interruption)

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree entirely that hon. Wadri is my friend but I am not Ceausescu. (Laughter) He referred to me as Ceausescu; Ceausescu was a dictator in Romania who was executed along with his wife and children. So, any reference to me as Ceausescu maybe interpreted as a wish by the hon. Wadri that my entire family is obliterated. (Laughter) So, I would like him to pull that out of the record. I am not Ceausescu. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, hon. Sam Kutesa is my long time friend. He was one of those who inspired us into joining politics. He was a member of the Democratic Party and he contested in Mbarara North Constituency with the present President in 1980 and you beat the UPM candidate then. So, I know you and the point I am making is, the name Ceausescu - you just go back to your history of the Hansard of this House. (Laughter) You are the very one who introduced the name of Ceausescu and ever since that time, we have been making jokes about it. I know Dictator Ceausescu was assassinated in 1989 in a bloody coup in Romania and all his children and wife were executed except one child who was out of the country. I know and you are not him but that was just a by-the-way.

The point I am making is to appeal to this House that the public out there expects a lot out of us in as far as sovereignty in debating this report is concerned. We have responsibility to this country, we have responsibility to the 34 million people on whose behalf we speak here, and history will judge us harshly if we do not take this as our national duty to come up with objective actions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we visited the President during CHOGM and he said that the country is not run on phones; the country is run on minutes and records. When you look at our report, it is based on those grounds. If you say that minutes are not evidence, yet the President said that the country is run on minutes – if you say that what we have attached is not enough –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, I would like to correct that; what I said is that it is on record. When we were considering hon. Amama Mbabazi they asked you for the evidence and you looked through your file and you could not find the evidence; it is on record. So, you said, “circumstantial”, and you did not elaborate on the circumstantial evidence; it is on the record. When they asked you that question, you took about three or four minutes then you came up and said, “circumstantial”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we produced minutes, and one of them was where hon. Amama Mbabazi was –

THE SPEAKER: But we are not revisiting hon. Amama Mbabazi’s case; that we dealt with. As far as hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Omach are concerned, we finished; we rejected the recommendations of the committee; but the CID can take it on.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you said you do not want us to revisit it and the reason you are giving is that the evidence is not there. And I have told you that part of the evidence we put were the minutes. Therefore, because most of the things we are going to deal with are based on minutes and letters does it mean that everybody should be cleared; because you are convinced that minutes are not evidence?

Mr Speaker, I want to conclude on this –

THE SPEAKER: No, if you think that minutes are evidence, you should have said, “Look at this minute!” But it is on record that after keeping quiet for about four minutes, you came up and said, “circumstantial”, this is the fact – this is “bwino”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the minutes are here, and they are part of the attachment. I can assure you that they happened, but if that is the direction you want us to go –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you Mr Chairman for giving way. On that day when we were debating, Members may recall that whichever evidence that was voiced on the Floor was vehemently “murdered”, and I remember hon. Nyombi led the team that did that. 

I was part of the CHOGM Committee that made the investigations. We had all the evidence, we had the communication – I was there when we met the President and I was present when the President encouraged us to look for those kinds of documents. I remember he referred us to periodical reports which I think should be tabled so that we can refer to them.

Mr Speaker, as you were saying, the issues surrounding this CHOGM report – we should not take decisions basing on emotions. A few minutes back, I was exchanging views with one of the Lord Justices of this country and the view of the learned Lord Justice is that the work of the Public Accounts Committee should be as good as final. The next issue to follow should be for the execution body to do its part rather than Parliament debating it again and say that, “So and so is exonerated”. Like one colleague was saying, “So and so is my friend, so I must vote for him to be exonerated.” 

What we are doing to the report of PAC – we are threading that report and the public has hope in this Parliament hoping that we shall take some action on this matter of corruption. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I pray that you do not encourage this kind of report on matters where PAC and the Auditor-General have already taken a decision. Let us finish this report within one or two days and make our recommendations and commit whoever is concerned to the appropriate bodies. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it your view that when the Public Accounts Committee tables a report, we should just say, “adopted”? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] That is why we debate it to agree with the recommendations. They made specific recommendations; in any case, we are not reviewing the decisions we made earlier. Let us move forward and pronounce ourselves on it. Why should you raise people’s emotions when the content is not justified? It is just emotions; should you judge us wrongly because we did not satisfy your emotions? No, that is not what a Parliament should do. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I stand to seek further clarification on your guidance on how we should be proceeding. When you look at our Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, particularly Article 163(b) “The Auditor-General shall conduct financial and value for money audit in respect of any project involving public funds.” 

When it comes to value for money audit, it is very difficult to give clear evidence. But what they are looking at is, was this sum of money really spent on this item? Even if the books show that indeed you spent it, which is the evidence you want, it is so intricate that the auditors come out to see if indeed it was worth the public money spent on such an item.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just to give you information in line with the –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, bear with me. I think it is a disservice to our guests in the strangers’ gallery this afternoon. We have pupils and teachers of Kampala Parents Primary School. They have come to observe proceedings of the House. Please, stand up. Join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome! (Applause) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving hon. Ssekikubo in relation to value for money is: it is not just about papers or minutes. For example, one of those who got the contract for beautification of Entebbe Road is in this House. There is no single beauty remaining on Entebbe Road and we know how much money was spent there. So, we are not going to say, “Where are the minutes?” There are no trees. (Interjections) The grass is almost like elephant bush. That is the kind of value for money we are talking about in this House.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, in that regard, therefore, when we put the measure so tight that you have to have evidence beyond reasonable doubt; that is setting the standard rather high. I want to inform the House that before Members are committed, the Auditor-General must have given them time and reminders to show and prove that there was value for money spent. Most of them - I know by the time the Auditor-General comes to submit their names, he must have gone a long way and he must have hit a dead end. Even after that, an opportunity was given to them by the Public Accounts Committee and you know after many hurdles here and there, when they finally submitted themselves, still they could not satisfy the standards until when we are here. 

Mr Speaker, guide this House in view of the fact that you cannot accept the circumstantial evidence which can be part of the evidence and we could, as in certain instances, fail to obtain the hard evidence we are looking at. I find it very difficult for us.

When we say that our discussion here does not –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am not saying circumstantial evidence is not evidence; I have been a trial lawyer for sometime and we know sometimes you can use circumstantial evidence. But when you say circumstantial evidence, you have to state the circumstantial evidence you are referring to. You just do not give a cover, an umbrella, that the evidence is circumstantial without detailing it. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. It is with that in mind that I would beseech you that when you are making a ruling on these issues, you take into account that coming up with hard evidence could be difficult –

THE SPEAKER: No, I did not. The Speaker does not make a ruling on this. It is you. The work of the Speaker is to pronounce the decision of the House. It is you who say, “We reject it.” So you cannot say I am the one. I am only telling you how to – if you want to be safe in the way you are saying it, maybe the committee would say, “We fully endorse the Auditor-General’s report.” 

MR SSEKIKUBO: And in which respect, Mr Speaker?         

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleague, before we broke off for elections, we had started debating that very motion and there was a procedure we had agreed to follow. I assume this is a continuation of that motion. It is not a new motion. The fact that we went for elections does not mean that we are now a new Parliament. We are the same Parliament. We had started on the debate, same motion. Is it really in order at this particular time, for some honourable members to debate as if we are starting a new motion? We had listened to ministers who submitted. The Prime Minister had a list of ministers who were going to submit. Some ministers were heard, others did not have an opportunity to be heard and they are here ready to present. Is it, therefore, in order –(Interjections)- for some Members to pretend that –(Interjections) - this is a new thing and therefore we have to set new rules and procedures?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said, at this juncture, we are not reviewing decisions we made earlier. We finished the matters as far as hon. Omach and hon. Amama Mbabazi are concerned. Let us proceed with cases we have not disposed of. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) Hon. Member, you are a member of the committee. I think you have said what you can say. You cannot be on and off. Let us proceed with the debate.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I sat in this House throughout the CHOGM debate. Therefore, I am privy to all that went on at that time. We want to know the justification on which we will base the next amount of time we are going to invest in this process. If it is a final position in this House – if the Public Accounts Committee cannot produce any other evidence apart from the type they gave us in their minutes and if they refer to the minutes as their evidence, that would be regarded as circumstantial and we already know the verdict. We know that we are going to go through a process of exoneration up to the end.   

Therefore, my view is that going by that precedent that is already set, we seem to be wasting valuable time. There is already a verdict. We are just working out a way of technically throwing out the Public Accounts Committee report. It looks like the mind is already made up. The circumstantial evidence is not acceptable and therefore, instead of wasting Parliament’s time; let a pronouncement be made because Shs 500 billion is not money to play around with when children cannot be vaccinated, schools are closing because they cannot feed the children and roads are bad! If this Parliament has so decided that it no longer wants the report of the committee and it wants everybody exonerated – besides, after you have exonerated the political heads, what business do you have looking for an office attendant? Guide the House and tell us to throw the thing out and we go home.

THE SPEAKER: No, my question – it is not me to say circumstantial evidence is not evidence. I am a person who has been dealing with evidence for a number of years and I know that circumstantial evidence is evidence. But when I say circumstantial evidence, I go to another step of elaborating what I am calling circumstantial evidence. As I have said, having listened to all these views, let us proceed to debate the report and conclude it but we should not say we review decisions that we had made earlier.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your guidance but I think we would like to let Government know that we are not going to be part of the process of exonerating people when we have evidence. We are not going to be part of that process.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With all due respect to you as the Chairman of this Parliament, I think we are setting wrong precedents. This is an issue that we debated for a long time last year and we made a decision. Are we going into history as a Parliament that pronounces itself on issues and then goes back on them? I think it is not rational. We have set a precedent; it is not reasonable to say that we should reconsider those people whose cases we have debated and since we have put a procedure in place which we agreed on, that we should list case by case, I think you need to guide us properly. You are in the chair and you need to make - 

THE SPEAKER: But what else can I do? I have said that we should continue with the debate as we did before. What else do you want me to do? Let us proceed with the debate; eventually, a question will be put on the report. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Why don’t we follow a proper procedure that we agreed on and when the time for debate comes, we will debate it?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I maintain that we follow the procedure we agreed on. But, hon. Members, we are taking a lot of time without doing any work. Let us proceed with the cases. 

3.50
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, now that you have allowed us to proceed with the debate, I want to begin with the Vice-President –(Interjections)– we are allowed to start from where we want. I have read the report over and over again. I have kind thoughts maybe for only three implicated ministers but for the others, if I were a judge, I would give them the harshest sentence this country ever had, beginning with the Vice-President. But to avoid embarrassing a high profile person in this country, and now that this Parliament is left with one month to go, some people may get to the Back Bench and others to the Front Bench. I really recommend that the appointing authority – the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni - should save us and ensure that we do not see certain categories of ministers back to the Front Bench because even if we talked until evening, Ugandans have a culture of stealing with a clean conscience. They do not feel ashamed and when they run to the House, everyone wants to hide under the armpits of the Speaker, as if he is also in the report. “Procedure, clarification…” what are you clarifying when you have put nothing on Entebbe road for beautification? What clarification do you need from this House? 

Every time it rains in Namasuba where I stay, there are floods. Where did the money go? And then you rush here for clarifications? In fact I am not surprised that today, the Front Bench is full. There are certain faces that we do not see here everyday but they are here today. We used to think they are very important “kumbe” we are also important. But we shall not be a clearing House; get somewhere else and clear your name. And now that they have allowed us to debate, I want to appeal to His Excellency the President to consider, as a matter of urgency, terminating the Vice-President, Gilbert Bukenya, even before the completion of this term of Parliament. These are my very strong opinions. 

I went to the CHOGM committee and I saw clear manifestations of conflict of interest and the Vice-President was impudent; he refused to appear before the PAC until the President embarrassed him and he appeared before the committee and they all started rushing to the committee. I thank the President for doing that credible thing. 

I have a lot of reservations on the issue of roads. I made a request in writing to one minister that the road to my home in Namasuba was totally impassable; it is not a private road, there are over 300 users and that minister in question is hon. John Nasasira. From his budget, I saw a team of experts coming to Namasuba. The roads were graded and paved and I am now in a very difficult situation because it was not a CHOGM road but it was done anyway. But there are other CHOGM roads that were done, whether well or badly, I do not have that information –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that much as you are lamenting over the road to your residence, the Akright Kakungulu Road was included in the CHOGM programme but was never implemented during that time and we were looking forward to having it probably redone after the CHOGM but since then, we do not know where the money which was allocated for that road was sent. But since my friend hon. Nasasira is here, we would like to see that money put to the right use. I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): I thought hon. Anywar was concentrating on forests and not roads but it is true that the roads to Kakungulu Estate were planned and had been among the roads to be done before CHOGM but there was no money provided. But since that time, we have provided the money and the roads have been done and I am sure hon. Anywar is aware of this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I submitted before hon. Beatrice Anywar came in, there are situations where you see that public money was used and you can trace the justification of use of that money even beyond the ambit of what it was budgeted for. But there are situations where you see CHOGM cars being washed at about Shs 150,000 per day. Honestly speaking, why do you even have to come to this House to explain? Are you washing the car with mineral water, milk or champagne? In Bwaise, people wash cars for Shs 3,000 –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to be helped to follow. Have we started debating the report?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we have started debating it.  

MS NANKABIRWA: There are procedures to follow if you want to raise an issue but not in chorus like this. I am sorry but I thought that we were going to receive submissions from the ministers who did not present but if we have started the debate, then we should know which particular minister or particular report we are dealing with. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard what he said.

MS NANKABIWA: Is it roads or the vice presidency? This is what we were following. We should finish sector by sector. Otherwise we shall not end the debate. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, my understanding is that Government is a system. You cannot come up to exclusively say that you are going to discuss CHOGM as far as roads are concerned without referring to the select committee of cabinet which was responsible for handling issues? Government is a system. It is like the different parts of the body working together. So, really, with due respect to the hon. Minister, Ruth Nankabirwa, let us look at Government as a system. Thank you.

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker, I wanted to inform my young brother. He made a statement that I refused to go to the committee and we were ashamed when the President came to their committee and then we started running. No, you went to see the President. The Attorney-General had asked you to see the Vice-President. I never refused to come to your committee and I never ran. Eventually, because there was a lot of hullabaloo, I said, “Let me go,” and I think you have all the documents written and the correspondences from the Attorney-General. So, I think it may be exciting for you to make a statement but you must make it justifiably so that it has substance and meaning. 

Two, Mr Speaker, I came here and made my submission. My submission was debated -(Interjections)- it was debated. Yes, you asked me three questions, Mr Mafabi, and the -(Interjections)- please, you should understand. The shadow minister of Finance asked me questions. I have been waiting. I want it to be finished because as they say that Shs 500 million was eaten and whatever, we are also human beings and we need to show ourselves. It is not a matter of continuing just to talk. You can advise the President as you say but you should not advise him on the wrong statement you made. 

Mr Speaker, I am asking for my case to be finished. If I need to be asked more questions, I am here but let us finish this report. Otherwise, we shall continue debating and debating with no end until this Parliament ends and then my honourable shadow minister for finance will not be able to ask me more questions when this Parliament ends. Therefore, I would feel more comfortable if we started and went to the end. Mr Speaker, I want to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I do not want to move a motion without notice for censure of the Vice-President because I also have that option. I have chosen the kindest, given my method of work, because the moment I move that motion, even if I have one vote, it will be on the record that we attempted to get him out of that office.

This Parliament has about one and a half months to wind up its business. Those who have won elections like me have won; those who did not make it; did not make it. There is nothing you need from anyone. So, it is an opportunity to stand your ground and tell these people off -(Laughter)- these people on the Front Bench who made mistakes. Unfortunately, the multi-party system has come at the wrong time where for some people on the other side it is not very easy for them to say what I am saying and when it comes to voting there are also others who will look at other people’s mouths to see how they are voting. I would have even probably asked that when they are debating, a particular minister should probably get out of the House because the rage with which the Vice-President kept talking and looking at me, if you are not courageous, you will not get up to continue talking. (Laughter) Yeah, because when these high profile people move out of here, they are surrounded by so many guns and we are expected to talk about them here when the whole world is seeing. So, at times you should even thank us for the little courage we have to try to clean the country of the little vices. 

But being the man I am, I will say - I even have more to say because it is only the day for dancing that changes not the day for death. We can suspend parties but you cannot suspend the day you will die. 

So, the little I have to say to all Ugandans out there is that whether we do not manage to censure these ministers, or to punish them, at least to have them talk before the world and try to explain themselves is a good enough therapy for this country. You can run but you can never hide. I am just 34 years; I will be here for another 30 years. We can even take all your assets when you are dead. There are people - women are delivering on “kaveera” in Pader and you own the whole world in the name of CHOGM. 

So, someone should apologise to us because there is no way you can wash a vehicle at Shs 150,000. Someone should apologise to us that you cannot use billions of shillings to beautify Entebbe Road and as of now it looks like a mortuary. I use that road. So, if you have a clean conscience, do the needful. Say sorry, we shall also forgive you and we shall forget and make this the last. But we may ask you to refund some of the money. (Laughter)

As I sit down, I want to thank some ministers who made some kind gestures. I have a very good road to my home. I want to thank the Minister of Works but those who have done what they did and we do not even see any public dividends out of their actions, I wish you well. But no matter how much money you have, you cannot eat a lorry full of matooke. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since hon. Otto started with the Vice-President, let us dispose of the part of the report on the Vice-President. 

But permit me, hon. Members, to introduce to you our children, the pupils of Mpumudde Methodist Community Primary School. They are here with their teachers. You are welcome! (Applause)

Now the case is on the hon. Vice-President.  

4.07
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did participate in all the proceedings when we discussed the CHOGM report and I think we exhaustively handled the issue of procedure and therefore I agree with you that it may not be tenable now to revisit a procedure which we agreed upon. So, I want to submit on the case of the Vice-President.

First of all, I want to defend this side that we have clean consciences and I do not think anybody sitting on this side fears to talk in the presence of any of the members of cabinet in front of us and therefore it is wrong to suggest that there are Members of Parliament who are not courageous on this Floor as suggested by hon. Otto.

I want to be specific on the report because I read the PAC report, which was presented to us. I also read the responses by His Excellency, Gilbert Bukenya and I think specifically he was being accused of ordering the direct procurement of BMWs thus causing loss of Shs 6 billion.
 
We had a lengthy debate and I thought we had stopped the discussion of the response given by the Vice President before we broke off. When I read what he said and what was talked about, my personal view was that he is not personally culpable. 

There are letters that he submitted like the one written by the President where he was clearing procurement of BMW vehicles. I hope the members do recall the debate and also have access to letters. It is my considered view that the Vice-President is not guilty of the offences being levied on him. This can be seen in the PAC report and also from his response. 

To allay the fears of hon. Otto, we shall consider case by case. By exonerating the Vice-President, we are not clearing everybody. I want to invite the members to join me in clearing him. 

MR ODUMAN: I would have loved to see the evidence you are talking about say from the PAC report. Judges give evidence before passing judgement. The way this debate is moving is such that we must adduce evidence to back our opinion; unfortunately, that is not how we are proceeding. Help us to know how the Vice President is innocent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is true that we are determined to clear some people. If you (Chris Baryomunsi) have read the report, you must have seen where the Vice-President is directing the method of procurement, where to procure and whom to procure from. Is he part of the procurement process? The cost of cars rose to 78,000 Euros because they were air lifted. We had time to work on the procurement and the cars would have been shipped. The agent whom the vice president directed Government to procure from was not a representative of BMW. The vice president declared a procurement emergency himself yet there are procedures to be followed. If there was a profit, then we should clear the man but if there was a loss, then we should not.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I was very clear and I was using English. The Auditor-General’s report was tabled in this House and it was considered by the PAC committee on behalf of this House. You gave us a report and I am here as a Member of Parliament to make my own opinion like anybody else. My opinion does not necessarily have to be similar to yours. This is not a court and I am not a judge therefore for you to argue that I handle myself like a judge is not right.

I have all the rights as a Member of this House to consider what you presented and to listen from the accused and make my own observations. I want to urge members of the committee to give us a chance to contribute because they had their time to talk.

I have read the letters as the chairman of PAC has said. One particular letter says that at a meeting of CHOGM sub-committee on transport held today Monday 28 May 2007, he (the Vice-President) directs while referring to a decision of the committee. That is why it is hard to find him personally culpable in this matter.

I think he was writing as the chairman of the cabinet sub-committee handling CHOGM affairs. I have read the letters you are referring to and they are in the English language, which I understand. 

Considering that we had discussed the Vice-President’s response and we have one month to go, I want to move a motion that this House pronounces itself on the person of his Excellency, the Vice-President, Gilbert Bukenya. I move that he be cleared of wrong doing and the recommendations of the committee be expunged from the record of this House. I beg move.

4.18
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to second the motion that my honourable colleague has just moved in support of what he has just said. This House has debated the CHOGM report in detail and the responses that were made in the committee report. 

However, before I raise certain pertinent issues in the report, I entirely agree with certain aspects of this report. Hon. Odonga Otto raised issues of beautification on Entebbe Road. I personally witnessed the round-about at Golf Club being dug three times and flowers being planted three times. 

I will rise again, Mr Speaker, with your permission, to contribute on those issues of abuse of the funds and other facilities that were provided. However, as directed by you that we are discussing the issue and the person of the Vice President the report is very clear. My honourable colleague has just highlighted and I second him that the Vice President as a person is not culpable. He did not exercise unanimous decisions; the decisions he took were as a chairperson of the committee. This committee included ministers, civil servants – specialists in their respective fields. The minutes were provided to the committee and it has included them in the report. It is strange that out of all the members who were present in those meetings – (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Vice-President chaired a committee of honourable ministers that we see seated in front of us. They had technocrats, lawyers and all the advisors they would have wanted to have. Is it in order for a colleague to stand on the Floor of this House and impute that the actions of the meeting that was chaired by the Vice-President were collective responsibility of which he had no bearing yet he had all those heads who would have advised him? Is he, therefore, in order to move this House to believe him?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the thrust of his argument is that it is not personal. He is saying the decisions were made by the committee of which he was simply a chair and therefore you cannot just single out the chairman and blame him for a wrong decision.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. It is unfortunate that hon. Ibi Ekwau does not see that you could be a chairperson at one time and your members overrule you on a decision. However, Mr Speaker, I want us to look at this in context –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Tanna, for giving way. We are fighting to restore the moral fiber not only of this House but of this country. The information I am giving to my colleague and this House is that it is one thing to be culpable and it is another to be responsible – even if you are not directly culpable - Saif Gaddafi was given a PhD in the London School of Economics with the hope that he would behave better in future. When he did not, the director of the department where he was given the doctorate resigned. This was not because he did a wrong thing as a director but because he felt he was responsible for a decision that was inappropriate.

So when we are debating, let us look into that direction other than simply pinning or denying. There is the element of responsibility which is important for the dignity of everybody. Thank you.

MR TANNA: To correct the record, I have followed the Libyan saga and Saif Gadaffi the person. But to correct my brother such that the Hansard does not bear a false submission, Saif Gaddafi actually received a doctorate correctly but the director of LSE only resigned because he received a donation from Saif Gaddafi.

As I second the motion moved by hon. Baryomunsi, I was not present the day Parliament absolved two ministers. A precedent was set here, the rest of my colleagues sat, names were mentioned and Members hurriedly cleared the other two. I think we should follow what was done – the names of the people that the committee has highlighted be mentioned, debated and we expeditiously clear or sentence as the report says.

I agree with hon. Baryomunsi that Prof. Bukenya is not individually culpable nor should he be held responsible for his actions in that particular approval that he provided. This is because the letter he is being held responsible for having written has attached minutes which explain the presence of the other people who consented, including the President whose letter was then provided. That shows you the genuineness of the person that he went to his superior and said, “Look here boss, the committee said A, B, C, D. What should I do?” The boss said, “If this is what is required, please go ahead.” Why do you hold that person responsible? I beg the House to support the motion that the Vice President be cleared.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. When we stand on the Floor here and a Member says that the Vice-President should be exonerated on the issues of procurement, does this mean that all the people who are implicated in the report on the issue of procurement are exonerated? Or do you want to exonerate one party and leave the others? This is because on the issue of meddling in procurement, the Vice-President, hon. Nasasira and hon. Kutesa are all implicated. So hon. Members, if we are taking a decision to exonerate one and it is all to do with the procurement of BMWs, does it mean that we are exonerating whoever is implicated in that?

THE SPEAKER: There were specific recommendations. So when he moves that motion that we expunge the recommendations touching so and so, that is what it means.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am a bit at a loss on the way we are proceeding. Maybe we needed Members to be on board and the best way to achieve that is by having the responsible minister answer issues. We would have expected to be informed by the chairperson of the committee or the minister himself or herself that the issues against a certain minister are these. Those issues can be answered as we assess. But for us to have –

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t they clear in the report? You were part of the committee which made the report; aren’t you aware that there were specific charges? Aren’t you?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, but it has been long, Mr Speaker – if we were revisiting the matter, but you said we are not doing that. Anyway, can we move procedurally in the right direction that in regard to a certain minister, these are the issues? Why are you hiding from even those little ones? If we have the report, let us have them on board before we proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we all know that CHOGM was supposed to be held in Uganda in 2007. We are saying that if we had followed the normal procedures, we would have saved a lot of money to do other things. 

We brought up the issue of the Vice-President because he was the chairman of the sub-committee of Cabinet that dealt with CHOGM. If you read this carefully, you would realise that there is clear evidence that there was a deliberate effort to delay the process of procuring the cars so that they could do emergency procurement.

The adverts to procure vehicles were run in June 2006, but on 7 July 2006, when they were about to open the bids, the adverts were cancelled. There were four methods that the technocrats had put across – sponsorship, which meant that if somebody bought a car, it could be used and later taken back the way it was done in the Malta, leasing, buy back and outright purchase.

If you read on, you will realise that there was a meeting that was chaired by the Vice President on 20 November 2006, where the issue of selecting Motorcare and the purchase of BMWs came up. On 4 December 2006, the Vice President, in a meeting again, said that anybody who talked about any other buyer would be held liable. The minutes are here –(Interjections)– yes; I am reading from the minutes that are attached to the report. And if anybody wants the minutes, I will avail them. 

Anyway, there was a meeting of 20 November 2006 – see page 13, paragraph two and it reads: “On the issues of companies that were willing to lease vehicles to Government, as was discussed at the last Cabinet sub-committee meeting, hon. Sam Kutesa informed the meeting that he had written to some companies, but so far only one, Motorcare had come up with a proposal to sell 30 BMWs and lease 30 or more of the same capacity for the principals. He further explained that that company was also willing to lease or sell more 120 BMWs of 300 series and 120 BMW motorcycles for the police riders and 60 Nissan Pickup single cabin vehicles for the police as lead cars.” 

On 4 December 2006 and even in the letter from the Executive Director of the CHOGM Secretariat, it is said that the Vice-President clearly said that nobody was allowed to say anything about issues of cars. These are the minutes of 4th – and I am going to give you the page. In minute 3, page 6 of the meeting held on 4 December 2006 – this is communication from the chair by H.E, the Vice-President Prof. Bukenya – in which he said: “The decision on transport that was taken during the 15th Cabinet sub-committee meeting on the CHOGM was final. The committee decided that since only one company had come up with a proposal to lease/sell vehicles to be used during CHOGM, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Works and Transport and the Chairman of the Transport Committee, were to work out the modalities with the company. All other companies that were coming up with proposals should not be considered.” (Interjections) Yes! Those are the minutes as per what the Vice-President said on 4 December 2006 just a few days to Christmas.

After that, they went to the President and told him that it was better to only lease cars. They later on advised the civil servants to start following up on the procedures. Later adverts were run, after which Spear Motors emerged the best, which meant they were supposed to be awarded the contract on 8 May 2007. See the letters that are attached. But before that, the Vice-President called an emergency meeting and gave some directives, in which he said: “Declare this misprocurement…” He later on set up an emergency meeting chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and Secretary to the Treasury and directed that it should be Motorcare to deal with. He even instructed them to go and begin negotiations immediately. Mr Speaker, having said that –(Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Can I give some information? Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi is going through the same vicious cycle.

I said that in the meetings we held – they held the first meeting when I wasn’t present, but I take responsibility having been the committee chairperson that suspended the international bidding. But I would like to say that this was done because we had not defined the types of cars and so on. On the 28th, which the ministry – and I hope you have copies of the minutes, Chairperson of PAC – warned that to manufacture a new car would take a minimum of eight months. That was in November – we were jittery. Some of us wanted to have a smooth running of the commonwealth. So, therefore, we already had made a decision that we were not going to buy vehicles because of experiences in the past. We had bought Mercedes Benzes which remained at the conference centre and literally cost government a lot of money. So, we decided that they should be leased, as many other countries were doing. And for leased cars, you get a lease and after you have used it, it goes back to the owner. This was the practice in Malta and Abuja. And we sent technical teams to asses that. I made a statement to that effect. 

I dislike the way the honourable chairperson PAC is saying that we went to the President and we tried to entice him into something. No, we had a meeting with the President and the committee in February where a decision was affirmed that cars should be leased instead of being procured. 

And indeed when the Executive Secretary wrote to the President, for which you refer to that letter, the President replied - this was way back before I wrote my own letter. This was the reply of the President then: “I have read your letter of 5 April 2007 concerning the above subject, that is, CHOGM procurements. It is clear that the complainants Benz, etc, initially did not offer the lease/rent option, which BMW did. It was therefore in order to proceed with BMW.” This was a month plus before the letter you are replying to, and it is copied to me, it is not smuggled, it is also copied to the Executive Secretary. This was in April.

It goes on to say, “The question then is why didn’t the concerned officials involve PPDA? There would have been no problem especially if the leasing cost was comparable to similar leases in the world.” And it goes on to say, “Leasing, buying cars, is not like going to Mars. There are plentiful incidents of these occurrences, therefore the prices are known. Why was PPDA not involved from the start?” [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Good, there you go!”] Wait. You must read this with a lot of brains. [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Okay, for us we are dense. You have the brains”] Can I Speak? He said, why don’t you go to BMW? But he goes on to say, why didn’t the officials – I don’t think the cabinet committee of ministers are the officials to look at all these prices. There are technical people, and that is why he was writing to the deputy head of public service, “Why don’t your officials go and check?” Were you expecting the chairperson of the committee of Cabinet to be the one to go to Malta and elsewhere to check these prices? I think that would be me going too far because I do not implement procurement. 

Furthermore, if you look at my letter which has been the subject of difficulty with you, which was written on the 28 May, in that letter I say, “There will be no outright purchase of vehicles,” because we made a decision on that, “All vehicles will be leased except 30 that will be purchased out rightly.” We made a decision on that. This was now four months to CHOGM. And I said: “I have directed to set up an emergency committee to ensure that the process moves within the timeframe and the funds available and meet the objectives of the emergency procurement.” I think in procurement there is emergency procurement, I was advised so. I said, “The committee should comprise of the permanent secretaries, Secretary to the Treasury, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs,” who was the key person to keep the money, “And the Secretary Ministry of Works.” 

I said in paragraph 3: “Therefore, negotiations should be initiated with a company to ensure that vehicles are procured on time according to the PPDA emergency procurement law.” 

And this was affirmed by a letter thereafter of the permanent secretary who said, “Go ahead with that same process.” I have given you a copy so it’s available to you.

Mr Speaker, let me point out one thing, which we are failing to appreciate. The process of delay, which I have asked you to investigate, was not a delay by me because I am not involved in the procurement. My purpose was policy guideline. And our policy guideline was very simple, “Go lease cars; don’t buy cars” because when you buy cars, although Chairperson of PAC is saying that the prices could be similar, you must continue spending on the car until you dispose off your car through service, oil change etc. 

When you are a government, I hope it will not be soon –(Laughter)- I am trying to say, you must take time to see what is the best you should do. 

Mr Speaker, I explained all these and all these are written in my document. I think it is only mere prolongation of our debate. I hope the chairperson has looked at my response.

You also further say I have used the word, “BMW” instead of “companies” and, therefore, I was faulty. We decided from the beginning to identify the type of car that we would need. And we identified Toyotas, we identified Benzes, we identified BMWs and we used that debate instead of who is the agency that is dealing with them. I did not bother knowing the agency because that is procurement implementation. So, Mr Speaker, I hope hon. Nandala-Mafabi can understand. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Vice-President, thank you very much for the information. Yes, you are right, they told you eight months and in short what they were trying to tell you was that any further delay with the process of procurement would lead to problems. I don’t know why you never agreed. But the President was very clear, he said, “Why didn’t the concerned officials involve PPDA?” There would have been no problem especially if the leasing cost was comparable. You never gave officers chance to compare. A Vice-President is seated in front of you and directing you on what to do. Who are you to do otherwise? In fact, under the Standing Orders – (Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I think it is important that this House gets it very clear the role His Excellency played. I will not be with anybody who wants to bring in the name of the President when the President, from the word go, was very clear and elaborate in as far as procurements are concerned. We don’t want to put anyone in problems but the name of the President should not be thrown into the mud. 

He is very clear here in his letter of 17 April 2007 where he was writing to Hilda Musubira, Deputy Head of Public Service, Secretary Administrative Reform and Executive Director, GHOGM. The subject matter is CHOGM procurement. He says: “I have read your letter of 5 April 2007 concerning the above subject. It is clear that the complainants Denzi initially did not offer the lease rent option, which BMW did. It was therefore in order to proceed with BMW.

The question then is, why didn’t the concerned officials involve PPDA? There would have been no problem whatsoever especially if the leasing cost was comparable to similar leases in the world. Leasing and buying cars is not like going to Mars. There are plentiful incidents of these occurrences and the prices are known. Why was PPDA not involved from the start?”

I wanted to exonerate the President in this matter. There is yet another letter to that effect - I wish I had time to read but I think my role here is that I just wanted to stand and beg whoever is concerned on either side of the House that for God’s sake, the President was very clear from the word go. I thank you.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If Members of this House agree to exonerate the ministers, so be it. If they don’t agree, let those ones who committed whichever offence take responsibility but for someone like hon. Sanjay Tanna to get up and say we exonerate all these Members because they were working on the instructions of H.E the President, which President is not here to defend himself, is not proper.

I also stand here to say, let us handle these issues and leave H.E the President out of them because he made many communications to the effect that whoever was concerned should follow the right law.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. The process of applying to host CHOGM started in 2003 in Abuja. There were two countries, which were vying to host CHOGM: Malta and Uganda. So from 2005, Uganda knew that we were going to host CHOGM in 2007 so I keep wondering why the cabinet sub committee delayed and then said to produce a new car would require eight months. But we had known from 2005 that we were going to host CHOGM! Why did we delay until the last moment? This country has got rules. There was PPDA and many companies applied to supply vehicles. Why did the Vice-President direct that only one company should be considered?

Mr Speaker, after seeing where the debate in the House is going, it seems a decision has already been taken and therefore we are wasting time debating –(Interruption) 

PROF. BUKENYA: This is information to him because I made a statement. Mr Speaker, he said we knew that Uganda was going to host CHOGM in 2003. Actually we didn’t know. Confirmation came in 2005 November and not 2003. That is the correction I wanted to give him and I don’t know why you were busy refusing it. Thank you very much. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You yielded your information, relax. Mr Speaker, it is good that they had known - (Interruption)

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Chairman of PAC for giving way. What is true is that Uganda made its intention to host CHOGM in 2003 in Abuja. That was rejected. The decision to host CHOGM in Uganda was made in November 2005 in Malta and I can tell you that even then, it was still in doubt because Canada had applied that they host it instead of Uganda because of - that is I think the time when Dr Kiiza Besigye had been arrested and Mafabi also? There were people who were going around the world saying Uganda should not host CHOGM and I see some of them here.

I remember having to go before Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group that does the disciplining or decides finally and if it hadn’t been for the support we obtained from Tanzania and Pakistan, Canada would have carried the day.

So, the decision to finally host CHOGM was made in Malta in November 2005 not 2003. I thought I should make that absolutely clear. I was minister then and you were under me. I know you but I also know the decisions.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the background to this is there was a time when they wanted to decide whether Uganda or Malta was to host, I think you were not the Minister for Foreign Affairs so you don’t know about it and I want to help you.

There was an agreement where the Prime Minister of Britain was discussing with Uganda and Malta to make a decision and there are minutes on that. However, let me deal with the issues as this is now irrelevant because in 2006, they had stated the process.

Leasing is where you get a vehicle for a few days and it goes back to the owner. Buying or outright purchase is where you buy and own. It is clear that if we had done outright purchase of 204 vehicles, it would have cost us 8,290,500 Euros. If we had hired 204 vehicles, it would have cost us 7,185,000 Euros. These are figures, which are here in the evaluation.

That means that if you buy, you need an addition of 1 million Euros to buy 204 vehicles. So, what happens if we had decided to buy the 204 vehicles and decided to offload them on the market? On average, each vehicle would have gone for 5,000 Euros, which at the exchange rate of the day, would have been about Shs 12 million. Which Ugandan would not have bought a new car for four days? 

PROF. BUKENYA: Hon. Chairperson of PAC, I would like to inform you that actually we bought or leased 144 vehicles. (Interruption) 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Is it procedurally right for us to see a dialogue between individuals on the Floor of the House when we are considering and adopting a report for the whole House? Is it procedurally right? 

THE SPEAKER: I don’t think there was a dialogue; people were giving information which was relevant to the debate going on. 

PROF. BUKENYA:  You know hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Member of Parliament for Budadiri West, the government bought or leased 144 vehicles. Of these 144 vehicles, 30 were outright purchases. And if you are doing mathematics, I don’t know why you are mathematicking on 204 instead of mathematicking on 144? Please, the smaller the number, the more expensive they are. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Vice-President did medicine and I did mathematics -(Laughter)- the initial number of vehicles was 204. All these prices I am giving you and even the ones I am going to give you for the 144 [PROF. BUKENYA: “I did more mathematics than you.”] At which level?  So, the initial ones were 204 vehicles and that is what I was giving on leasing. It was later on that  it was reduced to 144 and this is where the Vice-President is saying - I will even quote for you the minute; now you open the minute of 28 May 2007 on page 3: “The chairman observed that the cost of outright purchase of 204 vehicles was Euros 8.29....” You were the chairman. I want to remind you that you are not. But if the option is –(Interruption) 

MR KIGYAGI: Ever since I got here on this issue, the engagement is between the chairperson who gave us the report and the Vice-President whom we are debating. We have all this information; please give us the chance to discuss. You presented your report but you are again going into details and wasting our time. I would request for guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what really is happening is that you have gone into unnecessary details – talking about delays when CHOGM was supposed to come here. But that is not the issue because it was an established fact that there was a delay. What you should discuss here is whether it was a personal decision or a collective decision of the committee. That is all that we should be hearing. But going as back as 2003 is not necessary. The established fact is that they did not do what they were supposed to do in time. As a result of that was what was done proper? It was not proper. That is where we should be going.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude. I wanted to tell the Vice-President that in conclusion of what I have said, even in airlifting of the vehicles - first of all, the PPDA rules were broken by the Vice-President. Even setting up a contracts committee when it is not his job; it is the job of the accounting officer. 

Procuring an entity as an emergency and telling people that they should follow particular steps X, Y, Z and naming the particular person to go and yet the delays were caused by the Vice-President from day one, was a dangerous thing. 

Even the money he is talking about, for your information Members, the money we used to buy the cars was got from Bank of Uganda and was paid later. That is why I am saying that the excuse that there was no money, even the one which was paid was not there and the attachments are also on file. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, it is wrong for H.E the Vice-President to have got involved in directing and once you direct any civil servant or even a minister like hon. Nasasira or hon. Kutesa, you can’t expect them to defy a directive from the Vice-President because they will be committing treason. (Laughter) In that Ugandans lost because we would have procured the 144 cars which we had changed from 204 and sold them to Ugandans at 5,000 Euros per car if we wanted. 

We would not have airlifted where we made a loss of 748,000 Euros. If we wanted to buy BMWs, we would have gone directly to BMW which is a solo company with prices that are known and are on the net and yet what we paid was far higher than what we would have paid if we had directly gone there. 

In that regard, we made a loss and that loss was occasioned by the Vice-President of this country. Mr Speaker, I rest my case. 

5.06
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to start by saying that despite the fact that CHOGM was held, today we are discussing its effects. For the case of the Vice-President, only one thing can stop him from getting cleared and that is in his own remarks made in the report of 18 November 2010 when he was asked to clear three major issues. 

On page 15 of his remarks, let me read verbatim: “Indeed why he influenced the construction of the road to his hotel in Garuga at Ug Shs 200 million when it was not among the CHOGM roads to be done.” In response to the committee he said, “What is wrong with me having a road to my hotel? Is this not my government?” 

Is this fair to the people of Uganda? So, we are saying, what are we going to benefit? So, it is very clear now that politics is nothing but it is bread and it is about who gets what, how, where and when and this is exactly what we are discussing. When it comes to people attending to the household business not even at local, national or global level now - this is exactly what I equate to like when we are discussing some constituencies in this country where those incumbents should not fail at all costs and therefore -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you very much for giving way. I do not know in what context the Vice-President said that statement because it appears he was saying it out of anger -(Interjections)- yes, I am coming to that because when you say, “What is wrong with having a road constructed to my home, am I not a Ugandan or isn’t this our government”, it does not necessarily mean that that road was constructed. When I come to defend this issue of the road, I will show you evidence that the road to the Vice-President’s home was never constructed -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the Vice-President is in the House. It is grossly erroneous for a minister to stand up and begin to speak the words of the Vice-President in another version. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, he is a minister in charge of a sector constructing roads and he is telling you that no road had been constructed to his home. But hon. Members, aren’t we really wasting a lot of time? We have not moved at all since we started. We have a very big report, how are you going to deal with it? A lot of time has been wasted really.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I was there in the committee when the Vice-President made that statement. He was very annoyed which is actually very unbecoming of a Vice-President of any country. But that is not the point I wanted to make. Immediately after that statement, he went ahead to say - because I asked him, “Mr Vice-President, you breached the PPDA rules, you should be fired” and he opened his eyes and said, “You try to fire me”. Have you seen the President getting annoyed with such category of behaviour in public? So, I think those are the reasons why they should be relieved of their duties, according to my own submission.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very demeaning act and, therefore, if we are debating towards clearing these high profile officers, then it should have meant that they resign first and that would mean that they are very serious about what happened.

Out there, the trend is different and since this is not a court and we are just debating it - we did it very elaborately. Then it is obvious that history will judge us very harshly because CHOGM was meant to benefit this country but up to now there is nothing I remember or see in appreciation of CHOGM. Like when you take this kind of statement and there are many others made on the Floor of this House, where does this take us and the country? 

If it was meant for a few individuals to benefit and now it turns to clearing some of them, then to me I settle that it should have been done at a higher level not at this level because the numbers matter and the debate is taking us to a matter of numbers. I regret because it is obvious but the truth remains that the people of Uganda have been cheated and therefore, those who have cheated them must stand out and make apologies to them. This is the best way to handle such a matter. Loss has been made and we have seen it and it is very clear. Now who is going to drag us to say we exonerate the culprits?

Then it means, all of us will be held responsible and this is very unfortunate to this House. You know sinning is demeaning and it is a serious matter. If you are to keep silent probably in political silence, there are so many dangers and you will never be forgiven by the people out there. So, the answer for the Vice-President is to apologise to the country and that is the best way to handle you. It is the only way out. Otherwise, for us to start clearing a Vice-President, then it means it is obvious, we need to do it through a roll-call so that everybody can be seen by the public being held responsible for either eating the CHOGM money, misusing it or abusing it in the way it has been done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to seek guidance from you in regard to the matter under discussion in Parliament. When a recognised meeting sits and a decision is taken and the chair of the meeting communicates the decision taken in a formal meeting - let me give an example. For instance, the Parliamentary Commission by law is chaired by the Speaker. When we sit and decide on a matter and you as the Chair of the Commission communicates the decision taken in a formal meeting, are you held strictly liable or personally liable or it is the Commission? In this case, the Vice-President chaired the sub-committee on CHOGM, a decision was taken in a formal meeting and he simply communicated the decision. For the record of this Parliament, when a President writes and uses the words, “I advise”, that is a directive. 

So, for me, this is the guidance I would like to seek from you whether the chair of the meeting who communicates the decision can be held personally liable.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, what you are saying is that what we are discussing was a subject that was discussed by a formal meeting chaired by a chairperson who happened to have been His Excellency, the Vice-President but whatever was done was the decision of the committee. Now, the question is, do you blame the individual or blame the body that made the decision? I think that is the question he is asking. Does the chairperson become vicariously liable for the misdeeds of a committee? I think that is the question he is asking.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that pertinent question. But we will need to be quite careful not to give the impression that the chair of a committee or a subcommittee for that matter is simply part of the number or simply one of the people. To chair is not only to lead the committee to a conclusion but also to guide them. That is why you are Speaker; that is why when you are speaking, we sit down so that you can guide us. So, the chairperson had the responsibility to make sure that the committee does not make wrong decisions.

THE SPEAKER: So, are you suggesting that you determined the question I asked by gauging the structure of the chairperson because the chairperson is a small man or a big man? Let us determine the principle then we shall go to the details. 

5.17
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like this House to know that Ugandans are so angry over this issue of CHOGM and everyone out there is waiting to hear what Parliament has to say about this issue. At this time we are carrying out our oversight duty as Members of Parliament. So, Members have a right to ask the question: who is wrong and who is in the right? Now I hear everybody here is saying, “We must be exonerated” but who will be held responsible at the end of the day? Who will be held responsible for the loss of the taxpayer’s money? 

Mr Speaker, you must know that Ugandan taxpayers’ money is going –

THE SPEAKER: You see some people have got a tendency to what we call blackmail. They do not want you to take the right decision just because the country will be unhappy; you take a wrong decision just to please others; that is not the way. You just deal with the principle and decide the case as you see it rather than scaring people that if you do not take this course, the country will be unhappy. Let us take the proper decision as we see them supported by the circumstances. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, you know that most of us here represent Ugandans who are not able to come here and speak for themselves. So, we come here to speak out for them. Service delivery in this country has changed face so much so that the Executive and politicians have taken it up to themselves to deliver services physically. I always compare it to a father who comes home with a chicken and delivers it in the kitchen. When the wife finishes cooking, he goes to the kitchen and tells her, “Pick this piece and put it in the other plate, get this one and put it in the other plate and give this one to the children.” That is really very bad. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You mean the man doing that?

MS AKELLO: Yes, and that is very wrong. Even our African traditional culture does not allow that.

THE SPEAKER: No, in my background, a man does not distribute sauce.

MS AKELLO: So, Mr Speaker, I request this House to get sober and deal with this matter in the way we are supposed to. Let those who are accountable be held responsible; those who can be exonerated may be but those who must be held responsible must be held accountable! Those who have eaten tax-payer’s money must be held responsible and must bring back the money.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we have taken a lot of time on this matter, the motion by hon. Baryomunsi was to the effect that he has read the report and has heard the response. And his case was that the recommendation on the Vice-President, especially with respect to procurement of vehicles should be expunged –

5.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, when the main debate ensued I sat down very quietly, listening and taking stock of all that is being said. Last year, the then Minister for Internal Affairs, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda was requested to present a statement about the Police brutality that victimised two of our colleagues: hon. Suzan Nampijja and hon. Ssempala Naggayi. I remember vividly that as the minister wound up his statement, hon. Dr Baryomunsi shot up and said, “Mr Minister, I am a Mukiga like you, and we Bakiga speak nothing but the truth”. Those of us who were in this House recall that hon. Dr Baryomunsi said that in this House. Now I am very surprised that hon. Dr Baryomunsi, today has made an about-turn; and I am beginning to wonder whether he is the same Mukiga that I knew during that time. (Laughter) 

With all this said and done, what has come up is not a matter of personalities; it is about whether Ugandans lost money or not. That is the bottom-line. We have had two people exonerated and I have watched the trend of debate in this House. Now it has come to the turn of H.E the Vice-President and the House looks set to take a decision.

Mr Speaker, today I read in The New Vision, a directive from H.E the President to the ministers and permanent secretaries and this directive was read at the conference by none other than H.E the Vice-President on behalf of the President. In that directive, the President clearly laid out ground of the key actions that this Government is going to take and one of them was about zero tolerance to corruption. The Front Bench Members here participated in that workshop. I was not there but I got the opportunity to read what they discussed through today’s newspapers –(Ms Kabakumba rose_)– Mr Speaker, the Princess, the Government Spokesperson, hon. Masiko who is the equivalent of the former Information Minister of Saddam, Mr Sahaf, should keep quiet when other people are talking – (Interjections)- yes, you wait for your turn. Sahaf was the minister of information playing the same role and of course you know what happened. 

The point I am making is –(Interjections)- earlier on in my statement I said Government is a system; it has all components. I took time to read certain directives in this report from the Executive under which all bureaucrats heed to causing loss to this country. Once a statement, whether it is a request or not, comes from a President or Vice-President, who are you, a civil servant, to defy? Therefore, civil servants hid comfortably under the directive that the Vice-President had given. (Interjections) Yes, that was the mistake because civil servants are guarded by Standing Orders. In that case, rightly so, His Excellency the President observed that PPDA rules were not adhered to. 

People out there, as hon. Franca Akello alluded to, are eagerly waiting to hear from us. This world is not coming to an end today. We still have a lot of tasks in nation building that we need to move together. Therefore, take into account the principal cause for which we are here. We are here on behalf of our people whom we represent and we should do everything in their best interest first and foremost. Money has been enormously lost and the public is aware. Therefore, I have the following to say.

As the person leading the Opposition side, I have looked at the trend of debate. It is not about numbers, it is about facts and reality. I would like to say that if there is to be any vote on this matter, the way I have seen the trend go, it will be done in the absence of my side. My side will not come back to this House as long as CHOGM is going to continue to appear on the Order Paper and be presented the way it is. I rest my case and from here, I think that is enough for us. 

We now have the honour and pleasure –(Interjections)- of walking out and throw the matter into the public domain. We cannot be part of this circus –(Interjections)- I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

(Whereupon members of the Opposition withdrew the chamber_)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the recommendation against the Vice-President should be expunged. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

5.32
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you think we should give time to these people to rethink their decision? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MR NASASIRA: I am just waiting for a few minutes so that honourable members can get the copies.   

MR ARIMPA KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, I seek guidance on a procedural issue. Before we broke off last time, some ministers had presented; I remember hon. Khiddu Makubuya had finished and I think it was the last presentation we had. So, we prefer to deal with those that were presented, finish them and then listen to the others. I am seeking for guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were saying that last time when we adjourned, a number of ministers had already presented their cases and it was a question of debating, making assessments and deciding on that. Apparently, hon. Nasasira was not here and did not present his case. His suggestion is that let us clear those who had made their cases and then hon. Nasasira will come later and present his case. This is what he is saying. 

5.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Nasasira is the only one who had not presented. It is only fair that he too presents so that we discuss the rest. When he finishes, I request that hon. Kutesa follows because he is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and in many cases he is at the departure lounge.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think his suggestion was that we clear those who presented and at the end when we are concluding the matter, anyone who had not presented presents and then we conclude.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, some of the cases that have been presented are intertwined. You may find transport touches the Vice-President and the foreign minister. Let us give them a chance to present and then we shall look at the minutes together.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the consensus? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

5.37
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I make my presentation, I just want to make one comment about Members of the Opposition who walked out. This has been the most undemocratic method of work. You have a chairman of PAC who comes from the Opposition; he presents a report and when he is challenged with facts, the only solution they have is to walk out. It would therefore give me an opportunity to present my own facts. 

On the 26th of February 2010, I received a letter of that reference - since you all have copies - reference 288/473/01A dated 25 February 2010, which I have attached to my presentation as Appendix 1 and which read as follows: 
“Hon. Eng. John Nasasira, The Minister of Works and Transport, Entebbe.” I will go through this for the purpose of the Hansard –


THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, these are 13 pages; can’t you summarise? 

MR NASASIRA: I wanted to do this for the purpose of the Hansard because the report that brings you the allegations is also on the Hansard. Some years later, somebody will be reading this Hansard and will want to know what Nasasira’s response was to the allegations. 

“Investigations in the matters of expenditure of public funds under CHOGM 
As you are aware, the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament has been carrying out investigations in the manner in which public funds were expended to ascertain if these funds were properly spent and hence whether there was value for money in the preparation and management of CHOGM. 

During the investigations, however, your participation was brought up to the attention of the committee and in exercise of Rule 181 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, you are called upon to appear before the Public Accounts Committee to give evidence on the matter. 

You will be expected to appear before the Public Accounts Committee on 19 March 2010 at 10.00 a.m. in committee room 408/409 situated on the fourth floor of the North Wing of the parliamentary building. 

By copy of this letter, the accounting officer of the Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to attend in person.
Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, MP;
Chairman, Public Accounts Committee.” 

That was the letter. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the invitation to appear before the Public Accounts Committee was the first invitation I had received in a good number of years that I have served as a minister in Government. I had always seen, year after year, my permanent secretary lead the ministry team to appear before PAC to deal with the Auditor-General’s reports. I inquired from my permanent secretary whether the Auditor-General had mentioned me in his report in person or by title and I was told that I was not. I wondered why the committee was inviting me to appear before it. 

I responded to the invitation in my letter, reference MIN/PERS17 dated 5 March 2010 as follows:
“Hon. Nandala-Mafabi,
Chairman Public Accounts Committee
The Parliament of Uganda
Kampala.

Investigations in the matters of expenditures of public funds under CHOGM
I acknowledge receipt of your letter ref: AB288/743/01A dated 25 February 2010 inviting me with my ministry’s accounting officer to appear before your committee on 10 March 2010 at 10.00 a.m. This date is however not suitable because I will be out of the country between 10th and 13th March 2010 attending an East African Community conference on the development of the railway transport in East Africa. This conference will take place in Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania. 

By copy of this letter, my personal assistant has been directed to liaise with your clerk so that an appropriate date is determined. In the meantime, I will be grateful if you send me the issues that your committee would like to raise for my clarification so that any necessary information is prepared for your committee in advance.” I signed the letter. 

Mr Speaker, on 17 March, I received a letter from the chairperson of PAC which was dated 10 March 2010 which read as follows:

“Reference is made to your letter MIN/PERS/17 dated 5 March 2010 requesting for a reschedule of your appearance before the Public Accounts Committee. You have now been rescheduled to appear before the committee on Thursday 18 March 2010. The meeting will be held at 10.00 a.m. in committee room 408/409.” It was again signed by Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. 

This letter however did not mention the issues the committee wanted me for as I had requested in my letter of 5 March 2010. 

On 18 March, together with my PS, the accounting officer, and in accordance with the invitation of 25 February and that of 10 March, I appeared before the PAC. Since I had not been availed the issues the committee wanted me for, I had hoped that my PS who had previously appeared before the committee a number of times would be of assistance to me to refresh my memory given the fact that CHOGM preparations and management had taken place over three years earlier. To my surprise, when we arrived in the committee room, my PS was told to leave because the committee no longer needed him. My request for him to stay since he may have been of assistance to me, given that I had not received the issues the committee wanted me for, was turned down. 

I inquired from the committee why they wanted me to appear before them given that I had never appeared before PAC and why they could not let me know the issues they wanted my clarification on so that I could come with a prepared answer. I was informed that there were few and simple clarifications. 

Given the respect I have for the committees of Parliament, our Rules of Procedure and our Constitution, I sat down and hoped that my memory would not let me down. At the end of my appearance before the committee, I had hoped that the clarifications I had given on all the matters that were raised were enough. I had made it clear that everything I did during the preparation of CHOGM was done within the structures set out to prepare CHOGM, my responsibility as the Minister of Works and Transport and within the law.

I am, therefore, surprised at the accusations made against me in the PAC report. The PAC report was based on the special audit report of the Auditor-General on CHOGM 2007. I was never mentioned, either by name or title, in the Auditor-General’s report. Some of the roads mentioned in the PAC report were improved using the ministry’s budget and not the CHOGM budget. They were never mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report and I wonder how and why they were included in this PAC report. 

Mr Speaker, I wish now to respond to the accusations made against me in the PAC report. First, the two recommendations related to road works and the second related to transport. I have decided to put these recommendations here and my response so that members can easily follow my response. 

The first recommendation in the PAC report was on page 15 and it was similar on page 93. This recommendation says: “The Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira, should be reprimanded for allowing astronomical variations without the due justification and process of the law.” 

First, I never allowed astronomical variations and the committee has not mentioned these astronomical variations in their report at all. 

I am even shocked at this recommendation because in the paragraph above this recommendation, on page 15 of the report, the committee says, “Reduction in scope for four roads to cater for roads leading to hotels in Kampala centre was also requested by hon. John Nasasira.” This was a reduction and not an increase. “… Although this was good, this request should have been planned and needed not to have waited for CHOGM.” Mr Speaker, but this work was in preparation for CHOGM; where could we have planned this before? 

In any case, the committee itself in their report had observed that there were delays in preparation and disbursement of funds. Again on paragraph 2.1 of page 9 of the PAC report they say, “Disbursement to implementing ministries like the Ministry of Works and Transport were made in late December 2006, almost 10 months to the date of the meeting, and yet the ministry had made a request to start with works in January 2005.” 

The request the committee refers to is in my letter that I wrote to the Prime Minister, which is in annex 32 of the report and which I have attached to my response as annex 4. I wish to read it. This letter was dated 5 January 2005 and it was to the Prime Minister. This is what I wrote: 
“As you are aware, preparations for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2007 have been on-going. One of the issues being discussed is infrastructure projects, in particular road projects. A submission was made to the National Task Force on 19 November 2004 for onward submission to Cabinet as part of the budget requirement for hosting CHOGM 2007…” – (Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: I am a Member of Parliament for Kampala District and my constituents are very interested in the proceedings. That is why I have decided to stay. I wanted to be guided on the content. If the honourable minister could summarise so that we proceed accordingly; I think it should be your views not verbatim.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I can go ahead and summarise and request that my report be put on record for Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR NASASIRA: I was quoting the letter to the Prime Minister and you can see that by 5 January 2005, I was already concerned that we needed to start these projects in time. So, the committee realised this point and therefore this issue of saying this could have been planned earlier does not arise. In that letter, I was saying that we needed that money quickly so that we can start on those roads in time. However, as you see, money was only availed in the budget later on, 10 months before CHOGM. This is the challenge we had. We tried to start early but there were no funds.

The other issue on roads that I am accused of is on the Serunkuma Road leading to the Enkombe Apartments. This issue of Serunkuma Road was clarified by my colleague, hon. Isaac Musumba, when he made his defence here last year. The whole matter of Serunkuma Road is that hon. Musumba wrote to me in his capacity as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs stating that those Enkombe Apartments in Mbuya were going to be a venue for CHOGM and when he visited the apartments, about a kilometer of the road was in bad condition and he wanted us to repair that road. His letter is attached to my response which is with you, dated 11th June. 

On receipt of that letter, I passed on the request to my ministry’s technical committee to handle. The matter was then taken to the CHOGM National Taskforce. To prove that, I have attached a copy of the loose minute to an engineer called Kaaya who was part of the CHOGM taskforce. It shows when this matter was brought to the national taskforce. The letter and the loose minute are on page 10 and page 11 of my report.

Again on 24 July, the engineer-in-chief instructed the engineers to inspect Serunkuma Road. You will notice that from the loose minute of Eng. Kaaya on page 11, the national taskforce considered a number of roads - Stretcher Road in Ntinda, Serunkuma Road, Masiro Road and others - and decided that these roads needed to be included on the repair list. However, the committee wants to make an impression that this was collusion between me and hon. Musumba. In fact, in their report they had said that those apartments belonged to hon. Musumba only to withdraw later. 

As you remember, that case came here and, Mr Speaker, you advised that Mr Musumba was never heard and should go back to the committee. Mr Musumba went back to the committee and that issue was finished. As far as I am concerned, there was nothing about collusion on this road. This road was brought up like all the other roads to other venues. It was passed on to the technical committee and it was discussed and decided that it be repaired and indeed it was repaired.

The Auditor-General raised the matter here because by the time of CHOGM, the first seal of the road was done and the last seal was done after CHOGM. We had to stop on the first seal of the tarmac so that it could be used during CHOGM time.

The other recommendation is on page 97 of the report and it reads as follows: “Hon. John Nasasira should be held liable for authorising road construction to the Vice-President’s hotel out of CHOGM funds. He further should be held liable for roads to hon. Rukutana and hon. Suruma which were not critical.” I remember this matter was a major headline in the newspapers - how we used CHOGM money to private residences of ministers and so on. 

Mr Speaker, let me first respond to the accusation that I authorised road construction to the Vice-President’s hotel out of CHOGM funds. I have never made such authorisation. The committee refers to annex 33 in their report as a basis for their accusation. Annex 33 is an internal memorandum I wrote to my Permanent Secretary and Engineer-in-Chief. I have attached that loose minute to my response. You will see his response as annex 8, and I wish to read it. The loose minute reads as follows:
“The PS and Engineer-in-Chief, 
Immediate repair of Kitala-Gerenge Road 
The above gravel road near Entebbe is reported to be in very poor condition. The road must be repaired before CHOGM 2007 due to some dignitaries who are expected to use it at the time. 

Despite our budgetary constraints, you are please instructed to immediately arrange for full re-gravelling of the road. Our contractors in A+ and A classes who are not heavily committed with CHOGM roads should be considered.”

Mr Speaker, you can clearly see that my instruction was to re-gravel Kitala-Gerenge Road which sometimes is called Garuga Road. For clarity, I have attached a map of this road as appendix 9. So, I invite honourable members to go to the back of my response and you will see Appendix 9, written as AP 9. You will see that Kitala-Gerenge Road - if you look at the top left hand corner - goes to Entebbe and then continues to Kampala. Off the Kampala-Entebbe Road, the Kitala-Gerenge Road is shown in black and it comes all the way up to Lake Victoria.

The Kitala-Gerenge Road is 9.4 kilometres from the junction on Kampala-Entebbe Road to Gerenge Landing Site on the shores of Lake Victoria. As you see from the map, there are many villages along that road. There is even a camping centre, a golf course, a fishing farm and several resorts. This road was opened in 1992 and was then under the Ministry of Local Government. My ministry took over its maintenance in 2005; it was graded in 2006 and was due for re-gravelling in 2007. 

Mr Speaker, you know very well that on many occasions, colleagues here have raised concerns to me about roads in poor condition in their constituencies. They do this because they expect me to act and indeed in most cases I have acted. Similarly, Kitala-Gerenge Road was such a bad road and given its attraction and proximity to CHOGM activities and the possibility of use to the resorts in the vicinity, we felt it necessary to re-gravel it before CHOGM. The work was done using the ministry’s budget and not the CHOGM budget. 

If you look at that map, at kilometer 6, the road branches off on the right and goes to two resorts. Looking at the map, one resort is called the Country Lake Resort and the other one is called Katomi Kingdom Resort. Now, Katomi Kingdom Resort is the resort that is owned by His Excellency the Vice-President. The road that branches off at kilometer 6, which goes to His Excellency’s resort and the other resort, Country Lake Resort, was not part of my instruction and it was never re-gravelled under the Kitala-Gerenge contract. So, I do not see the basis of this accusation that we did a road going to the Vice-President’s resort.

The next one is hon. Suruma and hon. Rukutana. I do not want to go through this reading but I will take you to another map which is labelled Appendix 10. That map had got many roads for the preparation of CHOGM but using our ministry’s budget, we re-carpeted it. We put a new layer on the road from the Nsambya-Ggaba Road junction to Munyonyo and while we were doing that road and doing some more repairs, we decided to improve the access roads in the area. Those access roads we improved are shown in kind of purple-pink, both on the right side and left side of the roads. 

We also did a road, which is shown as brown, from Makindye all the way to where you see those pink-purple roads. That brown line is the road through Makindye which we did with CHOGM funds. The blue and the purple were done with Ministry of Works’ funds. They were never part of CHOGM and they were never queried by the Auditor-General. 

What is interesting is that there are many people who live along these roads. Now, in the case of hon. Suruma, if you look at that map you will see I have marked his house, which is on Steven Kavuma Road, just somewhere on top of the page. I hope members are following the map. The road does not stop at hon. Suruma’s house but it just passes near it. There are many houses along this road, so I do not know why the committee wanted to make it look like we were doing a road for hon. Suruma.

If you go further down on that map where there are many pink lines, you see that we have marked where hon. Rukutana’s house is. Hon. Rukutana happens to live on one of those roads that we did. I have never understood why the committee chose to imply that we were doing the road for Rukutana.

As I said earlier, these roads were not queried in the Auditor-General’s report and I am surprised why the committee brought them up. They are not private roads but it just happens that some ministers lived along these roads.

I am happy because the woman MP for Kampala has stayed. Our main problem has been poor roads in Kampala and I am surprised that when we improve roads, PAC condemns us as well calling it wastage of taxpayers’ money. People in that area are very happy with the work that we did there.

This is what the next recommendation says: “The Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa, and the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira, bent procurement procedures to favour BMW. The committee holds them liable for their action and they should be dealt with according to the law.” I have failed to comprehend how the committee reached this conclusion because it is not stated anywhere in the Auditor-General’s report that hon. Kutesa and I made decisions on procurement of vehicles of CHOGM.

What I find as my role in procurement of CHOGM vehicles is untrue and at times contradictory as I will elaborate below. I will be referring to the following annexes as I explain. These annexes are attached to my response but they are also part of the PAC report. In my response, one of them is attached as Appendix 11; this is an internal memo from the Director of Transport, Ministry of Works and Transport who was also the chairman of the CHOGM transport committee. The other annex is 12 and this is the letter from my permanent secretary to the same director who was the chairman of the CHOGM committee on transport. Annex 13 is the internal memo to the director of transport from me.

These cars have been a big controversy for some time. On page 16 of the PAC report, the committee says, “Forty firms picked bids and out of these 23 had been returned by 11 July 2006. On the same date, the Cabinet subcommittee took the decision that halted the exercise. This decision was taken only three days before the closing date of bid submission. The minister, hon. John Nasasira, communicated this decision and halted the procurement indefinitely citing a Cabinet sub-committee directive.” 

Mr Speaker, this statement is not true. Let me read you the letter which I have marked as Appendix 11. This was a loose minute from the director of transport to me:

“During the meeting of the Cabinet sub-committee on CHOGM held on 11th, the subcommittee decided to halt the bidding process for acquisition of the above services until a taskforce on transport clarifies with the minister issues raised at the meeting. The issues were mainly:
1. 	The omission to consult the Minister of Works and Transport before tendering of transport and transport related services.
2. 	The consideration to retain the vehicles for Government use after CHOGM.
3. 	To review the number, types, makes and specifications in the bids.
4. 	The inclusion of private sector participation and support in the provision of transport services.
5. 	The hurried tender and tendering of all services.”

When the cabinet sub-committee met for the first time, they had already tendered out and that is what PAC continues to refer to. They had tendered before coming to the Cabinet subcommittee to tell them what they were tendering out. So the Cabinet sub-committee was asking them whether they had the type of vehicles, and on the issue of leasing rather than buying the vehicles. They told them to go back and clarify on these and report back.

The director of transport makes it clear in the memo that the halting was done by the Cabinet sub-committee. In the PAC report, they are imputing that I am the one who halted the process.

Let me go on with the memo: “… As directed by the Cabinet subcommittee, the transport taskforce requests to meet to discuss the issues raised above and I have also enclosed a copy of the bid document for your reference.

Considering that the bid opening is slated for next Monday 17th and your decision on the matter will affect the way forward, I propose that the meeting takes place on Thursday 13th or Friday 14th.” That is the director writing to me. “… After consulting the contracts committee of the Ministry of Works, I have been advised that they could go ahead to open the bids but not to proceed with the valuations until the decision by the Cabinet subcommittee is made.” He is proposing to me that they open the bids but they do not go on with the valuation until they go back to the committee which had told them to hold on until we clarify on those five issues.

“The purpose of this internal memo is to seek an appointment to meet the transport subcommittee taskforce to discuss and give guidance on the procurement of the transport and related services”. Having written that, when the Permanent Secretary saw this loose minute to me, he wrote back to the chairman of the committee and this is the letter from the Permanent Secretary to him; it is appendix 12: 

I am drawing reference to your internal memo of 12th addressed to the hon. Minister of Works and Transport and copied to me on the subject. The hon. Minister has also clarified to me a number of aspects on this issue. 

When he wrote to me, I called the Permanent Secretary and I said, I do not agree with this; first and foremost, you are instructed by the Cabinet sub-committee of CHOGM to halt the procurement, carry out consultations and incorporate the views of the Cabinet sub-committee to repackage the procurement and thereafter proceed. The powers of the Cabinet sub-committee far override the contracts committee of the Ministry of Works and Transport and as such it was irregular for you to dilly dally and refer the decisions of the Cabinet sub-committee to the contracts committee for advice.” This is the Permanent Secretary now writing. 

“It is equally wrong for you to start informing the minister and the Cabinet sub-committee about the views of the contracts committee and how they are affecting the instructions. Further, I have been advised by the Minister of Works and Transport that he was not as an individual supposed to give or receive clarifications to or from you but rather guidance will come from the Cabinet sub-committee as an organ of which the Minister of Works and Transport is a member. 

You will appreciate that almost invariably, the internal composition of the procurement; that is the supply of the services, is going to change. This means that the tenders you are about to receive are bound to be inappropriate. It is a waste of time and resources and a risk of getting a sticky complaint from bidders for you to receive and open tenders and leave them in abeyance. Instead, you should immediately instruct the bidders to hold their tenders, await new tendering brochures and submit their bids at a later date. Needless to state, this will mean extending considerably the tender period. 

Please arrange for the instant halting of the return of tenders, extend the tender period as you consult various stakeholders particularly the transport sub-committee of CHOGM Task Force on the issues and concerns raised by the Cabinet sub-committee. 

Lastly, you are advised to appreciate the pecking order in the hierarchy of government and not forgetting the absolute need for you to always consult adequately.”

This is the permanent secretary telling the chairman. You will realise that by this date, 13th - the bids were supposed to come in on 17th July - the bids had not come to the ministry, to the procurement committee, but the chairman of the committee was saying, “Let the bids come and I open.” On the other hand, the permanent secretary says, ‘No, first clarify what the Cabinet sub-committee has said. Let the bids stay there, extend their bid security and then we repackage as the policy guidelines say’.” So, where is this accusation by the PAC that the Cabinet sub-committee and the Vice-President were manipulating and delaying procurement?

Lastly, my letter to the same individual, referring to his Appendix 13: “I refer to you a loose minute dated 12th July and delivered to my office at 3.00 p.m. on 13th July. In it, you were requesting that I meet your committee either on 13th or 14th July. 13th July was definitely not possible since your memo arrived late and 14th July is also not possible because of the planned meeting in Entebbe at State House for CAA work and Ministry of Finance. I also do not think that the meeting is necessary at this stage. 

I agree with the issues you identified as to why the Cabinet sub-committee on CHOGM decided to halt the bidding process for acquisition of the above services, however one issue that is not correct is the claim that the halting was also due to your omission to consult me before tendering. The concern of the Cabinet sub-committee was your omission to consult it for a decision to be taken on the packages and vehicles to be procured and those to be hired. 

As you realise, the Minister of Works and Transport does not on his own form a structure within CHOGM preparation setup. In your memo, you informed me that you have consulted the contracts committee of the Ministry of Works and Transport and you have been advised that bids could be received and opened on Monday but evaluation awaits the decision of the Cabinet sub-committee. This is putting the cart before the horse since the decision by the Cabinet sub-committee may fundamentally change the bid packages. You should abide by the Cabinet sub-committee decision and halt the bidding process until you have received approval from the Cabinet sub-committee.”

Mr Speaker, you can see how those decisions were made. So for PAC to accuse me of colluding with hon. Sam Kutesa to stop the package, I do not know where they get their accusations from. 

The PAC further says that, “The committee observed that the minister should not have been involved in the procurement process and should have concentrated on policy matters. The technical officers pleaded with the minister to continue with the opening of the bids but the minister refused. The committee found that 23 firms had returned bids before the opening was cancelled.”

I am being accused of refusing and yet you saw that the committee was advised by the accounting officer saying, “Do not open.” I think I have explained enough of these accusations and I have not found anywhere in the report where the committee accuses me on that one. 

Moreover, PAC in their report at one time accused me of neglect of duty. On page 24 of their report, this is what the committee had to say: “The committee found the Minister of Works and Transport to have neglected his role to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. For example, the Minister of Foreign Affairs wrote to companies inviting them to bid; something the committee found to be outside his role and strange. More surprisingly, the Minister of Works and Transport, the in-charge of the sector, seemed not to be concerned. 

Furthermore, in the letter of the Minister of Foreign Affairs dated 24 November to the Minister of Works and Transport, Sam Kutesa submitted the offer of the BMWs to the Ministry of Works. The Minister of Works still did not find this irregular enough.”

This is outrageous. First, the PAC was accusing me of halting the procurement and of being involved in the procurement process and now they are accusing me of inaction, that I neglected my duty. 

Let me also add that the statement above implies that the Minister of Foreign Affairs submitted the offer of BMWs to me. This is far from the truth. If you look at Appendix 14, the Minister of Foreign Affairs actually sent it to the accounting officer who was dealing with procurement. This was never sent to me. It was sent direct. The letter is written to me but he says, in the last paragraph, “As indicated on 20th November at the Cabinet sub-committee, BMW has now confirmed willingness to lease vehicles to Government under specifically agreed terms as specified in their offer.” This was handed to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works.

When BMW made the offer, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs handed it to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works. However, here PAC is trying to impute that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs wrote to me and handed over this quotation. I want to conclude that the PAC statement is not true. There is nowhere hon. Kutesa and I sat together to deal with procurement. I have shown the evidence on how the procurement was going in both appendices and I think I should now conclude my response to PAC’s report as follows:

First, it is my prayer that in line with laws of natural justice, committees should in future avail in advance the issues they want to discuss with the people they summon to appear before them. This matter of summoning you to a committee and when you ask them, “Tell me why you want me so that I come prepared?” they do not but they want to ask you questions is done in bad faith. Even people who go to court go prepared. I even wrote to them asking them to provide me with what they wanted so that I could prepare, they refused. 

I hope as a practice of Parliament there is a way we can put in our Rules of Procedure that whenever committees summon people to appear, they should tell them what is required of them so that they come prepared. I think this is purely necessary to comply with the laws of natural justice. 

Secondly, the habit of declaring people guilty before they are even heard biases public opinion against them. It hurts individuals, families, and friends and in this ICT age, it even damages peoples’ reputations globally. You are declared a thief; you are declared to have built roads to private homes of ministers and it is on the internet and read by everyone everywhere. This is not justice. If we are trying to build a just society, there must be better methods of working that out. I am very saddened that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not here to listen to this.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am happy to have been a player in the team that worked 24 hours a day and seven days a week to make CHOGM a success; a point the PAC recognised at page 8 of their report. I thank you for the attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Hon. Members, it appears you now have got all the responses from the affected honourable members and ministers in regard to the CHOGM report. Can we now proceed to debate the report and make a conclusion in one way or the other?

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, whom should we begin with? 

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know. Where do you want to begin from? Maybe you begin with the response you are prepared with.

MR KIGYAGI: Okay, since you have said we begin with what we have prepared for –(Interruptions)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that we begin with the fresh response because it is still fresh in our minds.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that after this fresh one, you will need time to go and revise the others?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: No, we have it; he has just read it and it is still live in our minds.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is up to you.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Can I begin to debate, Mr Speaker?

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, if my memory serves me correctly, just a few moments ago, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister guided us, with your permission, that we give an opportunity to the hon. Minister who had not had an opportunity to make a presentation. But otherwise, I would have preferred that we follow the order in which the affected honourable members presented their responses. And that is justice; in any case we are here to do justice. Since we are going to handle each and every case on its own merit, why don’t we follow the order in which these presentations have been made? It just makes good sense of organisation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday when we made a decision to discuss this report, last night I slept at 3 a.m. because I was scrutinizing the response of hon. Sam Kutesa which he presented to this House a few months ago. 

Since hon. John Nasasira has just made his response, I think it would be fair to study it first as we consider that of hon. Sam Kutesa and if possible, that of the Attorney-General and probably if time allows, we would handle hon. John Nasasira’s –(Interjections)– tomorrow! Okay, I suggest that we move as the Prime Minister has suggested by first speaking to the response that was made by hon. Sam Kutesa. Thank you.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, we have taken a lot of time on this CHOGM issue. I would like to suggest that we continue sitting, as Members of Parliament, discuss this issue to its closure today.

THE SPEAKER: You mean we keep sitting here until when?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think as a Parliamentary Commissioner - we have power – (Interjections) – yes, we have power and if need be the commission can order for the dinner to be served. (Laughter)

MS WINFRED MATSIKO: Mr Speaker, I suggest that we proceed as the Prime Minister guided that after hon. John Nasasira has presented, we can proceed first with hon. Kutesa’s response before considering the others.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed that way.

6.22
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to make some observations and comments on the report of PAC.

The Public Accounts Committee met and gave us a comprehensive report - my contribution is going to be based on what PAC reported on as well as the submissions that have been made by those who were implicated by that report. I have extensively read the Report of PAC in regard to the issues that were raised against hon. Sam Kutesa. I also have read his defence and I would like to comment as follows. 

But before I get into the details, I would like to say that as Members of Parliament, we need to realise that we have to serve this country above self. We are not supposed to always please people because we want a political mileage; we should know that we owe responsibility to the people who elected us by putting things right. So, if we are to put things right, we do not have to do that with bias and compromise, but with a thorough mind, a mind that hasn’t been corrupted. Otherwise, if we get out looking for ABCD, it might be unbecoming of us.

That is why I think it is very unfortunate that some members decided to move out because I don’t think that is an ideal plan for any leader in this country especially on issues of fighting corruption. If you have a genuine heart to fight corruption, you have to get to the depth of it, but not to use it to just gain political mileage. So, it is a very unfortunate incident. But I hope this will not continue into the ninth Parliament. I hope people will understand that that is not what the country wants.

Mr Speaker, one of the issues, which was talked about in the PAC report was conflict of interest in regard to the ownership of a company called Eurocar. When you look at the PAC Report on page 107, you realise that conflict of interest is emphasised. But what is very surprising is that the Auditor-General had addressed this issue in the final report that was brought to PAC, having discovered no elements of conflict of interest.

Now what I cannot understand with PAC – because I imagine that PAC discusses the Auditor-General’s report – how come that some issues are smuggled in? When such a thing happens, I realise there was some hidden agenda of some sort because, if the Auditor-General dropped the issue, who is PAC to go behind the Auditor-General’s work and bring to surface something that had been dropped. So either PAC wants to tell the whole world that they do not trust the Auditor-General and what they do, or they are bringing in something, which if they talk about, would give them political mileage. And I think that is very unfortunate for this country and Parliament. These are some of the vices that should be dealt with.

Another issue that was talked about in this report was corporate sponsorship. I am happy because the minister interfaced with PAC and the issues were raised. But if you read the responses of PAC after the minister had given his submission, it reads: “Corporate sponsorship. Kutesa appointed Saatchi & Saatchi and signed a contract awarding 10 percent commission. Was his role to contract with service providers? Why did he usurp the role of the accounting officer? What interest did he have in this contract?” 

This comes after a lengthy explanation had been given and discussed with the committee but still it seems the power to believe is limited.  Therefore, it is very unfortunate for people to appear before PAC, you explain your case, you seem as if you have finished but as soon as you finish, another report comes to bring back the same issues that you had discussed.

As you have already heard, when you are charged wrongly - it is very unfortunate because in this era, everybody will read about you on the internet and it is very unfortunate to have your reputation soiled. Many times the reputation that you have kept for years is spoilt in a split of second because of some other interests. 

It is very clear that the minutes of the meeting were given to the committee but there was total disregard of its contents. Maybe you will allow me for the sake of the Hansard to bring out those minutes so that we know for sure that this corporate sponsorship decision made by PAC was not done in good faith.

The minutes of the meeting that was held at Mweya State Lodge by the committee of corporate sponsorship on the 29 May 2007, attended by 14 members of the committee, was very clear. During this meeting- and this was tabled before us and the committee too has a copy; the committee was chaired by hon. Musumba. 

One of the recommendations they made was that the sub-committee recommended the appointment of Saatchi & Saatchi by the sponsorship committee as the lead agency to carry out the sponsorship campaign since it was one of their mandates and because of their strategic position. It goes on to say that the chair then, who was hon. Musumba, informed the meeting that the sub-committee had invited Saatchi & Saatchi to be part of their meeting and that they were impressed by their presentation on corporate sponsorship.  Later on the meeting agreed that Saatchi & Saatchi should be given the mandate as the lead agency and that an official letter should be written to them by the chairman of the committee. 

So, Mr Speaker, rightly –

THE SPEAKER: Please, cut short your speech.

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Yes, Mr Speaker, but I thought I could bring these issues out so that at least people are not implicated on issues that they were not involved in.

This meeting was chaired by hon. Musumba but in the report of PAC they say that hon. Kutesa gave the contract to Saatchi & Saatchi, as if he did it single-handedly, and at the same time they say that he decided the 10 percent commission, which was made by a committee in a meeting. Therefore, this is not accurate and it should be put on record that it is wrong and erroneous for somebody to just bring a report and say because of this, you are held personally liable and responsible for the decisions that were made by the committee.

Saatchi & Saatchi had even been evaluated by UBC and PAC knows that. They found that they had done good work and they were fit to do this exercise. Therefore, accountability is very clear. The committee has accountability on Saatchi & Saatchi but the report says there is no accountability. 

Mr Speaker, I think it is very unfortunate that issues are mixed up for the sake of pleasing whoever it pleases. But I think as parliamentarians, we should have accurate figures. I want to give an example. Recently I watched on TV – an inmate had been sentenced to death; they had said that he had murdered somebody. But after so many years in prison and while waiting for his death, the person they say he had killed appeared; he was alive. So actually they had sentenced somebody wrongly. 

I think when we write issues and go out to the public, we should be accurate and to the point; and we should make sure that if you are singling out somebody to have done wrong, let that person be the one liable for that rather than just using a minister or a ministry or an official to just cover-up what might be underneath. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Kutesa should be absolved of this. He is not part of these comments. These comments are not genuine and are not in good faith and they should be dismissed. I thank you very much. 

6.36
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Allow me, Mr Speaker, to first of all, thank hon. Nabilah for standing up to be counted. (Applause) Despite all the odds, she has agreed that continuity must be provided even in the most difficult of times. I think that is the philosophy that we should be providing for the destiny of this country.

It is very important as we wind up this Eighth Parliament to take stock of some of the major achievements of the Eighth Parliament and of the country, to ensure that we forge forward to the Ninth Parliament. 

I think CHOGM, which was held in 2007, was a landmark achievement for this country and we stood up to be counted among the countries in the world that hosted a very successful CHOGM. This is embedded in the strong diplomatic engagements which were done by the team of Ugandans who scouted since way back in 2003 to ensure that we build the necessary momentum in Abuja and the decision was eventually taken in Malta in 2005. I applaud the team, which did that great work and I think it was spearheaded by hon. Sam Kutesa.

As we deliberate on the many events which took place, the organisation was gigantic and we applaud the successful hosting of Her Majesty the Queen within our parliamentary precincts. This was a very great achievement, which will leave this eighth Parliament on record that we made a landmark in the history of the Parliament of Uganda.

Coming down to the events and activities, which were carried out, I appreciate that the Cabinet sub commute did a commendable job. We recently resolved that the Vice President is exonerated but when you look at the activities, which were carried out; the sourcing and the procurement process of the vehicles, there were serious policy decisions, which had to be taken by the Cabinet sub committee. Also when you look at the policy of changing from purchasing to leasing, this had to change the entire procurement process.

The Cabinet sub-committee had all the responsibility to take up the decisions, which were eventually enforced by the technical teams and I think as we deliberate the transport sub sector committee and the policy decisions, which were taken at the Cabinet level by the Cabinet sub-committee, I think this was a responsibility of the committee rather than the PAC report submits that it was individuals. It would be stating that whatever decisions the chairpersons of committees of Parliament read on the Floor of Parliament, they are personally liable for them. 

That put aside, we need to reflect on what went wrong. We may not rule out the aspect of the investigative arm of Government but when you look at where it says that the hon. Minister sidelined the procurement process by writing to the supplier firms, I think he was communicating the modalities of the changed policy from the outright purchase to the aspect of leasing. I also think this was a delegated responsibility by the Cabinet committee where everybody took the decision and the minutes are also available in the report.

My sister has also elaborated on the aspect of conflict of interest. It is very clear that hon. Sam Kutesa is accused of conflict of interest in the committee report when he had 20 percent shares in Eurocar but it is also contradictory that way back in 2005, he had also relinquished his stakes in the company and the procurement process was carried out in 2007. 

So I think this does not stand ground given the fact that he had already relinquished his interests in as far as the Eurocar aspect was concerned. I think this is a very important aspect which should be drawn to the attention of Parliament so that as we look at witch hunting and looking for real blood of individuals, we look at the interests of the country; we look at the modalities and ensure that at least the process was carried out by procurement, which in the time line were divergent. I think this is a very important aspect, which this Parliament must consider as we look at the history of the process of procurement of vehicles, which were used during CHOGM.

The last aspect concerns corporate sponsorship and Saatchi, the company, which was given the mandate. The minutes of the committee, which took the decision are very clear and elaborate in as far as the report is concerned. 

So considering the fact that we have read the report and heard the responses from the various ministers and officials and the Minister of Transport also collaborates how the decisions were taken together with the committee and the Vice President, I also beg to move that having read the report and having listened to the references, which were also presented, it is clear that the queries, which were raised by the Auditor-General were satisfactorily answered by the honourable minister. 

Having listened to the PAC and all the accusations, which were being forwarded and the responses, which the minister submitted to the Floor of Parliament, I beg that we expunge the three issues which were raised. The one on sourcing and communicating with the suppliers, the aspect of conflict of interest and the corporate sponsorship aspect so that we are able to ensure that we disapprove these allegations, which were presented by PAC. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You beg to move what?

MR KASAMBA: I beg to move that we expunge the allegation that the minister is taken accountable as the report recommends.

THE SPEAKER: That is hon. Kutesa?

MR KASAMBA: Yes, sir.

6.45
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to disagree with hon. Kasamba on the issue of saying we expunge that from the Hansard. It should remain in the Hansard and even his arguments should remain there because his arguments are disagreeing with what is in the Hansard and that is healthy. So it should remain on record.

I want to say that since we have already exonerated His Excellency the Vice President on the issue of procurement especially to do with BMWs and he chaired the committee, all those who were implicated on the issue of procurement in all fairness, should be exonerated on that issue.

THE SPEAKER: And who are those?

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: In the report I remember there is hon. Kutesa and hon. Nasasira on the issue of bending the procurement procedure. Since we have already exonerated the chairperson of the committee, then the members who are implicated in the report should also be exonerated on that issue. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The issue is that- You are a member of the committee.

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to provide information. The Attorney General had also been mentioned on the issue of procurement and therefore his case should be equally handled so that if we are to exonerate- Just like his Excellency the Vice President has been treated, this treatment be extended to all the ministers mentioned in the report.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, can you mention those ministers you are talking about?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the senior government officials mentioned include His Excellency the Vice President Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, the hon. Minister for Foreign Affairs Sam Kutesa, the Minister for Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira, the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, hon. Prof. Kiddhu Makubuya. These are the ministers that were specifically singled out by the PAC report in regard to the issue of procurement and the submissions clearly indicate that they are not culpable. I thank you. 

6.53
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule):  Mr Speaker, I would like us to follow the right procedure on the issue of exonerating members, are we procedurally right to have an omnibus exoneration when the issues of accountability are personal? This is provided for in the Constitution. If you may wish to look at Article 164(2) which states that: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions   shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.”

Mr Speaker, members are being variably mentioned and how they came to this is different. So, can we –

THE SPEAKER: No, what they are telling you is that they were mentioned as having been involved in the procurement but according to the record they have, they were never directly involved though they directed those concerned with procurement. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Then that emanates from how we have resolved. Because as you can see and as I was about to mention in my presentation, different individuals had their different roles which were different from those of the Vice President, for instance, in this particular case, the hon. Minister for Foreign Affairs wrote to three companies in South Africa which is different. We would need to know as Parliament how he got to know that certain companies in South Africa were willing to supply vehicles.  So, I suggest that we handle issue by issue exhaustively until we know that we are done. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, according to the submissions made, let me put the question that it is your view that hon. Kutesa be exonerated? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Is it your case that hon. Nasasira be freed from the accusations?
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Is it your case that according to the explanations made by the learned Attorney-General and comparing it to what was said in the report, he also be exonerated? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Do I take it at this juncture, Mr Speaker, that there is no issue to be contributed to on the Floor particularly in regard to those ministers you have mentioned? Are we saying that they have nothing to blame and, therefore, I should stop my submissions because I caught your eye and rose to rebut the statements they are putting forward that they have no blemish. 

THE SPEAKER: No. For us we are not a court. But in as far as our role is concerned; we have not seen the evidence. But as I said before, we are not stopping the other agencies of Government with the mandate to investigate this matter to do so. This will not be a defence that, “Parliament exonerated us.” 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, could you offer an opportunity, say to the ministers, particularly that they are now here to put right the incriminating record, which is in the report? 

THE SPEAKER: That is what hon. Nasasira has done; that is what hon. Kutesa did; that is what the Learned Attorney-General did by making a very long statement. That is the record.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I don’t know whether it is at this opportunity that I would be allowed to rebut, particularly what hon. Sam Kutesa said. 

THE SPEAKER: But we have now finished as far as these people are concerned. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thought that he is escaping and you are allowing him the opportunity. (Laughter)

6.53
MRS NABILLAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I stand here, I do so to remind Members of Parliament that the decisions and debate we make on the Floor of the House are for the constituents. They are normally not for the parties we represent but for the people that elected us to this House. We, in Kampala are normally accused of accessing lots of money as Members of Parliament without doing anything. So, for me to walk out when there is a debate on money and I access my salary this month would also be abuse of office. (Applause) 

I would like to talk on behalf of my people of Kampala that we are very concerned about the CHOGM report. I would have wanted the ministers and the Vice President to have summarised their presentations in form of bullet points. It would have definitely taken us a shorter time and we would have deliberated more on their merits and demerits. 

I am very afraid that we have a similar conference coming to Uganda, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) of which I am a committee member. But we need to learn from the experience of CHOGM, the mistakes that were made and how we need to move forward because definitely mistakes were made.  But do we move and make better?  Can we use what we learnt from CHOGM to make other conferences better than what it was and avoid the mistakes therein? 

I will assure you that, Members of Parliament got information last year that we are hosting the Inter-Parliamentary Union in April next  year. This is a very big conference. This year it is in Panama and next year it will be right here in April; we are late in preparation.  We are 157 members and all the 157 countries will be coming to Uganda. If we don’t do everything in time, we will see an IPU repeat of CHOGM on procurement, on what was not done right and what we need to do. So, when I remained here, I remained for a dual purpose, to represent my people but also show cause for concern that Government should also come in and take IPU seriously and not wait for hurried processes as was done in CHOGM. 

We realised that Canada and India also wanted to host it and we competed for the slot to host the same conference. So, I am standing here on a positive way forward for this country to see that we don’t do post-mortem most of the time but we are proactive on the future events that can draw lessons from the past experiences that we have had. 

I would like to also note that the key players who should have been brought on board like PPDA were also laid back. PPDA should always have a member to sit on these committees as the conference preparations are going on so as to advise accordingly. And if there is a waiver to talk about, do it in time so that arrangements are done and mistakes are avoided. So, I think we saw that on CHOGM but we are waiting for other conferences for reports to come to Parliament and we discuss them as we make mistakes.

So, it is a good thing that the senior Cabinet ministers are here, the Prime Minister is here and the implicated people in this report are all here and are the very key players in this Government, to be cognisant and very active in the Inter-Parliamentary Union and also accord that conference the due importance that was accorded to CHOGM because they are Members of Parliament at the same time.

I want to note that if there are cases to answer for the people involved, I think other agencies like CID can take over because we will continue as Members of Parliament to be investigators and to try to do all this work and we will go round in circles for five or six years as we are getting money and being paid for going round in circles. So, I think as Members of Parliament and in my capacity as Member of Parliament for Kampala, I would recommend that the relevant agencies take up further action. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I want to explain that Parliament of Uganda made an application a long time ago to host IPU next year in April and we started on arrangements to host that. I signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Secretary-General of the IPU, Mr Anders B. Johnson, when he came here and we immediately started the plans. Even in the budget which is ending in June, this conference is there. We have a big item budgeted for in 2011/2012 to cater for that and even certain items have started being procured.

Officials from IPU came here and visited all the facilities we have, by way of hotels and they were impressed. Actually, when they went for a vote although we were competing with Canada, Uganda was accepted to host that conference which will come next year and I assure you, we are really in full gear to receive the visitors and I thank you.

Now, we have not ended this issue of CHOGM because the motion is not to receive and adopt. But we must formally either adopt subject to what we have done but this we cannot complete today. I even see some of the people affected are still here, hon. Rukundo is there. I think we are adjourning and we shall continue with the debate on the same subject next Tuesday so that we end it by putting a question on a motion to adopt the report. 

So, I thank you very much but continue studying the details of the report so that when you come on Tuesday, you will fully be equipped to debate. I thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 
