Tuesday, 31 March 2009

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I am delighted to see that the Front Bench is fully packed. Perhaps I may have to find out why the other side is not, but I am happy to see you again. 

I want to thank honourable members and the parliamentary administration for giving me support when my brother died and I was out of the country. Thank you for going to Mbulamuti. Thank you for your contributions and prayers.

Hon. Members, I have a number of issues I want to communicate. I will go through some of them today and the rest tomorrow. The first one concerns some work I was doing during the recess. The parliaments of the Great Lakes Region signed an accord for co-operation to assist us in handling conflict and post-conflict issues in the Great Lakes Region. We did that in Kigali in November. 

The second thing I want to talk about is the management of the boda bodas in the city of Kigali. They have been able to address the issue of these motorcyclists. They all have uniforms, helmets of a particular colour with telephone numbers in big numbers on top of the helmets – you can see them from ten miles away. Passengers cannot ride on a boda boda without a helmet, and the helmets of the rider and the passenger are the same colour. 

In this country we have been having problems where people do not want to use helmets; in Kigali it is working. They also indicate the type of boda boda to be ridden on a particular road. Bicycles are not allowed in the city. The bicycles are on other roads. I want to urge the mayors of the towns in this country that there is something they can learn from Rwanda on the issue of boda bodas.

Secondly, in December I went to Dar-es-Salaam where I attended the first meeting on good governance of the East African Community involving the parliaments, the judiciary and the central governments of all the five states. One of the things that came out clearly is that we are de-linked from the work going on in Arusha. 

One of the articles in the treaty requires that the Clerk of the East African Legislative Assembly should table the proceedings from that House to us so that we discuss them. Similarly, when we discuss issues of East Africa, we are supposed to do the same. Nothing of that sort has happened. 

It was clear that in all the Houses, the East African Community is not a priority. So we agreed that we should have a specific committee on the East African Community in our national parliaments. I tried to sell that idea in the Eighth Parliament but it was dismissed. So I would like to urge the rules committee to either designate our committee to be the Committee on Foreign Affairs and East Africa or we have a separate committee on East African Cooperation. I leave that to you. It is really something that was very glaring. 

Thirdly, I went to Cuba and I signed an accord of cooperation between our Parliament and the Parliament of Cuba. I was not very attracted to the other practices, but I was very attracted to the advancement in science they have made. The life expectancy there – the men die very early at 77 and the women die at 80. So it has gone to that extent. The literacy rate is almost 100 percent. The coverage of power is 95 percent. 

What really attracted me to sign an accord is that they eradicated Cholera in the 1960s. There is no Cholera in that country and there are no livestock diseases – even the jiggers are not there. (Laughter) 

They have designed a project to assist Uganda in eradicating Malaria. I am glad the honourable minister is here; I would really want you to pick up on that project. I will be inviting them here to make a presentation to this Parliament and to the country so that we can stop committing genocide by omission or commission. 

As I said, I will communicate the other matters to you tomorrow. I am happy to be back with you. Thank you very much. 

3.12
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank you for the very informative message you have given us about your trip. I am touched by one particular aspect of your report, and that is the issue of the boda bodas. There are a number of cities, even in Africa, that have purposely done away with boda bodas. In a city like Abuja you cannot see a boda boda, although when you are in Lagos you can see them mingling. Your proposal should indeed be embraced by the respective mayors and town clerks. 

However, I have my own reservations about this, Madam Speaker. Over the years, we have politicised the issue of boda bodas. Certain politicians feel that the boda bodas are their votes and if anything touches them, they come out and make big political statements. Many of the accidents that have occurred in our city and on our roads are as a result of those boda bodas because they do not adhere to the traffic code. I wish we could committee ourselves as a country, through the Office of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

Some of these arrangements like those in Kigali had actually been tried out here sometime back, like the issue of wearing helmets, which has been rejected. Police officers see boda boda riders breaking traffic rules but they fear to intervene because they know that there are big powers behind the boda bodas. 

I appeal to government; I think this is a very positive lesson that we can learn from our neighbours. Let us make our city worth the name. 

Many of you have travelled and you have seen how people manage their cities. I think Kampala is not worth being called a city. When it comes to 5.00 – 6.00 p.m., the roads become impassable. The number of taxis on our roads is uncalled for. I am afraid many of them may even be owned by members in this House and they may fear to talk about it. We really need to come up with commitment and a very positive attitude towards saving lives on our roads and also saving our citizens from untold sufferings through road accidents. Once that commitment comes from government, everybody will be ready to give it the support it deserves. 

In other cities, motorcycle riders are barred from the city; they do their business ten miles away from the city. In our case, they would be stopped in Mukono or even at Namawojolo so that only serious people come to the city, and they should be ready to conform to traffic regulations. 

I wish to appeal to the government and particularly the Office of the Prime Minister to take up this matter very seriously to save lives on our roads.

3.16
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to welcome you back and also to thank you for the report you have just given us. Allow me to report to the House that some time in early April, two very important protocols will be signed in regard to the East African Community. One of them is in relation to the common market which is following the customs union, and the other is EPAs. 

Madam Speaker, you have rightly said that much as EALA exists as a fully-fledged parliament which coordinates the activities and the interests of the partner states, we do realise that practically, there is no functional linkage between EALA and the partner states’ parliaments. For that reason, so many activities are going on without the knowledge of the partner parliaments yet these have budgetary implications. Not only that, we would wish that the projects that come up in EALA have relevance and are placed among the priorities of the partner states. 

I would want to hear from the Executive about what is happening with regard to EPAs because the protocol will be signed within the next week or so. We also know that there are some African countries which have vehemently rejected being party to the signing of the EPAs, and we want to know the issues behind that. I am not saying that we go with the decision of the other countries like South Africa, Nigeria and Ghana, but we what to understand the issues so that we can work together with government. 

More importantly, the issue of a common market is very fundamental because it will involve the free movement of people, capital and services, including employment. So we want to know what is contained in the protocol that is going to be signed in the next few days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe for your information, she is talking about the Economic Partnership Agreement between EAC and the EU. At some point, the government will have to inform us. 

3.19
MS WINIFRED KIIZA: (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to move this issue of concern, which is also kind of a procedural matter. Before we went for the Christmas recess, I stood on the Floor of this House to present a matter regarding the suffering of my people. The minister was supposed to present a paper to this House. He was given two weeks to present a report to the House –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister?

MS KIIZA: The Minister of Internal Affairs. We went for recess before the minister could present the report. When we came back, people continued harassing each other. When we returned, I reported to this House and the minister promised to give a report which never surfaced. 

On the 19th of this month, I raised the same issue after the Banyabindi cultivators had been beaten and imprisoned. I asked the minister when the report was coming to the Floor of the House so that we could debate it and know the way forward. The minister was supposed to table the report of the committee that was supposed to resettle the landless in Kasese on the 24th of this month. Up to now, this report has not found its way to the Floor of this House and I do not see it anywhere on the Order Paper, not even under the business to follow. 

I would like to know whether the people of Kasese are considered secondary citizens in this country and whether they do not have a right to be heard in their country. I want the Minister of Internal Affairs – if he is not around, the Office of the Prime Minister was heavily involved in this matter – to bring this matter to a logical conclusion. The matter is overdue and the people are continuing to hurt themselves.

3.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to welcome you back and to thank you for apprising us with regard to the many things you have been attending to. 

It is true that we gave an undertaking as government that a statement would be presented to Parliament regarding the settlement of the people in Kasese District who had been affected particularly with the incursion of groups from outside the country. The Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Agriculture and the Prime Minister’s Office carried out investigations on this matter and the report is ready. It will be presented here; it is a matter of agreement between the Clerk and the Speaker’s Office on when to bring this statement to the Floor of this House. There has been a lot of pending business and maybe that is why it has not been brought to the House yet. 

I want to assure the hon. Member of Parliament for Kasese that her concerns are our concerns and the report will soon get to the Floor of the House. I have been in touch with the Minister of Agriculture and I have also been in touch with the Minister for Internal Affairs. All they want is for the relevant offices in Parliament to agree on when to table it. They will be ready to come and present it any time this week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the rest is really mine to put this on the Order Paper. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, if you direct that we table it on Thursday, government shall be ready to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we will put it on the Order Paper for this week.

3.24
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pleasure to have you back in the House. Like the Member for Kasese, I brought an issue of concern to this House just before we closed for Christmas and I have not heard any follow up.  

This issue is to do with our people who are employed as guards in war areas of Iraq and Afghanistan and the lack of protection in terms of employment terms by government. This issue was handed over to the committee overseeing the ministry in charge of labour. Indeed I have been watching the Order Paper to see whether this issue has been dealt with or not and again I do not see it even in the business to follow.  

What has happened to this very important matter? The people we represent are taken to very risky areas to serve as guards of American soldiers and have appalling payment terms. If a dollar is Shs 2000 for example, they are given 13,500 and so on; just as they choose to pay them. 

Some of them still come home for leave after serving for a year and they find that their money is not on their accounts. They have to walk up and down to these offices that take them abroad to follow up their pay and yet the terms that they signed say differently. What is it that government is doing to protect these people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mary Mugyenyi, was it a question? What was the undertaking of the House on that matter?

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, the Speaker referred the matter to the committee in charge of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to investigate and report back to the House but nothing has surfaced. More than three months are going so I am concerned because I raised this issue.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was still the Minister of State for Labour, that question was raised first by hon. Mutumba and I came here and responded. Hon. Okello-Okello then raised the same question and I gave a response. I submitted it to the Clerk to Parliament with a request that it should be put on the Order paper. It is before this House but I do not know what has happened. I am not sure why it has not been put on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know why you deal with the Clerk when the Speaker is there. Okay, I direct the Clerk to establish where that reply is and we shall put it on the Order Paper.

3.29
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise a matter of public concern. In the year 2007, our President, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, went about his business while putting on open shoes - sandals. The President even crossed our borders and went to do work outside the country in those sandals. Nobody came to this House to inform the nation what was wrong. 

For about one week or so now, the President has been shown in the media greeting people with the left hand and even eating with the left hand. Again, nobody has come here to inform the nation why all this is happening. 

This is a very serious matter. The people of Uganda are entitled to know what is happening with their President. Can someone inform the nation about the state of the health of our President? If the President is not feeling well, can he not be advised to rest until he has recovered? (Laughter)  Should he be allowed to soldier on as if there is nobody on the other side who can hold the fort even for one day? I request the Leader of Government Business to inform the nation what is going on. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether there is a standard shoe which heads of state are supposed to wear or a hand which they are supposed to use when eating. Maybe let the government answer.

3.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the guidance you have given because there is no prescribed format for dressing on the part of any of the leaders.  

Secondly, I always see ladies putting on open shoes and nobody has ever complained, so why should a Member of Parliament, hon. Okello-Okello, come and raise such a matter here. My view is that we should follow the guidance you have given. I would like to assure hon. Okello-Okello that our President is performing the duties of this nation in the manner in which we all expect and to the satisfaction of the populace that elected our President for this term and maybe for the next term and other terms. (Applause)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, while I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip, I raised this matter of shoes because it was unusual. When somebody all of a sudden changes to do what he or she normally does not do, it is something strange. The second part of the question has not been answered.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The time available to this House is so scarce and there are so many issues which we have not attended to because we lack time. Is it in order for this House to be entertained by the hon. Okello-Okello on the manner of dress or manner of eating, as if there was a prescription on who wears what and does what at any time? Is it in order for the honourable member to talk about eating using the left hand when I also know that the honourable member uses a fork which he holds with the left hand? Is it in order to be entertained to this kind of foolery?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us leave the issue of the dress and the hands for eating for now and then when we prescribe, we shall say, “we prescribed this and you have not done it”. 

3.32
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also welcome you from those important meetings. This arises from your communication which touched the East African Community. 

This whole morning, my committee was interacting with the Minister in Charge of East African Community Affairs who doubles as the First Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Eriya Kategaya. Among the issues that came up was, first of all, the mechanism of EALA reporting to Parliament. It is true our laws allow EALA to report to Parliament twice a year but this is not yet done. 

Another issue that came to the attention of the committee was the two protocols that hon. Cecilia Ogwal talked about. One is the EPAs and the other one is the Common Market Agreement. Members need to be sensitized about all these. So we agreed in that meeting that probably before the signing takes place, members must be briefed and sensitized about whatever is going on. These are protocols that are going to be signed very soon. 

Also about the reporting mechanism, the First Deputy Prime Minister has acknowledged that very fact and he says anytime he will be bringing the report of EALA. If he does not, Madam Speaker, we shall be forced to do it as a committee. Otherwise, at the moment I do not think there is an urgent need to create a standing committee for East Africa. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I did not say that we should do it immediately. I am just saying that we have failed to debate issues of East Africa under the treaty and I think it is because the linkage is not clear. 

3.38
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My initial issue was to guide hon. Okello-Okello but you have made a ruling. However, if he could allow me as a medical doctor to really inform him that I do not get worried when I see somebody with open shoes.

Secondly, we have all seen the President in the pictures with a bandaged finger. That shows that probably he works very hard. He has worked so hard that he could have injured his finger and he continues to work. (Laughter) Why am I saying that? This is because it looks like a local issue. If it was a systemic infection, for instance, then all the fingers would have been affected. So, the mere fact that it is only one finger which seemed bandaged should not cause worry to anybody. I think that expert advice satisfies you.

The second issue is to inform the House that for the first time in Kanungu, we can now be accessed by air. (Applause) I know whenever I have invited most of you, you have feared the pathetic condition of the road from here to Kanungu. You take eight to ten hours by road, but now within 50 minutes you can fly from Entebbe to Kanungu courtesy of Eagle Air. 

We want to thank our local investor, Mr Garuga Musinguzi, who has put up an airfield and also to thank government for facilitating the public-private partnership that has enabled flights which are regular to Kanungu. There are flights every Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. I want to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for the support he gave us to license that airfield. 

There are special requests which the aviation industry has made. Flights or companies which are able to fly to upcountry stations should be assisted so that the aviation industry can be boosted in this country. Hon. Byabagambi was with us and I am sure he will take up some of the issues which were raised. So, I invite all of you to Kanungu and you should come by air. In just 40 to 50 minutes, you will be in Kanungu. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, and on that note let me invite the Minister of Works to make his statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I want to add my voice to those who have welcomed you back from your long trip. I want to thank you for the statement you have given to us about what you saw when you were on the trip.

On 19th March, hon. Angiro raised an issue in regard to the accident which happened at Entebbe Airport on 9th of March, and the House ordered the Ministry of Works and Transport to give a statement on that accident. Therefore, I am responding to the request of this august House to give the statement.

You are aware that there was an aircraft accident on 09 March 2009 involving a cargo aircraft, Ilyushin-76 operated by Aerolift Company Ltd of South Africa. The aircraft crashed into Lake Victoria soon after takeoff at around 5.15 a.m. It was flying from Entebbe International Airport to Mogadishu, and it was carrying tents and water purification equipment for the African Union peace keeping mission to Somalia, AMISON. 

The purpose of this statement is to inform the House of the accident, apprise the House of the progress of the rescue operations and the institution of an accident investigation team and other measures taken or being taken to address the tragedy. 

Allow me to give a brief background. The aircraft was Russian-made, registered in Sao Tome and Principe and operated by Aerolift Company of South Africa. It was chartered by Dynacorp Int., an American company which had been contracted by AMISON to provide logistical support to the African Union Mission. The logistical support includes procurement (chartering) of aircraft for transportation of military personnel as well as delivery of supplies to and from Somalia. 

Acting on behalf of AMISON and in liaison with Dynacorp and in coordination with Showa Trade of Uganda, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces applied for the necessary clearances from the Civil Aviation Authority Uganda (CAA). The Civil Aviation Authority reviewed the submitted aircraft technical documents, that is, Certificate of Registration, Certificate of Airworthiness and Certificate of Insurance, and on this basis granted the necessary operating permit. 

In this particular incident, Dynacorp Int. chartered the Ilyushin 76 to carry tents and water purification equipment to Mogadishu. The aircraft had 11 people on board - four crew members and seven other personnel. The four crew members were Russians and the other seven persons included three senior military officers from Burundi, one Indian from Dynacorp, one South African from AMISON and two Ugandans, that is, a loadmaster and a UPDF lance corporal. This fateful aircraft had made several trips between Entebbe and Mogadishu for a period of about two months. 

Description of the Accident

At 5.06 a.m., the aircraft, S9-SAB, was cleared to take off by the Entebbe Airport Control Tower. At 5.12 a.m., the S9-SAB got airborne and was instructed to contact Entebbe Area Control Centre on frequency 128.5 MHz. The aircraft never contacted the Entebbe Area Control Centre as instructed. At 5.14 a.m., the control tower again called S9-SAB and there was no response. At about the same time, and at a distance of about five nautical miles, that is about 10kms of surface distance from the end of Runway 17, the tower controller observed fire which was appearing from the aircraft engines. At 5.15 a.m., the control tower contacted CAA fire rescue services to attend to the incident. The control tower in turn called the airbase operations officer who also informed the UPDF base commander. The CAA, UPDF and Police marine search and rescue units immediately went to the scene where the aircraft had crashed and sank. 

The above search and rescue units encountered blazing fire which resulted from the spillage of fuel at the scene of the crash in the lake. When the fire subsided, the rescue teams at 7.30 a.m. on 9 March 2009, marked out the suspected accident area, identified and rescued two fishermen hanging on a wreckage of a boat which had presumably been damaged by the aircraft during the crash. The fishermen were rescued and they had no injuries. Neither human bodies nor main aircraft wreckage were cited or found on that very day. However, the team continued with the search. By 18 March 2009, all bodies of the crash victims had been found and have since been handed over to their respective next of kin. The fuselage was located under water but not yet recovered. 

The ministry was informed of the accident in the early hours of 09 March 2009 and we kept monitoring the rescue operations and gathering information about the accident. The Minister of Works and Transport visited the accident scene the same morning in the company of His Excellency the Ambassador of Burundi to Uganda, officials from the Ministry of Works and Transport, CAA, UPDF, Police officers and members of the press. 

The minister witnessed the ongoing search and rescue efforts to retrieve the bodies and the wreckage. On return from the scene of the accident, he convened a meeting which was attended by the Chief of Defence Forces, the Commander Air Forces, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Defence and senior officials from CAA and from Ministry of Works and Transport. The purpose of the meeting was to review the ongoing search and rescue operations, prepare a salvage plan and constitute a representative accident investigation team. 

Madam Speaker, since the accident occurred on Ugandan territory and pursuant to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, Annex 13, paragraph 4.2, Uganda is required to set up a team to investigate the circumstances surrounding the accident. In addition, as per the Civil Aviation Authority Act Cap. 354, Section 38(2), the minister responsible for civil aviation is mandated to appoint the investigation team. Accordingly, the minister appointed a six member team chaired by Rtd Col Chris Mudoola to determine the cause of the accident and make recommendations on how to avoid similar accidents in future. 

The team comprises of: Rtd Col Chris Mudoola (Chairperson); Ms Ketrah Katunguka, legal counsel in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Mr Ben Kwoba, Principal Airworthiness Inspector; Capt Earnest Yoti, Principal Flight Operations Inspector, CAA Entebbe; Lt Col Ham Kaija, Uganda Peoples Defence Forces; Mr Robert Ntambi (Secretary), Ministry of Works and Transport.

The team commenced its work on 17 March 2009 and is expected to accomplish its assignment and submit its report within 30 days. 

The team has since been joined by three experts from the Russian federation, the state of design and manufacture of the aircraft and one expert from the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 

Madam Speaker, allow me to report on the status of the search and salvage of the aircraft wreckage. 

The American Government on the request of the Government of Uganda has strengthened the UPDF, Police and CAA search rescue and salvage team by flying in 27 divers with hi-tech equipment from the US’ Navy Common Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa based in Djibouti. The specialized equipment includes the latest technology, SONAR - Sound Navigation Regulator, Recompression Chambers, and air supply equipment. The latter two will enable the divers stay longer under the water while the SONAR equipment will map the lake bed and take digital pictures of the wreckage under water. 

The common joint task force on 27 March 2009 demonstrated to the American ambassador and a team of Ugandan officials from the Ministry of Works and Transport, Civil Aviation Authority, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the press, the working of the equipment and the process of the operation. 

The team also visited the aircraft accident scene and held discussions with divers. Thereafter, the ambassador, officials and the joint common task force mission held a press conference.

From the demonstration and the visit to the accident scene, it was observed that the aircraft wreckage was disintegrated and the various parts such as the tail, the cabin and the cockpit lay wide apart from each other in the silt of the lakebed; in some cases over a metre deep in the silt. 

The divers will now with accuracy access the wreckage and recover the aircraft parts that are considered critical for information to the accident investigation team. These include the voice recorders and data messaging equipment commonly called the Black Box.

The exercise will take a couple of days due to the heavy silting of the lake, which makes the retrieval of the wreckage parts difficult and requires more diving time, and also there are heavy lake storms, which hamper diving. 

The salvage of the whole aircraft will require a heavy crane and platform which will be organised by both the Ugandan Government and the owners of the aircraft at a later stage. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I wish to assure this House that all bodies of persons aboard the aircraft have been recovered and handed over to their next of kin for decent burial. With the support of the US marines based in Djibouti, we anticipate the aircraft wreckage parts which are critical for information to the accident investigation team to be recovered as soon as possible. 

We thank the Ugandan search rescue teams comprising of UPDF, Police, fishermen and some volunteers from Lake Albert for their concerted efforts to recover the bodies and some parts of the wreckage. We are also grateful to the United States of America (US) Government for its technical support in the exercise. I thank you very much. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Mr Wadri rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the shadow minister of works here, is that why you are standing? Okay, hon. Wadri.

3.56
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has made and at the same time allow me once again to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families that lost their dear ones in this tragic accident. 

I know, as a country, we tried our best in terms of attempting to recover the wreckage. But what has been more wanting to us as an independent country, especially at this time when we are talking about development, modernisation, about putting Uganda on the right footing in as far as international issues are concerned, I think we as a ministry and as a country are still far behind in terms of swift action with well prepared equipment. 

When Ugandans woke up that very morning to the sad news, we expected that as soon as possible, we as a country would have recovered the wreckage. But to our greatest dismay, we realised that we are not technically well endowed with equipment. I, therefore, would like to appeal to government to ensure - and more particularly we are one of the few countries that have got an international airport near the lake. In which case, therefore, we should be able to prepare ourselves and ensure that we have got the right equipment for any emergency or recovery of such bodies whenever such accidents happen. 

Time in and time out, during the eight years that I have been in this Parliament, I have not seen the responsible ministry coming with that type of idea. Hon. John Byabagambi, I know you have tried your best by telling us what happened but we would wish to challenge you as a ministry to do a little bit more. Because at the beginning we were worried when conflicting statements started coming out that the aircraft was not airworthy and we asked ourselves, as a country, in the 21st century, when we are involved and participating in this important missions like that of peace keeping in Somalia, we subject our officers to an airworthy plane to carry them and give them resources is something which of course is of appeal to us. But you have at least in your statement tried to convince us that the plane was airworthy. But please, for future purposes, such planes which are involved in a number of operations of that nature should have routine checks.

And we will be interested - now that the Black Box has been found - to know what caused this accident because at one point there were speculations from the owner of this cargo plane from South Africa that they suspected a missile attack. You have kept quiet on that issue and we do not know whether this plane was hit down by a missile. And I know as a participating nation in the peace keeping mission in Somalia, we have our own enemies. Can we rule that out that this was a normal accident and that we were not in any way attacked by our enemies through the missiles? I think it would be very good, Mr Minister, if you could comment on that because many of us still believe in what the proprietor of this air cargo said that he suspects that this plane was brought down by a missile. Please inform us on that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we have heard from the Opposition and the Government, we will debate this for only 30 minutes.

4.01
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is brief as usual. I join the voices that are sending condolences to the families that lost their dear ones and I thank the minister for giving us a comprehensive statement. But what comes out in this is that every time a catastrophe befalls a country or something, the handlers of that specific sector should take lessons and from that they should build their capacity. Perhaps the military should now be telling us what they require to build capacity. 

On September 11th, people blamed the American Government and they described it as a failure of intelligence. They conceded and since then they built their capacity. It was an accident, it killed people but at the same time it helped the handlers and the government to build capacity. When these disasters happen, what do we learn from them? Floods are taking over bridges in the East and the North; what do we learn from this and how do we prepare to build the capacity? 

Finally, when this accident took place, the Minister of Information and National Guidance as she was interacting with the journalists at a press conference said in response to a question that, “We do not rule out terrorism.” There are speculative elements in the statement and yet we do not hear anything clearly telling us whether this was an act of terrorism or it was an accident or the team headed by Col Mudoola will tell us. This should come out such that we do not stop flying. We may start using boda bodas to go to Nairobi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not dampen the spirit of hon. Baryomunsi; he needs to fly to Kanungu.

4.03
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyaddondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek a simple clarification from an engineer who I really think is very good at Mathematics. The plane was six minutes in the air and to say that it had covered 10 kilometres is to assume it was moving around 60 km/h. I wonder whether at 60km/h a plane can take off. I will need to find out from this mathematician. 

Secondly, you said after six minutes the plane crew was supposed to get in touch with the control tower. I wonder whether this is the normal practice or this was a special case that needed attention of the control. 

Finally, the report falls short of telling us what exactly was the likely cause of the accident. It looks like you prepared this report and it has been overtaken by events and you did not have enough time to update it. But we would like to know what the likely cause of the accident is. Thank you.

4.05
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the Minister of Works for his statement which is going to help the House in discovering whether we are on the right track. 

On page 2 of the report, you explained a cobweb of operators within this scheme of aircraft but of greater interest to this House and to Ugandans is this company Showa Trade Company of Uganda. Could you please be kind and explain in detail who this Showa Trade Company of Uganda is? 

On page 3 you say that there were members of a team who were gathered and these teams did not include the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Why? You are talking about members of the UPDF and civil aviation and the rest; where is the component of internal affairs? I am asking this because we were pestering the Minister of Internal Affairs regarding the manifests of the members who were air bound and the minister was consistently unable to give a quick response probably because he had been kept away from knowledge to such an extent that probably he does not know people who fly on military aircrafts. Why wasn’t the Ministry of Internal Affairs involved in your preliminary discussions?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that the people who keep the manifests first and foremost are the aviation authorities. In this particular case the minister could not give information out because we did not want to reveal that information until the next of kin were informed. I am told it is inhumane and it is not correct to disclose the names of the victims until the relatives of the people who have been victims have been informed and I made that very clear to the honourable colleague of mine. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for that intervention. Either the minister does not have accurate information or he is deliberately misleading this House. First of all, in the terms he is talking, if an aircraft crashes and there are possibilities of survivors, you do not disclose those on board for fear that you could hurt those whose members have not actually died. But where you declare that there is nobody who has survived, you must declare the names immediately. I do not know whether this is a Ugandan practice; I have not read that part of the law of Uganda but the international practice is that you have to declare that. The discovery from this report anyway is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs was not involved and that one keeps you clean of the whole deal. 

We would like to know who the two Ugandans really are. For a minister to come and mention numbers in a report - it would be bearable if you are talking about others but Ugandans! And this is your formal report! You will need to give us the names of these two Ugandans. 

Somehow the report is also confusing. On page 5 you say that a team has been instituted to explain these circumstances but your report also seems to explain the same circumstances. You will clear me on this. Then on page 7 you talk about a request which you placed to the United States. This House would be interested in knowing when you requested the United States because during the course of my work as minister of internal affairs in the shadow cabinet, I got to know many days later that there were difficulties in approving the operation of the United States who dispatched a team later. But many days before you contacted them, some of us had mechanisms of reaching them and they said your government had not consulted them. Why was it so difficult for you to approve this arrangement?

Madam Speaker today is the 31st of the month and this accident was on the 9th, I would have expected a responsible government to come and give a simple brief at the start and promise us the details. But to put us into such suspense is dangerous and already theories are coming out. One of them is actually attested to by the owner of the aircraft as the Whip of the Opposition has already indicated that the owner is insisting his aircraft was shot at. We want an explanation either to the contrary or in confirmation of that. 

The second theory is that the bomber was actually on board - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are asking to pre-empt the report. If they have set up an investigation committee, don’t you think the owner of that aircraft will go there? If you are asking the minister to say these things now, you are interfering with the investigations really.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But I do not know whether it was simply courteous for the minister to say that the owner claimed that the aircraft was shot at - he actually did claim that. 

Lastly, there is a theory that this aircraft was carrying drugs and this is all because the time which was given between the accident and your statement is too long. So please, satisfy this House that these theories do not hold any water and that we are going to expect a report which is going to be fairly accurate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to inform the House that we have guests in the gallery: Women Members of Parliament from the transitional Somali Parliament. You are welcome! (Applause)
 
4.13
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also seeking clarification on the companies involved because DynCorp International is a large company which has been doing civil contracting for the US Government for over 50 years. But why UPDF decides to go through Showa Trade and airlift is something which I would like to seek clarification on. 

I am also aware that this same aircraft was contracted by the UPDF to transport the PGB equipment to Juba the time the President visited Juba during the peace talks. But under this arrangement where AMISOM has contracted DynCorp International, a huge international company with the capacity to move all sorts of goods across the country, I would really like to know how and why this elaborate string of companies got involved.  Thank you.

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, thank you.  I am rising on procedure about ministerial statements to this House and I am directing it to your Chair. For quite some time now, wherever a ministerial statement is coming it is only indicated on the Order Paper as ministerial statement by such and such a minister but the subject matter is always not brought out in the Order Paper. I am raising this because it appears that we are almost ambushed in the House with ministerial statements. I am requesting your office, Madam, maybe if you could change the practice and indicate in detail that we are having a ministerial statement from the Minister of Health about Cholera so that we can come and debate at a better level? Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall try to improve on the information to the Members of the House. 

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Members who have raised some issues of clarification on this matter. 

Hon. Wadri, I think we acted very swiftly and that is why the communication between the control tower and the concerned parties was done just in minutes. 

But as you have said, it is true that we still lack necessary equipment to carry out such very difficult operations. And at the same time our rescue team also could not approach the aircraft or the scene where it had sunk because aviation fuel, being lighter, was still flowing on top of the water while burning. There were flames all over, but thanks to God that the rescue teams managed at least to safe the fishermen.

On the conflicting statements, I can say that you know that even in a road accident when two vehicles collide, the drivers keep arguing over who had been in the wrong, until the policeman comes with a tape measure to determine that. To me, for somebody to sit in South Africa and allege that their plane might have been brought down, looks abnormal. Let us leave that work to the investigation team; they will tell us something in their report. I am not here to judge which is –(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for giving way. Mr Minister, in your statement on page 7(i) you insinuate that there was a possibility of an attack because you are not specific how far apart the parts of the plane had landed. All you are saying is that the plane’s tail, cabin and cockpit lay wide apart. How far apart? By that alone there is a possibility that it might have blown up mid air. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether hon. Kasigwa knows something on how hydraulics work. I am saying this because the impact of a bang from a certain distance onto the water would have not failed to immediately split the aircraft into pieces. I do not know whether he has ever tried to dive horizontally into a pool and felt the impact just from a short distance. Therefore, it is clear that disintegration was caused by the bang of the aircraft onto the water body. 

On top of that I would like to say that the aircraft has got a big surface area; the distance from one wing to the other is more than 56 metres. So, you can imagine what happens when such a huge aircraft, which weighs 120 metric tons, falls onto the water surface. I do not want –(Mr Kasigwa rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are pre-empting the report of the committee of Col (Rtd) Mudoola. Why don’t we wait for Col Mudoola to finish his work before we debate those details?

MR BYABAGAMBI: On the issue of the aircraft not being airworthy, I would like to say that as I mentioned, they tendered in all their documents though it is true that these aircrafts have been in operation for a long time. When the crew tendered in their documents, the CAA technocrats found that the aircraft was still airworthy, especially when they got a confirmation from the manufacturers. I think there should be not much to doubt about that, but remember that accidents can even happen with a brand new aircraft.

Hon. Tumwebaze talked about lessons. Yes, we should take lessons from such accidents and I agree with you. I know that such disasters also teach us a lot on the issues of disaster preparedness. I would like to report that my ministry is taking steps to see how we can fill in the gaps.

One member talked about the act of terrorism but I would like to say that I will not say much about that; we should leave it to the investigation team to establish.

Hon. Kikungwe, yes, it was cleared, but clearance does not mean taking off; it was cleared to take off and I think at some minutes passed 5.00 p.m. - the time lag of six minutes from the time of clearance to the time of the accident is a lot of time because when it is taking off, it flies at an estimated 350 to 400 kilometres per hour. And in air it flies at about 800 to 900 kilometres per hour. Therefore, you can imagine the six minutes; that was a lot of time! For example, take the taxing time from the runaway – it was taxing from where it had been parked. And from there to the runaway took about four to five minutes. It wasn’t in air for a lot of time. Actually it was there for only seconds.

There was a question on whether it was normal to get in touch with the crew by the CAA controller. I would like to say that yes, it is true that every aircraft that takes off communicates with the controller. That is a must. I do not know whether you have ever been to the cockpit of the aircraft; those people are ever communicating. This time why they sent a special message was because they had seen fire coming out of the engines. And I think why the crew did not respond was due to the fact that they had got aware that there was something wrong with their aircraft and maybe they were fidgeting to return to the runaway. We suspect that though I do not want to speculate on it until the black box is discovered; that will give us the real evidence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Works for accepting this clarification. You are saying that you want to recover the Black Box and the remaining parts of the plane, and you are saying that you are going to use a heavy crane to do this, but in those waters how are you going to mount this crane? 

The second clarification I want to seek is that, who are the directors of Showa Trade Company of Uganda? (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, mounting a crane is a very simple matter. Either we shall use a dry dock - I do not know whether you understand that terminology because I do not think it is accounting or finance. We might use a dry dock and put a crane on it. That is very simple.

On the managing director of Showa Trade – well, I do not want to refer him to the registrar of companies because this is a simple thing. Showa Trade is just an agent; it is not the owner of Dyanacorp or of the aircraft. It is just a kayungirizi. You know the kayungirizis. And this is Sam Engola. He is part of it -(Interruption) 

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. We are all aware that the ownership of Showa had problems in the Congo. They were indicted by the UN and as a country and Uganda People’s Defence Forces, how do we decide to associate ourselves with such a company? So the order I am trying to seek here is that is the minister in order to twist this matter to simply say they are kayungirizis? This is a serious matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know about the indictment but if, as you say, it was indicted in Congo, what followed? Was the company deregistered? Was it banned? Were sanctions issued against it for trading in this country? What happened? 

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, the director of this company was mentioned in the UN report for having looted the Congo -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is why I am asking -

MR KASIGWA: And the UPDF and senior generals in the UPDF were part of this racket. Although they were cleared by the Government of Uganda, I do not know whether they were cleared by the UN. Anyway, how do we get the whole country and our defence forces to come and relate with such a company? And the government is aware of all this!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. I do not know who can answer that but I was asking whether we took steps either to deregister or ban the company from doing business in Uganda. If we had done that, perhaps they would not be doing anything. What happened after that? Nothing! They are still on the company register and they are still working.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. (Laughter) I have to tell you that Showa Trading Company is still working even in Congo. I think I am almost through. 

Well, for the Ministry of Internal Affairs, you see, we have the UPDF Air Force nearby and then we have CAA which has also got a specialised unit on rescue matters. The manifest is kept by CAA because they are the operators. 

On whether Internal Affairs was informed or not, I want to tell you that the police force was also part of the rescue team. We have a specialised unit of the police force stationed at Entebbe Airport.

MR KYANJO: Clarification.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think I will continue. Well, he wanted to know Ugandans. I think that is not a secret. I can get a list of Ugandans although I did not mention it here. I thought it was not all that necessary because actually once a plane crashes, what do we say? Even if it sinks, you never know somebody might be alive down there! We cannot immediately say -(Interjections)- yes, if you have been following even the stories of Kenya, they say, “There is likelihood that there are no survivors.” No one can say there are no survivors. Miracles can happen. 

Hon. Members, you can imagine the fire burning on top of the lake and all of a sudden you find two fishermen hanging on the canoe. Nobody knew that even those people could have survived. So, anything can happen until you are 100 percent sure that there are no survivors.

Hon. Kyanjo, it is the Government of Uganda which contacted the US immediately because we knew our capacity was lacking. And there are some procedures and the procedure is that we have to inform Ministry of Foreign Affairs which then puts in a formal request. And that was done expeditiously the day after. It happened on 9th and on 10th we had put in that request. The US Embassy also had to contact their Government in America and the government had to contact Djibouti. You can see all that communication. So it took sometime; it was about three days. Within three days, the first group had arrived here. 

Dynacorp is a very big company, I agree, and according to the agreements which are on the Table, the company which was contracted was Dynacorp. It was not Showa Trade. Therefore, as far as we are concerned, the legal agreement we have is between Dynacorp and AMISOM. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Minister. We look forward to hearing the report when the investigations are completed. Next item!

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

4.32
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a personal statement as provided for under rules 22, Section 2 and sub-section (j); and 22 Section 3.

Madam Speaker, before I present my statement, may I belatedly convey the condolences of the people of Lubaga North to you and to your family upon the loss of your brother. Our hearts go out to you.

In its publication of 17 March 2009, The Sunday Pepper carried a lead story entitled, “Besigye names his worst enemies.” The story reports of an exclusive interview the paper held with Dr Besigye during which I was named as my party president’s enemy number six. The reason given was that I had colluded with top NRM officials and security agencies to frame my party president of treasonable activities. Since then, I have received a couple of hate mail from people who describe themselves as Dr Besigye’s fans or FDC supporters living in Uganda and abroad -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have no intention of interrupting the personal statement of my sister but I rise on a matter of procedural guidance. It has always been the culture of this House that when you are making any statement of this nature, you must restrict yourself to people who are in this House and who can be given an opportunity to defend themselves. The persons whose names have been mentioned in this statement are outside Parliament. They cannot, in any way, access these chambers to come and put right the record that has been put against them. 

Furthermore, rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure provides that a member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it. I seek your indulgence whether procedurally it is right for the hon. Member of Parliament to proceed with this personal statement in the absence of the people who will not be given an opportunity to defend themselves? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the honourable member has just started making her statement. Unfortunately, I got it here when I arrived and I do not know whether she discussed it with the Speaker. I also looked at the end, particularly at the prayers, and I was finding some difficulty with the content.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I did discuss it with the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did he read the text of this statement?

MS KAMYA: Yes, he did, Madam Speaker. I took a copy to his office and to yours as well. 

While you are considering that, last year at about the same time as this, I stood up and raised a matter in this House in the absence of Dr Besigye concerning government forcing PRA suspects to take amnesty. He was one of the people that were being forced to take amnesty. This matter was referred to the committee for investigation and Dr Besigye was not here. Surely if I can defend him concerning treason when he is not here, why can’t I defend myself concerning treason charges by him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, finish your statement and after listening to you, I will decide which parts we need to deal with and which we should leave out. Read on.

MS KAMYA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. As I was saying before I was rudely interrupted, I would have ignored the statements except that on the 13 November, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ogenga Latigo, in Parliament and in a formal statement to the press announced that FDC had credible information that I am colluding with senior NRM officials in Kiboga to set up a guerrilla camp for the purpose of framing senior party leaders. 

Three months later Dr Besigye himself, in a formal press statement, confirmed that FDC had impeccable evidence and recordings of a man who is said to have reported that hon. Nankabirwa, then Minister of State for Defence, and I had hired him to frame Dr Besigye and FDC leadership.

Madam Speaker, the reckless pronouncements by the two top FDC leaders resulted in unpleasant press and internet discussions about me. Under normal circumstances, I would have let this matter go as many of my friends have advised me, but this is now an issue of the campaigns of Lubaga North. It might continue to follow me even in the next campaigns. So I need to clean up before this matter becomes one about defence for me all the time. 

Besides, something undesirable could happen to the FDC leaders and Dr Besigye and they will say they raised this matter, they reported to the Police, and the Police are not doing anything about it possibly because they are colluding with Beti Kamya. Therefore, these accusations are not simple. They are accusing me of treason and fraud and they might continue. I think it would be interesting for this House to know whether they are seated with a person who is committing those crimes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform this House and all Ugandans that the claims of FDC are nothing but lies. I have no clue why they want to do this. For that matter, I seek your indulgence that this matter be referred to the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to investigate whether I am involved in treasonable activities of setting up a fake rebel outfit for the purpose of incriminating my boss, Dr Besigye, or for any other purpose. They should investigate why Police is taking this long to investigate a matter which could involve treason by not only a minister of state but one in charge of Defence and a member of the Opposition. They should also investigate whether FDC’s claims of recordings of evidence against me are correct.

I pray that the committee of Parliament reports its findings to Parliament within three weeks and that they give their recommendations on the next course of action. I hope you will appreciate that it is not good for me to be on the defence all the time because Police is not bringing out this matter yet the FDC leadership also accused Police of dragging its feet and questioned Police’s motives of not investigating this matter. I need to walk with my head high. I need to stand up with my head straight. I do not need to be on the defensive. I have been accused of treasonable activities and I do not need to be on the defensive. I pray that this matter be investigated by a committee of Parliament. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, of course I really understand your point and what you have been going through for so long. However, you know I have 300 members here and if each of these members has a quarrel within their party and they bring it here to be investigated by Parliament, I do not know what other work we shall do. 

What I could do for now is to instruct the Police to hasten their investigations, report quickly and take action. Otherwise, I will be setting a very dangerous precedent if for every member who complains I say, “Okay let the Parliament investigate”. These are matters that took place outside the House. They did not take place in the plenary or in our committee. That is really my dilemma. I do not want to set a precedent. Do you mind if I instruct the Police to work expeditiously on this matter?  

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I fully appreciate your predicament but the Police has already been accused of colluding with me, and the public court out there has already been poisoned by the fact that Police is already colluding with me and government. I think that a committee of Parliament would be the most neutral manner of handling this item. Police might be finding it difficult. I do not know why Police is not handling this matter but I appreciate that Police is accused along with me. I think they need a neutral party to look into this matter. Thank you.

MR TOSKIN BARTILLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the statement by the honourable member. Looking at our rules, it seems as though instead of being a personal statement, it should have actually been a petition so that maybe some relevant organs of government could have been used. The way it is now, I do not see how a committee of Parliament can get involved in following up issues of a party, as you have already said. 

I also think this is likely to attract debate, which our rules do not allow. I would therefore ask the hon. Member if she could go back and reframe a petition so that the matter can be handled. Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, we have a structural problem in Parliament; we have a multi-party political system with a party in government and a party in the Opposition with a leader outside Parliament. Unless one of the members opposite resigns in order for their leader to come in the House, this structural problem will remain. 

Indeed the dilemma we have is: how are we, as a parliament, going to debate a matter touching on the leader of the Opposition who is not in the House? He cannot answer! I advise my colleagues opposite; if they say anything contrary to him, if you go outside you will be in trouble. You can only say this in the House. Outside, the leader will discipline you for speaking against him. This is the structural problem. (Laughter) 

MR MICHAEL NYEKO: Madam Speaker, I just want us to move cautiously. My sister, hon. Betty Kamya, has been going through whatever has been going on. Some of us advised her that a party is very big and if you deal with it, you have to be very careful. Now I am seeing that ever since my sister, Betty, was suspended from the party, she wants to drag the institution of Parliament into her personal issues. I strongly believe that Parliament is not an institution where you just play on the gymnastics of politics from anybody. 

I request that -(Mr Alintuma Nsambu rose_)- I am not giving way. This Parliament should not allow to be dragged into these issues. If there is anything, there is nobody who has doubted the capacity of the Police to investigate anything. Even we in the Opposition, when we have problems the Police always carry out the investigations. Some of us have been accused of treason and the Police investigated and we went before court. If there is anything, let us entrust the Police to do it, but to drag the institution of Parliament in that kind of gymnastics, I am against it.  Thank you so much. 

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Incidentally, my fellow Member of Parliament, Madam Betty Kamya, is my relative from the –(Interjection)- we all belong to the grasshopper clan. Earlier on I was standing up on a point of information and I think this is now the opportunity for me to give that information to my sister.

There was a time when I informed her that actually the party to which she belongs is very good at telling lies and she denied. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I am very proud to be a member of the Forum for Democratic Change and to serve it in my capacity as the Deputy Secretary General in charge of administration. I have high regard for hon. Nsambu, Minster of State for ICT, and for the Nsenene Clan, one of the 52 clans in Buganda. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate and to even loudly say that he advised his sister, hon. Betty Kamya, to be careful of FDC and that FDC is a party of lies? (Laughter) Can he please substantiate what lie the party has told? If not, I seek your indulgence as to why the hon. Member of Parliament should not be ruled out of order. Is he in order to say such a statement about my respectable party? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know in this country we have clans and if you are not a member and there is a meeting of that clan, you cannot attend it. Therefore, you are not privy to the minutes of the Nsenene clan. Therefore it is fine. (Laughter)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, so many things have been said mainly about our President. One of the examples has already happened today. Someone was cutting my hair and he affected my skin and it is swollen. Typical of the FDC style, they come and tell lies about what happened. 

I propose the following: that Parliament appreciates that they told lies about my sister, Beti Kamya, and that you rule that lies should be forbidden even for future generations. That is how we shall move –(Interjections)– that Parliament just appreciates that FDC is full of telling lies, which should be forbidden.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I really appreciate what hon. Beti Kamya is going through, and I am also aware that in other parties some things have been happening, but I am unable to bring this matter to be handled by this House. Can I ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to help hon. Beti Kamya to have this matter resolved quickly? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, we investigate a case that has been formerly reported to one of our police stations. Therefore, if the wish of this House is that Police should be involved -(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is that FDC formally reported to the minister then, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, and to Police and also filed a statement with CID. I also reported a case to Police but Police is not doing anything. One of my prayers today is to investigate Police. Why would Police sit on a matter that includes treason by a minister of state? For nearly six months, Police has this information and it is not doing anything about it! We need to have these matters behind us but they will not go away until they are handled by Police and if Police will not do so, then Parliament must intervene. That is my prayer this afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us give the first responsibility to the Police. Hon. Minister, can you report to us by June?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, without wanting to waste the time of this honourable Parliament, I will ask my sister, hon. Beti Kamya, to give me the reference case and we proceed with investigations.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 64/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have her instructions to proceed? 

MR OPANGE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

4.57
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): “a) Can the Minister explain to the House why land tribunals as established by law are not working?
b) In the absence of land tribunals, what is the alternative?”

4.58
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Madam Speaker, hon. Ekwau Ibi Florence, MP for Kaberamaido, asked the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban development the stated question.

Although the Land Act came into force in 1998, it was not until 2000 that the land tribunal institutions were operationalised. The land tribunals were placed under the jurisdiction of the line ministry, namely the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, for supervision of day to day activities and the Judiciary for technical supervision until 2004. 

While under the then Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, the land tribunals operated under a circuit arrangement. Under this system, districts were zoned together into four to six districts for the chairperson to exercise jurisdiction over. Each district had two part-time members who were to assist the chairperson in compilation of dispute cases over which the chairperson would then preside. For any tribunal to exercise – (Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. The minister has not provided me with a copy. I am just listening to what he is reading but I cannot follow what he is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have enough copies for the Members?

MR ATUBO: Yes, I have. This question was asked on 14 April 2008 and we did forward the answer. I personally brought the answer to the Clerk to Parliament on 19 June 2008. I also personally gave a copy to my sister, the honourable –(Interjections)– yes, I did. I first gave the official one. I handed it over to her in June last year and I have been waiting for it to be put on the Order Paper. Unfortunately, it has taken eight months for that to be done. Anyway, it is good she has asked after we already gave the response.

Further, I would like to say that each district tribunal’s business was allocated four days in a month. This modus operandi caused a lot of delays in resolving land disputes. This coupled with inadequate funding, supervisory incapacity, lack of logistics and clear reporting mechanism caused a lot of disgruntlement among the tribunal members who subsequently started agitating for a transfer to the Judiciary.

In 2004, arising from pressure from some of the tribunal members who wished to be transferred to the Judiciary, purportedly for effective monitoring and technical supervision, the Land Act (Amendment) Bill, 2004 was passed, enacted and made into law in March 2005. This saw the tribunals transferred to the Judiciary by the end of 2005. That is why land tribunals, as established by law, are not working.

Two, in the absence of land tribunals, what is the alternative? I would like to report that the resultant transfer did not change the funding of tribunal operations. Land disputes continued to pile, sometimes resulting into violent evictions due to the incapacity and delays of the tribunals in disposing of cases. These, in passing, led to the issuance of Practice Direction No. 1 of 2006 by the Chief Justice. 

The actual transfer of land tribunals to the Judiciary was effected in early 2005 through Practice Direction No.1 of 2006, which is annex 1, issued by the Chief Justice. The practice direction transferred the functions of the land tribunals to magistrates’ courts and empowered those courts to exercise jurisdiction over land matters. According to the Judiciary Law and Order Sector (JLOS) study report on the integrated study on land and family justice of May 2008, by the time the mandate of the tribunals expired in 2006, they left a backlog of cases.

Findings and Observations

The study findings attributed to the backlog of cases were due to the following:

1. 	Circuit mode of operation: The circuiting mode of operation where each tribunal was designated to handle land disputes in more than four or six districts with each district tribunal business being allocated only four days in a month contributed to this backlog.

2. 	Failure to realise quorum: tribunal business could only proceed if quorum was realised - the chairperson and two members had to be present at any sitting of the tribunal in order for business to take place. Often times, the quorum would not be realised by most tribunals owing to the part-time nature of the members. They were only paid allowances and not salaries. Only the chairperson was a salaried officer.

3. 	Inadequate funding: there was serious under funding.

4. 	Delays caused by bureaucratic procedures: the tribunals were further observed as duplications of ordinary courts with all kinds of bureaucratic procedures.

Recommendations

With the expiry of the contract with the tribunals, the consultancy of the JLOS still observed and recommended that tribunals be re-operationalised.

They further observed that the tribunals still remained the most reliable land dispute resolution institutions in the foreseeable future, and that the tribunals were filling a critical gap.

The JLOS study report also made the following recommendations:
a) 	Each district should have a fully fledged tribunal of its own to avoid circuiting. If circuiting was to be inevitable, then it should not be in more than two districts.

b) 	Government should prioritise land dispute resolution and source adequate funding for it.

c) 	Tribunals should be used in areas where incidents of disputes are high, and in areas where they are low magistrates courts should continue handling such land disputes.

d) 	A special fund should be sourced to handle the backlog of cases handed over to magistrates’ courts.

e) 	The supervisory mandate should be shared between the Judiciary and the land sector as a whole. This land institution should work out a modus operandi for land tribunal operations and resources.

f) 	All members of the tribunal should be made full time employees to avoid failed quorum. It should also be a requirement that all members be residents of the district where they have jurisdiction.

g) 	Indigenous or traditional dispute management institutions, sometimes called customary mode of dispute resolution, should be accorded precedence in respect of disputes relating to land held under customary tenure system.

h) Local council courts are affordable, participatory and effective so they should be promoted and strengthened to handle lower dispute land resolutions.

I wish to add that in the absence of land tribunals, land disputes are handled by a number of institutions both formal and informal, that is, customary, clans, families, and so on. The others include LC and magistrates courts and indigenous customary disputes management institutions.

In conclusion, I would like to report that land disputes are on the increase and yet there is lack of capacity to cope with this increase. Therefore, rather than doing away with land tribunals, they should be operationalised and strengthened to cope with the increase in disputes.

The ministries and departments concerned with their revival should be urged to expedite the exercise. The need to do so is so overwhelming that it must be handled without further delay. 

Government must urgently find the resources - financial, human and structural - to operationalise the land tribunals to mitigate the escalation of conflicts arising from failures to resolve land disputes and other delays. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it seems to me that you reproduced the report of the JLOS study. What is your opinion?

MR ATUBO: My opinion is in my conclusion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, this is your conclusion?

MR ATUBO: Yes. Land disputes are on the increase and in fact in one of the meetings I attended with JLOS, they quoted that over 6,000 cases of land disputes were inherited from the land tribunals. Those are the ones they had recorded. Some tribunals had not yet handed over some of the cases to the normal courts. 

Land disputes also have got a compound effect on society because they breed violence, murder, family disputes and all sorts of things. That is why I am saying that land dispute resolutions are so important for peace to prevail among society.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, since you said that Government must urgently find the resources – financial, human and structural – what do you, as the minister of the sector, intend to do? I think that will complete the picture.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, as we stand now, the land tribunals were transferred by an Act of Parliament to the Judiciary. So, I am only there to manage the ground on which these disputes are committed -(Laughter)- and this is the land. When it comes to the dispute having been committed, it goes to somebody else.

If it is in the wisdom of Parliament and the committee of Parliament - as far as the Ministry of Lands is concerned, we would prefer that the land tribunals come back to us but there is a process for doing that. The process is of course Parliament initiated, but the Ministry of Lands can initiate it and Cabinet can also initiate it. So, we can put our heads together and see what the best thing is. Thank you.

5.12
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to ask supplementary questions to the hon. Minister of Lands. 

One, the RDCs have been reported - and we have evidence - to be handling land disputes in the districts. I want to know from the minister whether the RDCs have that mandate of handling the land disputes at the districts.

Two, the increase of land disputes in the districts and in Uganda is a result of ignoring the evidence given by the customary leaders -(Interruptions)- yes, the increase in the land disputes in the country at the districts is a result of ignoring the evidence given by the customary leaders who know the actual boundaries. What is the position of the ministry as regards the evidence that is adduced by the customary leaders?

Three, the land tribunals are not funded. Where does the budget or the vote of the land tribunals lie? Is it in the Ministry of Lands or in another place? What is the position now? Do we have a supplementary budget? In most of the districts, these land tribunals are not in the office and when you ask them they say they do not have operational funds and even the retention is not forthcoming monthly. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think some of these things are what the minister actually said. Anyway, he will answer.

5.14
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister said that there are many alternatives like the LCs. He also mentioned this idea of taking the land tribunals’ responsibility to the Judiciary. I am wondering if he could tell us if he has been following the funding. Is the funding there? If it is not there, don’t you think that people are still facing those problems? For us in the North, even in December we had lives lost because of these land wrangles. Who has to follow it?

We also have the sub-county land committees. I am sure that the sub-county land committees are in place. Sometimes there are also the parish land committees but we especially have the sub-county land committees. I heard that the training of these sub-county land committees is done just once, which means they are not competent in handling land issues. I am wondering if the minister knows about this. 

We cannot rely on these alternatives if they also still face the same problem of funding which was not there with the land tribunals. If the training to effectively carry out their responsibility has not been completed to date, I feel that it is the role of the minister to follow this up. He has to respond to that. Thank you.

5.16
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Knowing very well that in areas like Buganda the majority of the people do not have land titles, why has Government failed to implement the current land law which endeavours to renew the working relations between the landlord and bibanja holders? 

Secondly, if for 23 years government has not even bothered to put in place or to fund this - they are just telling lies; this government is fond of telling lies. You were talking about FDC -(Laughter)- but be very careful. The government has not bothered to put in place the district land boards and district land tribunals to address the grassroots land disputes in the country. What stories are they going to tell us in 2011?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe this is because we do not have enough questions in this House but supplementary questions are supposed to arise from the answer. You are asking him things he has already answered. 

5.18
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to support the conclusion by the minister. However, I want to also emphasise that there is a problem with some RDCs like my colleagues said. Some of them are ok and I want to give you an example. On 18 March, the Committee on Social Services went to visit Kawolo Referral Hospital and we had the opportunity to be in the presence of the RDC, Mr Matovu. After the visitation, he took us to an old woman who is 78 years today. Her family’s graveyard is where she is staying now but some rich guy from Mpigi went and bought off the land and the woman has been victimised. As we talk, the woman sleeps outside with her grandchildren and she is weeping. Mr Matovu, the RDC, has tried his best but the government has not come out to help him to help this old woman. She is being tossed here and there. 

On the other hand, we cannot rule out that there are some RDCs who are really grabbing people’s land. I am one of the victims. Alice Kaggwa, I am not ashamed to mention her name, forcefully took my land in Bubuli, Entebbe Road. I took up this matter with the President’s Office, through the minister, but she got away scot-free and she was instead transferred.  

So, the government must come up with these district land tribunals to help the poor. People in Bubuli are crying; they are being taken to the police stations, detained and shot at by Alice Kaggwa. She is an RDC. She was just transferred from Entebbe to Rakai where she is again going to victimise many other people. If she could victimise me, a Member of Parliament, think about those people who are voiceless out there.  

We must take up this matter seriously and let the district land tribunals be re-established and funded so that people get out of this problem.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we are really going to help the people of this country, why don’t we task our Committee on Natural Resources to ensure that funds are put in the budget for these tribunals? All this revolves around money shortages. Don’t you think we should really put in effort and help our people by getting money to the tribunals and let them work?

5.21
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Arising from the minister’s response to this question - an attempt to lament in the absence of the district land tribunals, and that land tribunals do not fall within the jurisdiction of his ministry. However, we do see very active land committees at sub-county levels. They are there and the committee believes that they should be facilitated by Government to discharge their duty.  

I would want to know from the minister whether these sub-county land committees fall within his jurisdiction and if so, how his ministry is facilitating these committees. If not, where do they refer difficult cases because they have their own limitations since they are not professional enough to handle complicated cases? Now that the district land tribunals do not exist, where do such committees at lower levels refer difficult cases? Thank you.

5.22
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. He says that his participation in or his contribution to this report is from the conclusion. In the conclusion, he only talks about the funds and mentions little about the delays caused by the bureaucratic procedures. I would want to hear from him what his comments are about this. The consultants have given their view. So, what is the view of the minister? We also want to find out from him. 

I want to know from the minister what his participation was. If he had not been given this question, what was he going to do about this? Was he just going to let these issues go like that without his attention and yet he also discovered that there was a problem? Suppose this question had not come, what would he have done?

5.24
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality Kabarole): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question is actually emanating from the minister’s conclusion on page 5.1 where he says that land disputes are on the increase.  

I would like to know from the minister what measures his ministry has put in place to address this. There are so many land disputes, as he has said, some of which arise from dubious deals. People get fake land titles and there are rampant evictions, left and right, especially in the villages. The very poor people are very helpless. As we wait for the Natural Resources Committee to appropriate money to the ministry, what are you are doing to help these poor people who are suffering rampant evictions because of these increased land disputes, Mr Minister? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
CAPT. JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his answer.  

My concern is about the delays caused by bureaucratic procedures. It also goes back to the structure of that system at the district level. Normally, the chairperson is supposed to be a lawyer but in many cases, even those who assist him or her are also lawyers. My problem is that that structure in many cases reverts back to how the courts handle cases. The minister should also think about the structure at that level. If you have the chairperson as a lawyer, can you have renowned Ugandans who may not be lawyers on that committee so that they can speed up the proceedings? If you put only lawyers, it makes the work even more difficult and it reverts back to bureaucratic procedures.

The other thing is the issue of witnesses. I know the minister might not be fully aware but I was a chairman of a district and I used to interact with these tribunals. My problem is that when we talk about witnesses, in many cases the tribunal does not regard witnesses from the clan and those from the LC courts. When you take your case there, you actually start afresh as if no case has ever been heard before. So, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification from my colleague. We are asking: where are the tribunals? Why are you now coming to explain what is happening - the technicalities and so on? I think the issue members have put across is that the tribunals do not exist. Now you are coming to explain that they exist but they are not functioning in a right way. What do you mean?  

MR OTEKAT: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Speaker, I was explaining from past experience and also noting that the minister indicates that these tribunals are about to be brought back. I was only informing the minister that when they are rejuvenating these committees, they should take into account certain issues. When he goes back to that committee, they should tell them that in order to improve work at the district level, it has been advised that they should also be able to do this. That is why I was going back to that level. Even if they are not operational now, we are being informed by the minister that they will be operational soon and we need to budget for them.  

Another issue is: is there a way witnesses from the LC courts and witnesses from the customary clan leaders can be absorbed so that the courts at that level are able to handle witnesses and so justice can be felt at the grassroots level? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, these are merely supplementary questions. I do not want contributions. Contributions will come in June when we are discussing the budget.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just reacting to a contribution made by hon. Opange and I thought we could clarify this and cover bigger ground in addition to what the minister will say. He said that disputes are on the increase because they neglect evidence from traditional authorities. I think that is not the reason why disputes are on the rise. They are on the rise because land is gaining value -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Prof. Kabwegyere in charge of disaster is a minister. The Minister of Lands is here and he is going to answer. I want to find out: is hon. Kabwegyere answering as a minister of lands or he is also providing questions to the Minister of Lands as an MP?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is part of the Cabinet. Please, conclude. He is assisting a Cabinet colleague to answer. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I actually enjoy hon. Nandala’s aberrations sometimes, so it is alright. I was saying that when land acquires value -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know that I am a sensible person, that I have gone to school and that I am not an economics professor. Is it in order for the Minister for Disaster to say I am obsolescence yet I know that I am a sensible and intelligent person better than Prof. Kabwegyere? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Omara Atubo to respond to the issues?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you very much, colleagues and Members of Parliament who have spoken on this very important point concerning the issue of land and land tribunals, which concern the people of Uganda very much. I will table the issues that were raised and if I do not mention your name, it does not mean I have not answered you. 

The first thing, hon. Members of Parliament may wish to know is that land tribunals are established by command of a Constitution. It is not a simple tribunal but the command of the Constitution. Article 243 provides that Parliament shall by law provide for the establishment of tribunals and the jurisdictions are there as well as the determination of disputes. The chairpersons are also provided for. 

I do not want to go into the details and the wisdom of the Constitution makers as to why they found it very important to establish an institution to deal with land tribunals outside the ordinary courts. It was probably because of the special nature of land and thus, the Constitution makers found it very fit that land disputes be settled by the institution of land tribunals instead of the ordinary courts. That is the command of the Constitution and that is what you, Members of Parliament, did when you made this law in 1998. 

In fact, if we were to go with the structure which was originally provided for in 1998, it started from the districts, went to counties and down to sub-counties. However, you found it impossible to operate because being a third world country, you found that you did not have enough money and therefore you had to come back, change the tribunals and make them operational only at district level. There was even the jurisdiction of sub-county and urban land tribunals. This was a very elaborate structure but it was not possible to implement due to our funding problem and therefore we restricted it to district level. 

When we did so, we even combined districts, for example the districts that I am very used to like Lira and Apac. At that time, the whole of Lango as a region or sub-region had one land tribunal with one chairperson and with various committees at Apac and Lira. They had to travel, and you can imagine that. So it was an impossible task for the land tribunal. With that experience, we shall be able to see how best to function.

The other issue is whether land tribunals exist. Yes, they exist because by virtue of Article 243 of the Constitution, you made the law to operationalise that provision. However, what is happening is that the district land tribunals are not functioning. If you read the Practice Direction No. 1 of 2006 of the Chief Justice, it says: “In exercise of the powers conferred upon the Chief Justice by Article 133 1(b) of the Constitution, this Practice Direction is hereby made in order to enable magistrates’ courts to exercise jurisdiction over land matters - and this is the most important - until new chairpersons and members of district land tribunals are appointed or otherwise.” So, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Otekat was right; the important thing is that we should now – funding permitting - be able to appoint the district land boards. That is all. Until we appoint them, until we give them funds, they cannot work. 

The Chief Justice did not want to create a legal vacuum where disputes arise and you have nowhere to go. So the Chief Justice stepped in very fast and said that while we wait for the appointment of the district land boards’ officials, chairpersons and members, let the ordinary courts handle the matter. 

The issue of ignoring customary leaders: customary records are handled by section 88 of the Land Act. In most cases, people think that the traditional mode of customary resolutions of land disputes is not there. It is there. In fact, it is protected by section 88 of the Land Act. Even when the land tribunals were there, this provision was operative except that possibly most people did not bother about it. It reads: “Nothing in this part shall be taken to prevent or hinder or limit the exercise by traditional authorities of the function of determining disputes over customary tenure or acting as a mediator between persons who are in dispute over any matters arising out of customary dispute.”  

This provision was put in the Land Act because when the land tribunals were established, there was a feeling that the powers of the traditional authorities were usurped or abolished. No! That is why it says, “Nothing in this part…” So the power of the traditional authorities is preserved by section 88. Even the Land Amendment Bill, which you will be debating here, will have that position preserved. We have to protect it. I will make sure that it is there so that when there is a land dispute, you can use your clan system, your family system, your tribal system and whatever authorities you have to settle the land dispute. 

The issue of sub-county land committees: sub-county land committees are not within the structure of the land tribunals. They are within the structure of the district boards. What are land boards basically for? They are basically for assisting you to acquire titles. So when you have land in Amach and you want to lease the customary land, you go to Lira District Land Board office and buy a form, fill it and then they send you to Amach sub-county land committee. They will be the ones to inspect your land in order to see the boundaries. They call the neighbours to ask them whether that is your land. They also find out if there is any dispute over it, how large it is, if anybody is complaining et cetera. When they say that they have inspected the land, the land belongs to hon. John Odit, there is no dispute and the neighbours have signed, the district land board now puts it in their minutes et cetera. So the land committees are within the structure of the district land boards.

Who funds them? Under the law and regulations, they are supposed to be funded by the district in which they are. Their money should come from there but sometimes the money is not there.     

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. A lot of land disputes have been handled. I do not know whether it is the sub-county land committee handling them but land disputes are being handled. So, can you clarify and also help us to be able to go and help those people so that they are able to do the right thing and not do what is not their responsibility. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Well, I even know in my own Gombolola they have tried to handle those land disputes. They should not; not even the sub-county land committee, which is even appointed by the district and the names brought to the ministry. They are just supposed to assist you acquire certificates of title. The people who should handle land disputes are the following: traditional authorities in your areas which are customary; local councils, and now there is even a committee which they appoint to handle them; and magistrates’ courts in the structure of the Judiciary. Those are the people who should handle the land disputes. 

Some of you are talking of RDCs handling land disputes; RDCs do not handle land disputes. What they handle are conflicts which are threatening peace, law and order in the area. So when a person goes and says, “This is my land” and he mobilizes people with pangas to fight, then that is when the RDCs come in. The RDC cannot come in and say, “This land, which is disputed belongs to Omara Atubo”, and he declares it; that is absolutely wrong. They should not do it. You should be able to educate your people that RDCs should not do this. They should only help to maintain law and order and the Police should go for that purpose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please wind up. I have got some other business.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Finally, hon. Kaliba mentioned land disputes being on the increase. Yes, land disputes will go on the increase for a number of factors: increase in population, land becoming more scarce; the value of land going up, the problem of conflict resolution procedures, the sophistication in societies, the production capacities; all these. 

He also talked about evictions which should be done according to law, but more importantly is question of fake land titles. The issue of fake land titles is a problem. It a virus, according to hon. Opange here, and the virus is not only affecting land titles but also degree certificates, driving permits, birth certificates, marriage certificates and many other certificates. This is the sophistication of our society in fraud. 

We are fighting it at the level of land in many ways. One of them is computerization. We want to computerize the land registry. The congestion is too much in the ministry headquarters here. We are building 12 regional land offices so that the people of West Nile will go to Arua - I think the construction has started – and they should have their land titles there. I have been to Gulu and the construction is going on. In Lira, I have personally been interested that it is finished very quickly since I come from there and in Soroti –(Interjections)- charity begins at home. And so I can assure you that within the next six months you will not have to bother to come to Kampala from Mt Elgon to get a land title on rocks. You will get your land title in Mbale. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I think we should have asked the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to follow up this issue of the funding this financial year so that the people can be assisted.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUBMISSION OF THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER 
FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10

5.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act, I beg to lay before Parliament the three year macroeconomic plan, the programmes for economic and social development and preliminary indicative revenue and expenditure framework for the next financial year and the medium term.

In accordance with Section 5(2) of the Budget Act, I beg to lay before this Parliament the preliminary estimates for the following self accounting bodies: Courts of Judicature, Electoral Commission, Inspectorate of Government, Parliamentary Commission, Uganda Law Reform Commission, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Uganda AIDS Commission, and National Planning Authority. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The various documents are sent to the relevant Committee on Budget and the other sessional committees.

5.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for submitting the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework in accordance with Section 4 of the Budget Act. And I would like to appeal to the minister that we receive copies of the documents in time because we only have 45 days within which to report to His Excellency on our recommendations. 

Last year I remember it took two weeks for those documents to be circulated to the various members and it delayed us in the process. I am appealing to you that we should have this document tomorrow so that we can also act in accordance with the time frame which is given to us by the Budget Act.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister whether the documents laid on the Table also show detailed revenue estimates just like we have always received a detailed submission of the preliminary expenditure estimates.

I would like to know whether the minister is aware of the provisions of Section 15 and 17 of the Budget Act and I would like to read them.

Section 15 states: “A person or an authority having power to waive or vary any tax under Article 152 of the Constitution shall make a quarterly report to Parliament which shall be on or before the 30th day of September, the 31st day of December, the 31st day of March and the 30th day of June in each financial year…” and it goes ahead to give details of what should be presented.

Section 17 states: “A minister responsible for any votes on appropriation-in-aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that vote are expended.”

Hon. Minister, I am raising this concern because we are now in the third quarter which is ending tonight and we have not received any such reports. So is the minister aware of these provisions of the Budget Act? Thank you.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the important issues she has raised. I am obviously aware of the legal requirements but the few days I have been in that office, I have not yet verified to see whether those legal requirements have been complied with by my predecessors and if they haven’t, I will undertake to comply. 

With regard to the copies of the documents which I have laid on the Table, we shall have them ready by the end of the week. They are quite big volumes but we shall have them ready by the end of this week. I thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you. There is an issue I raised and I did not hear the clarification on it. I was seeking clarification as to whether the documents laid on the Table also show detailed revenue estimates just like it has been the practice that you have submitted these documents with the detailed preliminary expenditure estimates. Over time we have not had details of the revenue side showing the non-tax revenue, how much you expect from that and other sources because both revenue and expenditure estimates are required according to Section 4 of the Budget Act. 

MRS BBUMBA: As I indicated in my submission, these are estimates of expenditure. The revenues are not there and it is very clear. The estimates of the revenues will come out in the budget. And since we are operating a cash budget, it is obvious that if you see the expenditure side, the revenue side will be equivalent to the expenditure side. I thank you.

MS AKOL: Maybe, Madam Speaker, you will have to give us a way forward because Section 4(2) of the Budget Act states: “The President shall not, later than the 1 day of April in each financial year, and in preparation for the final submission under Section 3, cause to be submitted and laid before Parliament, indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of government for the next financial year.” So according to Section 4, both revenue and expenditure are supposed to be laid on or not later than 1 April; that is what the Act says.

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, her first question was on details, but in my prayer I indicated that we are only presenting preliminary indicative revenue, because we do not have the details yet. What she is asking for is part of the documents we have submitted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know that the minister is new in that ministry; we must congratulate her on that. We believe she will carry the mantle –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And also wish her well.

MR NANDAL-MAFABI: I always wish them well. But the Chairperson of the Budget Committee is saying they are presenting only indicative figures, which means they have indicated what they will get from a specific source and what the deficit will be – of course in case of deficit financing she will come here to borrow money. I know you will borrow and come to finance it; that is true, but what I wanted to –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have been watching the proceedings from the screens that you provided to us – I have been part of this House. Anyway, what I want to say is that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been a very outstanding chairman of a very powerful committee and by usage he has always accepted the way the budgets have been presented. So is he asking all these questions because this is a lady finance minister? (Laughter) Why is he trying to intimidate her on her maiden budget?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the Minister in charge of General Duties is fond of teasing me, but that is not a problem.

Well, the issue that I am trying to put across is that I know that the minister is going to look at the previous quarters of what her colleagues did, but my question is: if today is 31st March, has she brought her portion of work concerning the Appropriation-in-Aid, tax waivers and so on? I am asking this because that is now her docket today; you can tell us about the past, but as of now do those documents include the reports you are supposed to submit by 31st March?

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, to save the valuable time of Parliament, I would like to invite my colleagues to look at page 16 of the estimates that I have submitted; the preliminary indicative revenue is clearly stated. And I would like to also say it here that although I am a female Finance Minister, I am not going to accept intimidation. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, but let me also add that I will not accept intimidation of female ministers in this House!

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

6.01
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. I move it under rule 133(b) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Madam Speaker, this is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill under rule 105 and rule 106 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution, under Article 94 (4) (b) provides that a Member of Parliament has the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted the Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 of the Constitution and that Rule 105 empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

CONSIDERING that many Ugandans have been infected by the deadly HIV virus as a result of malicious individuals who intentionally transmit the virus to them through rape, defilement or even in marriage, yet there is no law in place to curb such errant behaviour;

COGNISANT of the fact that there is no legislation in regard to the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS protection, testing and care of persons infected and effected with HIV/AIDS;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, ‘The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2008’ a draft of which is hereto attached and to order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” I beg to move.

I just want to justify why I am moving this motion. In accordance with rule 157(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the HIV/AIDS Committee is mandated by this House to initiate relevant Bills and motions required for combating the epidemic in Uganda. It is in line with the above stated mandate that the committee initiated consultations with the key stakeholders with the view of establishing a legal framework that will address the current challenges in the fight against HIV and AIDS. 

I would like honourable members to note that since 1992 when this House enacted a statute establishing the Uganda Aids Commission, there has been no other piece of legislation in regard to HIV prevention, management and control. 

There is also lack of a legal framework and this has resulted in a number of challenges, for example, malicious individuals who intentionally transmit the virus through rape, defilement or even remarriage. 

There is also the issue of violation of the rights of the people living with AIDS such as discrimination and stigmatisation.

There is also inadequate provision of services and the problem of accessibility to testing facilities, care, treatment and social support. 

Hon. Members, it is therefore timely for Parliament to position itself at the centre of the fight against the epidemic by working with other stakeholders such as people living with AIDS, the civil society and Uganda Aids Commission, to draft a Bill that will provide for the prevention, management and control of HIV/AIDS.

I want to take this opportunity to assure honourable members that the committee shall consult all stakeholders widely on this matter to ensure that the views of all Ugandans are taken into consideration as we work on this Bill.

Finally, I wish Members to note that everyone is at risk of getting this virus. This implies that every individual in our communities, young or old, male or female, residing in a rural or urban area, is at risk of acquiring this dreadful disease.

This motion, therefore, provides us with an opportunity to make our humble contribution in the fight against this epidemic. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The seconder, hon. Baryomunsi.

6.08
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, hon. Rwakimari, for moving the motion. I rise to second the motion and to make some few comments. I will be brief.

Over 25 years ago we were hit with this scourge of HIV/AIDS and Uganda adopted an approach where we fast tested interventions and put programmes in place in order to learn how to manage HIV/AIDS. We did not start by putting in place a law. 

However, we now have a lot of experience and we have learnt a lot of lessons. We now know how to deal with HIV/AIDS and therefore, everybody in the area of HIV/AIDS agrees that it is ripe that we enact a law.

The way HIV/AIDS has been addressed has been through different pieces of legislation. But as we further understand HIV/AIDS and as the technologies and skills develop, I think there is a general understanding and appreciation that we need a specific law to deal with matters of HIV/AIDS. 

The other challenge is that Uganda registered one of the highest prevalence rates in the early nineties but we have been able to reduce the prevalence from 18.5 percent to 6.4 percent in the general population today. However, for the last five to seven years, the infection rates have stagnated and there is also agreement that we need to strengthen interventions by legislative back up. 

Therefore, everybody in this country does agree that there is need for a law and we think we have the right skills, the right experiences and the right lessons for us to enact a specific law which will help us.

This is an initiative of the HIV/AIDS Committee of Parliament. We did start the drafting and we worked closely with Uganda Law Reform Commission, Uganda Aids Commission, Ministry of Health and other NGOs and players in the field of HIV/AIDS. We did agree that Parliament, through the committee, will spearhead this process and therefore the relevant government departments are aware and have endorsed and worked closely with the Committee of Parliament to pursue this process. 

As such, we want to urge the Members to support this motion because HIV/AIDS is an issue which we all understand. We have drafted the Bill carefully and it does not offend any provisions of the law, particularly Article 93 of the Constitution.

And contrary to what has been in the public domain - I think people have tried to narrow it into a law dealing with the malicious and wilful spread of HIV. There is only one provision in the Bill but the Bill is comprehensive. It tackles several thematic areas of HIV/AIDS like prevention and control, treatment and care and protection and support of those who are affected and infected. It is therefore a wide Bill. It is comprehensive and the issue of malicious spread is just one provision within a wide range of provisions which are in the Bill. 

It is a practice in many countries to come up with specific laws to deal with HIV/AIDS. Therefore, there is nothing strange with us as a country proceeding to enact a specific law on HIV/AIDS. We thank you very much.

When I look at you, I expect everybody to support this motion which is an initiative of the HIV/AIDS Committee. Therefore I invite you to overwhelmingly support this motion so that we proceed as Parliament. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Arumadri.

6.12
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I want to take with a pinch of salt what the seconder of this motion is saying that there will be no financial implication. A law which is going to be enforced must definitely be managed financially. And if he has second thoughts, I would rather he consults further with the Front Bench to say that in the event -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Arumadri, at this stage the HIV/Committee is only seeking permission. The Bill will be drafted and brought here for the first reading. That is when we shall raise issues about Article 93. Now they are just saying, “Can you allow us to draft a Bill?” They are only asking for permission at this stage.

MR ARUMADRI: I was prompted by the seconder who said that there would be no financial implications. If he had not said so, I would have kept my peace. (Laughter)  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, any other contributions? I put the question that this House gives leave to the HIV Committee to proceed with the drafting of the Bill and present it for the first reading at some stage. So, the motion is approved. Thank you very much – Okay, I put the question that this House gives authority to the HIV Committee to draft the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE CONCERNS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE ALLEGED DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether we can receive the report. Can we receive it and then debate it tomorrow? Hon. Members, this is a bit controversial but if the chairperson can just present for today then we can debate tomorrow. Is that okay? 

6.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, AD HOC LEGAL COMMITTEE ON THE CONCERNS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE ALLEGED DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND (Mr Peter Nyombi): I submitted this report about one month ago. I also checked with the Office of the Clerk about three or four times and was assured that copies had been made. Even as late as last Thursday, I went to the Clerk’s Office to confirm that the copies had been made and I was told that they had.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Present the report but If Members have not received their copies, they should do so tomorrow. Present but the debate will be tomorrow. 

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I don’t intend to read this report verbatim except for the issues that were raised by the Public Accounts Committee. 

On page one, we merely give an introduction of how the ad hoc legal committee came to be set up and the terms of reference that were given to it. Again in the last paragraph, we reflect on the findings of the Public Accounts Committee namely; that the Butabika National Referral Hospital is the sitting tenant of land designated as Kyaddondo Block 237-238 Plot No. 2 and secondly that Kyaddondo Block No. 237-238 Plot No. 2 was developed with a main civil hospital, Kirinya Forensic Unit of two schools: a psychiatric nurses’ schools and a training school, junior quarters comprising of 125 units and senior quarters comprising of ten units and that on 06 May 2004, a resolution was passed by this Parliament urging government to stay the sale of land belonging to Butabika Hospital and four, that contrary to the above mentioned resolutions,  the Uganda Land Commission had gone ahead with “the sale” and distribution of land belonging to Butabika Hospital amounting to 400 hectares. 

Lastly, that the beneficiaries of the above mentioned sale and distribution included, among others, Sanna Trading Company, a company that is based in Dubai, which was allocated 250 acres, Messiah’s Property Services of P.O.Box 1707 Kampala, which was leased 100 acres of land and three, Mukwano Industries, which took 50 acres. There were over 100 lessees. 

The report further stated that in spite of the fact that the land in question had been intended for the expansion of the hospital, the Uganda Land Commission had disregarded the resolution of Parliament and gone ahead to sell the same.

In the last paragraph on page 2, we point out that PAC alleged that these allocates or lessees - that is the people who benefited from this land - immediately transferred their interest in the land that had been allocated to them for pursuit of a noble cause to private individuals for purposes of private interest and that the Uganda Land Commission took no action and in fact in most cases sanctioned the violation of these lease agreements. However, PAC did not cite any example of land that had been transferred by the so-called big investors, neither did it elaborate on how the Uganda Land Commission had colluded with the allocatees in breach of the lease agreement.

I need not read page 3 and 4 but only inform you that PAC cited, quoted or attached to the report two letters and we quoted these letters verbatim as support to the argument that the Ministry of Health and Butabika Hospital had opposed the leasing out of this land to these different individuals. We cite the two letters verbatim. However, in our analysis of these letters, the following was apparent:
 
1. 	That Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital is a sitting tenant of land designated at Kyaddondo Block 237-238 Plot No. 2.

2. 	That the main thrust of the above quoted letters, the letters that were attached by PAC, was to secure the title deed of land designated at Block 237-238 Plot No. 2 and not the acquisition of land adjacent to the land on which the hospital is seated.

3. 	That the reference to a housing estate too close to a big national referral mental hospital is given no background in the letter. 

PAC therefore made the following observations. Madam Speaker, allow me to read these observations:

1.	That the sale of Butabika Hospital land contravened sections 42, 44 and 45 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.

2.	That the whole process of leasing had been violated at the time and Uganda Land Commission watched and participated in the violation of the law, which they were supposed to stand for.

3.	That the mentioned “investors” did not apply for land from Uganda Investment Authority and so gave rise to the question of who advised them on the availability of Butabika land for investment.

4.	That the public servants under the Ministry of Land, Office of the President, Uganda Land Commission and State House became “investors” for purposes of allocating themselves government land.

5.	That Section 2 paragraph (f) of the lease agreement provided for automatic termination of leases in the event that there was transfer of leasehold before completion or obtaining an occupation permit of the proposed building from the initial lessees. In most cases however, this section was violated as no action was taken by the Uganda Land Commission, which showed that the violation was abated by the commission.

6.	That efforts by the committee to get registers and verify the directors and shareholders of the companies that were allocated the Butabika land hit a dead end due to lack of cooperation from the registrar of companies, which showed that there were a lot of under hand methods in the transaction.

Therefore, PAC made the following recommendations and I want to read them verbatim:

1.	That all transactions on land belonging to Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital be cancelled and the land be reverted back to the development of the hospital.

2.	That the officials of the Uganda Land Commission be held accountable for their actions/omissions in the transaction as it was tantamount to abuse of office.

3.	That the actions/omissions of the chairman, commissioner and Secretary of the Uganda Land Commission be investigated with the view of charging them in courts of law for corruption and abuse of office.  

4.	Investigations should be carried out on all the public officials involved in the transaction by virtue of their offices with the view of charging them for violating the provisions of Section 10 of the Leadership Code Act 1992.

5.	That the Uganda Land Commission should ensure compliance with the Constitution, the Land Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act (PPDA) 2003 in the disposal of all public land and that consultation with responsible institutions be carried out before such sale.

6.	That government should immediately provide funds for the survey and titling of all government land to avoid abuse.

Now arising out of those observations and those recommendations, these were the issues that the Legal Ad hoc Committee tackled:

1. 	Whether there was any sale of Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital land.
 
2. 	Whether the sale of Butabika land contravened Section 44-45 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.
  
3. 	Whether in leasing out of land, the Uganda Land Commission contravened any law.

4. 	Whether there was abuse of office on part of the public servants from the Ministry of Lands, Office of the President, Uganda Land Commission and State House in leasing different partials of land in question.

5. 	Whether the terms and conditions of lease agreements made between the Uganda Land Commission and lessees had been violated and whether the Uganda Land Commission can be blamed for not taking action against the culprits who had breached the terms and conditions of the agreement.
  
6. 	Whether the failure on part of the registrar of companies to avail Public Accounts Committee the company file of some of the leases could be interpreted to mean that there were under hand methods in the leasing of the land.

7.	Whether public officials who were involved in the leasing of the land in question had violated the provisions of Section 10 of the Leadership Code Act, 1992; and lastly 

8. 	Whether the title deeds for the plots of land that were leased out should be cancelled?

This is how we dealt with these issues: 

One was whether there was sale of Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital. I will read this verbatim. “As pointed out above, Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital is the sitting tenant of land designated at Kyaddondo Block 237-238 Plot No.2 over which the main civil hospital, Kirinya Forensic Unit of two schools, that is, the psychiatric nurses’ training school and the psychiatric clinical officers’ school, junior quarters 125 units, senior quarters 10 units, dairy and agricultural farms are allocated.”  

There is no evidence nor was it contended that any part of the above mentioned land over which the hospital sits was sold or given away to some investors or individuals. Therefore, the allegations that Uganda Land Commission “sold out” land belonging to Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital are baseless and sold out is in inverted commas because Uganda Land Commission never sells; it leases.
  
Two; whether the sale of Butabika Hospital land contravened Section 44 and 45 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.

Madam Speaker, Section 44 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 provides:  “A bidder shall not be excluded from participation in public procurement and disposal on the basis of nationality, race, religion, gender or any other criteria not related to qualification except to the extent provided for in this Act.” 

Section 45 of the same Act provides: “All procurement and disposal shall be conducted in a manner which promotes transparency, accountability and fairness.”
  
Disposal under the above quoted Act means divestiture of public assets. The land that the Uganda Land Commission leased out did not belong to Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital, it was not a public asset it was not part of public land. Therefore, the commission was not obliged to comply with the above-mentioned Act of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.  

Otherwise, the commission would be required to comply with the above-mentioned Act for every plot of land in this country it leases out to the public so that if I am leasing land, anyway, then the Uganda Land Commission would have to comply with this Act.  This Act only refers to public assets. 

The issue of whether the leasing out of Butabika land contravened any other law. Article 239 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides and I quote: “Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament.” 

Section 49 of the Land Act provides: “The functions of the commission shall be to: a) hold and manage any land in Uganda which is vested in or acquired by the government in accordance with the constitution;

 b) Where applicable hold and manage any land acquired by the government abroad except that the commission may delegate the management of such land to Uganda missions abroad; 
 
c) Procure certificates of title for any land vested in and acquired by the government;
 
d) Perform such other functions as may be prescribed by and under this Act or any other enactment thus, Uganda land commission is empowered to hold and manage any land which is vested in and acquired by the government.”

In the exercise of these powers, the Uganda Land Commission leases out public land to any willing leasees. It is in exercise of these powers that the Uganda Land Commission leased out land at Butabika and there in no evidence to show that in doing so, the Uganda Land Commission violated any law. 

The other issue is whether there was abuse of office on the part of the public servants from the Ministry of Lands; Office of the President; Uganda Land Commission; and State House when they leased the land in question: Section 87 of the Penal Code Act provides: 
“1) A person who is being employed in a public body or a company in which Government has shares does or directs to be done an arbitrary act prejudicial to the interest of his or her employer or of any other person in abuse of the authority of his or her office commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term of not exceeding seven years; 

2) Where a person is convicted of any offence under sub-section 1 and the act constituting the offence was done for the purposes of gain, the court shall in addition to any other penalty it may impose order that anything received as a consequence of the act he forfeited by Government.”   

Accordingly, the following are the ingredients of the offence of abuse of office. If you are to prove abuse of office, you must prove the following: 

“1) That the suspect must be a person employed in a public body or a company in which the Government has shares; 
2) The suspect must have done or directed to be done an arbitrary act prejudicial to the interest of his or her employers; 
3) That he or she must have committed the act in abuse of his or her authority.” 

Although officials of the Uganda Land Commission are employees of a public body, they cannot be said to have abused office when they exercised the authority that they were empowered to do under that law. There is no evidence to show that they abused their authority; they followed the law. In any case if the commission had leased out land that belonged to the hospital and therefore designated the plot number, the Registrar of Titles would not have issued them with a title deed because you cannot create a title deed over another title deed; you cannot have two interests in the same plot of land at that level. The public officials who leased the land in question committed no offence in leasing the said land if they followed the right procedure and nobody has alleged that in doing so, they got involved in some illegal activities.  

Whether the terms and conditions of the lease agreement made between the Uganda Land Commission and the leasees had been violated and whether the Uganda Land Commission can be blamed for not taking action  against the culprits who had breached the terms and conditions of the lease agreement: Section 3 of the Registration of Titles Act  provides: 
“1)A Registrar of Titles shall be appointed to be in charge and control of the titles and to exercise the power and perform the duties conferred or imposed upon the Registrar of Titles by this or any other Act.”

And Section 37 of the same Act adds: “The Registrar shall keep a book to be called the Registrar Book and shall register in it certificates of title and shall enter in such manner as to preserve their priorities, the particulars of the dealings and matters affecting land by this Act requiring to be registered or entered.” 

Section 38(iii) adds: “One of the certificates shall be registered in the Register Book and the other original herein after called the duplicate shall be issued to the person entitled to it.”   

Thus after a title deed has been made, the official charged with the responsibility of keeping custody of title deeds and the other related documents is the Registrar of Titles, which means the certificate of title and the lease agreement therein are kept by the Registrar of Titles. Any transaction that occurs after a title deed has been issued, including the transfer of titles, is managed by the Registrar of Titles. 

It follows that after the Uganda Land Commission has executed the lease agreements and the title deeds issued by the Registrar of Titles; it is the Registrar of Titles who has the responsibility of supervising and managing the transactions affecting the title deeds thereafter and not the Uganda Land Commission. If there was any transfer of title or any breach of the lease agreement, the Uganda Land Commission would not be privy to the transaction. Therefore, the Uganda Land Commission could not be blamed for a breach of the lease agreement, if at all, unless the commission had been alerted about such a breach by the Registrar of Titles who keeps the title deeds and the lease agreements. It would, therefore, be the Registrar of Titles who would alert the Uganda Land Commission about the possible breach of the lease agreement.

The other issue is failure on the part of the Registrar of Companies to avail PAC with some of the company files of some of the leases. It could be interpreted to mean that there were underhand methods in the leasing of the land. The Uganda Land Commission and the Registrar of Companies are two independent departments under two different ministries. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it would be far fetched to allege collusion on part of the officials of the two departments. There was no evidence to show that there was collusion between these two officials who are far removed from each other. 

Whether public officials who were involved in the leasing of Butabika land violated the provisions of section 10 of the Leadership Code Act; Section 10 of the Leadership Code Act provides: 

“1) A leader shall not put himself or herself in a position in which his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities; 
2) Where a leader deals with a matter in the course of his or her duties in which he or she has a personal interest, the leader shall inform the person or public body concerned of the nature and extent of his or her interest before dealing in the matter; 
3) Personal interest in this section in relation to a leader includes personal interest of a relation or friend or business associate of which the leader has knowledge if he or she had exercised due diligence” -(Interjections)- I am rich in heart to get anything. 

Thus, in order for conflict of interest to occur, a leader must have put oneself in a position in which his or her personal interests conflict with his or her duties and responsibilities. The question to ask therefore is whether the personal interest of the public officials conflicted with their duties. In our view, there was no evidence of personal interest on the part of the public officials which conflicted with their duties. 

Whether the title deeds should be cancelled - conflict is not wished; there must be some overt act. Whether the title deeds should be cancelled, Section 91 of the Land Act provides as to when title deeds can be cancelled and I quote: “Subject to the Registration of Titles Act, the registrar shall without referring a matter to a court or a district land tribunal have power to take such steps as are necessary to give effect to this act whether by endorsement or alteration or cancellation of certificates of titles, the issue of fresh certificates or title or otherwise.”

2) “The registrar shall where a certificate of title or instrument is issued in error or contains a mis-description of land or boundaries, contains an entry or endorsement made in error, contains an illegal endorsement, is illegally or wrongfully obtained or is illegally or wrongfully retained.” 

Thus, the registrar of titles can cancel a certificate of title only in the following instances:

i)	If the certificate is issued in error.
ii)	If it contained a mis-description of land.
iii)	If it contained an entry or endorsement made in error.
iv)	If it contained an illegal endorsement.
v)	If it was illegally and wrongly obtained and lastly;
vi)	If it was illegally or wrongfully retained.

In the cases under consideration, there was no certificate issued in error. There was no certificate with a mis-description. None of the above additional instances existed. Accordingly, the registrar cannot cancel the title deeds that were issued. 

Section 77 of the Registration of Titles Act provides: “Any certificate of title, entry, removal of encumbrance or cancellation in the register book, procured or made by fraud shall be void as against all parties to the fraud.” If there had been any fraud, those certificates would have been deemed void.

In conclusion:

1. 	There is no justification for the cancellation of the certificates of title. 
2. 	There is no evidence to warrant the prosecution of the public officials.
3. 	The government should provide funds needed for the survey or titling of all institutional land.

Land at Bugolobi

In its report, PAC pointed out that although the Secretary, Office of the President had written to the Secretary Uganda Land Commission raising concern about what she called gradual and steady encroachment of land that officially belonged to her office by private developers, the Uganda Land Commission had gone ahead to lease out land designated as Plot 12 Faraday Road, Plot 1 Mast Close, Plot 2 Mast Bend, Plot 4 Mast Bend, Plot 6 Mast Bend, Plot 8 Mast Bend, Plot 3 Mast Close and Plot 5 Mast close to various individuals. 

The committee had also established upon receipt of applications that the Uganda Land Commission had sought clarification from the Minister of Information whether they intended to use the land and the Minister of Information then, the late hon. Basoga Nsandhu had given clearance that the department did not intend to utilise the land in question. 

In our view, given the fact that the applicants duly applied for the land in accordance with the laid down procedures and that in leasing out land, the commission was exercising the powers conferred upon it by the law, the contention that the land that was leased out should revert to government has no legal basis.

In absence of evidence justifying the registrar of titles to invoke his/her powers under Section 91 of the Land Act, the title deeds cannot be cancelled.

Signed,
Peter Nyombi
Ben Wacha
Stephen Tashobya
Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We agreed there is no debating. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman of the ad hoc committee for his report. Whereas we have agreed that we shall debate this report tomorrow, I would like to inform this House that last week but one, a very contentious issue was raised by a member of this committee and that person went close to casting doubt on the authenticity of this report - that is hon. Abdu Katuntu who is supposed to be a member of this committee. 

For us to give a free mind to this debate, I know all committees of Parliament whether ad hoc, select or sessional committees operate in such a way that there must be a clerk attached to that committee and when this committee sits, it must have its minutes of proceedings. I would like to beg that before we debate this report tomorrow, we should give the honourable chairperson time to avail us with the name of the clerk to this ad hoc committee.

Two, to provide us with the minutes of the various meetings that this committee conducted so that we can have a clear position in our mind that this is a committee report and not a report of one person; it was alluded that it was only taken to the other members for signatures. Madam Speaker, that is what I wanted to observe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should really work within our Rules of Procedure. If we start this, it means that each time we get a report here we will begin to ask questions such as who fell sick, when did the clerk fall sick; how many days did he work; I do not want to do that to our clerks. Let us trust them; let us debate this report the way it has come. If the honourable member who did not sign comes here tomorrow he will be given time to speak against this report. I do not want to introduce new precedents in our procedures. It will be very bad for our staff. Let us debate this matter tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, for us to be able to debate this report it would also be important for members to have the report of PAC, which was submitted on 01 April 2008. It is now one year since this report was presented to the House; you need to get it so that you can have your mind on both of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are those not our documents? Are they not in this House? Yes, hon. Peter Nyombi.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I heard about that allegation. Can I respond to it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The one of hon. Katuntu?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, he did not sign the report. So he will explain why he did not. So, hon. Members, go and look through your archives and bring the reports, but debate on this particular report will ensue tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

