Thursday, 30 March 2006

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Gallery, we have some visitors but I do not have the details. I will introduce them to you when I get to know them. I want to welcome those who have been at Makerere University, and those who have received various academic awards or those who had children who have scored academic awards. Congratulations!

2.41
MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at the Order Paper, the business we have today and the business that is going to follow. There is no mention of the presentation of the preliminary indicative budget figures, which is required by law to be presented to Parliament by the 1st of April.  When you look at the dates, 1st April will fall during the weekend. I want the government to guide us on this issue. There is no indication that they will be laid today or tomorrow and by the weekend we will be time barred.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, for the valid point raised. Good enough is that we are still in March and we have a day tomorrow. I hope that by raising the point, you have alerted those concerned; the ministers are here and I think they will take note of that.  

4.42
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Beatrice Kiraso for raising this point. We had a Cabinet meeting this morning and we are having another one after the closure of Parliament. My understanding was that, a message had been sent to you, Sir, to request for a special meeting tomorrow so that we can make the presentation according to the law. But if it has not been done, I hope we could do a negotiation now.

THE SPEAKER: Is the document ready? If the date falls on a weekend, there are exceptions - we will take care of that on Monday. The only good thing is - if it is ready you notify me, then it will be arranged to have it laid before Parliament soonest.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, let us undertake that in the course of the proceedings today, we will communicate something to you.

2.43
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of concern and importance about the delay in the release of teachers’ salaries in Lira District, especially for the months of February and March, which is standing at a total of Shs 1,059,464,295. The situation in Lira is now tending to a very serious strike almost, especially this coming week because the acting CAO is unable to give an explanation to these teachers. His office has also not been given genuine reasons why this salary release has been delayed. These are teachers from the learning centres, those secondary and primary teachers. Maybe the authorities can take action immediately otherwise the situation is very bad.

During the recently concluded elections, we lost our CAO, the late Dan Ochieng, and the acting CAO is struggling to put things in order, but with this kind of arrangement he has failed completely. There is blame on the administration for not giving the teachers proper explanation to this kind of arrangement.  

I learnt of this when I went for the second anniversary of Barlonyo attack, which took place in 2004. This has been deferred because the district is in a very serious financial crisis. They could not organise this function although they were also claiming the timing was late for them. But in all, there was no money in the district. At the moment, the district is paralysed, there is nothing happening and when you go there, you just sympathise with the people.  

Not to mention, Mr Speaker, Lira District Referral Hospital is also in a terrible state. I am wondering what explanation can be given to us about lack of doctors in Lira Referral Hospital. On the 12th of this month, a lady called Grace Apio was admitted while in labour and she lost her life, and her dear son when she was referred to Lira Medical Centre from Lira Referral Hospital. Up to now, we have failed to understand why there are no doctors at Lira Referral Hospital compared to other referral hospitals in this country. What should be done with this kind of arrangement where the referral hospital is referring patients to private clinics? What is the meaning of Lira Referral Hospital? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, the honourable member talked to me in the corridors of this House about this problem and I was surprised that the matter had not been brought to our attention earlier, because this is a matter that should not arise. Payment of teachers and indeed the payment of salaries is covered by the conditional grants, which are not tampered with in any way. I would be surprised that Lira was chosen not to receive this money when, in fact, the honourable member told me that the neighbouring districts have received the money and salaries have been paid. 

The problem must be localised and since he has been with it for some time, it would have been more helpful if he had brought it to our attention so that we can check the channel. It may be the CAO or something is happening there but the money, I am sure, would have been sent and there should not be any reason why the teachers should not have been paid. He says it goes back to January, which is even more surprising because we are ending March and even the March salary should have been paid by now.

I would request Members of this House that immediately they detect a problem of this nature, they alert us so that we can come to the rescue of the public. The failures certainly in this case have nothing to do with the government at the centre, which sends this money. These must be localised problems, which we need to solve together with the Member of Parliament from the area.

MS KIRASO: I want to give some information on the procedure because I do not think anybody could have tampered with money for Lira District in particular. But the death of the CAO must have caused a problem because some chief administrative officers are in the habit of holding all records as if they are their personal property. If the CAO’s office did not submit returns to the Ministry of Finance - it is on the basis of the accountability for money that has been released and received that more money is released. I think the honourable member did mention that their CAO died; it must have been that problem.

So, maybe local government certainly gets involved to ensure that some of these records are kept and they are public records and not personal to the holder. We saw that problem in the releases and that is the explanation that I seem to have picked from the Ministry of Finance people about Lira District.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the matter be taken up.  Now, in the Gallery, we have students from Kyambogo University Students Guild Representative Council. They are here to observe how we transact business. You are most welcome to Parliament! (Applause)   

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANIMAL DISEASE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Animal Disease (Amendment) Bill, 2005” be read for the first time. A certificate of financial implications, as required under Section 10 of the Budget Act 2001, is available and I wish to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Well, the Bill stand committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequently for a report to the Parliament.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT (JANUARY TO JUNE 2005)

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Inspectorate of Government for the period January to June 2005, as submitted by the Inspector General of Government in accordance with Article 231 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the appropriate committee of Parliament scrutinise it and then subsequently give us a report on it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: Maybe there is a slight correction here. There are three statements we expect from the ministers: two from Local Government and one from Energy and Mineral Development.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to make a statement in relation to the administration and collection of market dues. This is a matter that has been in the news and I take this opportunity to give a lot of clarity, and perhaps make the situation better than it has been for a long time.

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to inform the House that the administration and collection of market dues in Uganda are provided in the Markets Act. The Act also provides for the establishment and management of markets across the country. It further gives the minister responsible for local governments, powers to make rules for effective running of the markets generally or any specified markets. The rules and regulations also provide guidance on how rent is charged on stalls and fixing of the amount payable. 

For many years, Kampala City Council and other urban and local councils have not been building markets to match the fast growing population in the urban areas. Consequently, all markets in Kampala city and other urban areas across the country are overcrowded to the extent that some vendors are now operating on the streets. This kind of situation has generated a number of problems namely:

•	The law of demand and supply is dictating the behaviour of the people in the markets, and those struggling to get into them hence the congestion of the markets.

•	Vendors who previously operated from the streets now occupy open spaces and offloading bays in the markets.

•	Traders who occupy shops, lock-ups, sublet the open spaces around their stalls to casual traders thus exacerbating the problem of overcrowding.

•	The stall owners charge the casual traders higher rates/ prices, sometimes far beyond what the former pays.

•	Most of the stall owners are not the ones operating them; they are sublet and sometimes sublet, and sublet again.

Collection of market dues:

•	Mr Speaker, traders operating from shops, stalls, lock-ups and pitches pay rentals to the local councils on a monthly basis.

•	Traders who occupy and operate from open spaces within the markets, which were previously used as offloading bays and walkways, have been paying daily dues. In the case of Kampala city, they have been paying in the range of Shs 500 per day for the spaces they operate from.

•	The vendors who operate from open spaces have in the end been paying much more money for the use of the market than the vendors/traders operating from shops, stalls, lock-ups and pitches hence their unfairness.

•	Previously, local governments used to administer and collect market dues themselves. This arrangement generated a lot of problems, which resulted into under collection of revenues as the large portion of the money collected from market was being misappropriated by the revenue collectors. I am sure Members of this House are aware of this.

In an effort to improve on revenue collection from markets, many local governments have now privatised the collection of market dues and engaged private firms to do the work. This approach has significantly increased the revenue collection from markets.  

However, the system has brought about some challenges, which have to be addressed. Some local governments lack capacity to negotiate and manage contracts with the private firms which the latter has taken advantage of. Therefore, the local governments have to be assisted to build capacity in the management of contracts, and this we are undertaking among the efforts in capacity building.  

Privatisation of collection of revenue is still the best option if it is well managed and monitored and we hope that you will be tighter on monitoring. In order to rectify the situation and address the problems mentioned above, and with the guidance of His Excellency the President, I have used the following guidelines to all districts and urban local governments:

Market vendors operating from stalls and those market vendors operating from open spaces within the established and gazetted markets, will be required to pay only one charge, that is, a monthly rent. Consequently, the daily market dues popularly known as “Empooza” have been abolished and I would want this to be fully understood that the word “Empooza” meant “daily collections”. Rentals on a monthly basis cannot be called “Empooza.”  

The monthly rent to be paid by market vendors operating from stalls should remain unchanged until further notice, and the rental to be paid by vendors operating from open spaces, since this is now to be done immediately, should be determined by the councils in consultation with the vendors concerned and the private firms collecting the market dues. But, I want to clarify further here that the councils between now and the new ones in May, are not meeting and I would not, therefore, by saying this imply that now councils meet to decide on this item.  

However, the residual leadership of the districts which is now in the hands of the CAO, should undertake this discussion with the contractors and the vendors to arrive at a rate that can be paid between now and the new councils existence because the ultimate power lies with the councils in determining the rate. But as an interim measure in the current circumstances, the CAO and the contractors and the representatives of vendors should arrive at a rate that can cover the period we still have between now and the new councils.

Wholesalers bringing in foodstuffs and other items in bulk on lorries and pick-ups et cetera, will be charged a once and for all fee on those items each time they are supplied to the market and the market vendors will not be required to pay any dues on those iteMs This stops the practice, which has been going on against the vendors that goods will be brought in by the wholesaler who would pay and then those who will be buying from the wholesaler would pay on each item they buy when they also have a stall, which they have paid for on a monthly basis. So, this eliminates that totally.  

The local governments, with my guidance, will determine the level of the rent to be paid by the market vendors of the stalls and open spaces and dues to be paid by the wholesalers bringing food stuffs and other merchandise. This again, the final position will be given when the new councils are in place. I am pleading with this House and with the public, including the contractors that we are talking of the month of April, and not beyond the end of May. So, we must bear this in mind that the two months should not be the period of chaos. There has to be some understanding until the authorities can determine by the laws the actual rates.  

Let me further inform the House that it is not one figure because we are talking of markets in the whole country. The price of the stall in Arua cannot be the same price as a stall in Kampala or in Kisoro. The local circumstances are the ones, which you consider in determining the rate and, therefore, the authority being the council with all its powers to determine the rate that will be paid.

With regard to weekly and monthly markets in the countryside, the market vendors who operate within the markets will continue to pay a market charge on each market day. These weekly markets, somebody who brings in a goat may never come back for the next one year because he has no new goat to sell, but you pay for using the market. This is well known and this goes on each day a market takes place.

Mr Speaker, I intend to issue you a more comprehensive set of rules and guidelines to the local governments using powers conferred upon the Ministry of Local Government under the Markets Act, covering the whole range of aspects and activities in the markets because some of the rules which are currently in force are out of date.  

I thank you for listening to me. The next statement is given by my colleague, hon. Richard Nduhuura, on the bus problem in Kampala at the bus park. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, this is a follow-up statement on the situation at the Baganda Bus Park in KCC. (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, although the two statements are from the same ministry, they are on totally different matters. So, how are we going to handle the debate?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the statement then we shall debate the first one and then the second one.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am updating you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the progress at the Baganda Bus Park.  

Mr Speaker, several meetings have been held between my ministry, KCC, UBOA and other stakeholders. It was established that indeed wrangles exist within UBOA and these wrangles are still in court and my ministry has intervened to restore order at the park. In the circumstances, we have taken the following actions:

•	We have halted further excavation at the site until the legal process establishes the rightful developer and the developer conforms to the legal guidelines by KCC.  

•	Kampala City Council, together with the cooperation of the developers, must ensure that law and order prevails at the park. In that respect, Police have been deployed to beef up KCC enforcement.

•	Kampala City Council and bus owners have identified alternative parking areas for the buses on Allen road and Cooper Motors Complex, which is being prepared to be ready by the weekend. Other places are being identified.

•	Bus companies, which use the terminal, are strongly advised to have their own parking yards and their buses to come to the terminal only for offloading and scheduled loading of passengers.

•	I have invited bus owners and officials of Kampala City Council for a meeting due to take place next Tuesday, 4 April 2006, to brief them on these interim measures and to discuss medium and long term arrangements pertaining to passenger transport service in the city.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I must assure you that the situation is under control and order is in sight. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we shall have limited debates on the two papers. Let us start with those who want to contribute on the first one.  

3.09
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for coming up with something at least for our people. But, I think we need further clarification from the minister, more especially those of us who come from rural constituency areas.  

When we talk about “Empooza”, he says consequently the daily market dues (Empooza) have been abolished. And then at the end he says, “With regard to weekly and monthly markets in the countryside, the market vendors who operate within the markets will continue to pay a market charge on each market day.” This will cause some bit of disturbances to our people. The people, like the ones of my constituency, boycotted and stopped paying this “Empooza” from day one. What “Empooza” means to them is going to a market and after selling your items, some few bananas, the contractor for that particular market issues you a receipt - that is why they stopped.  

As if that may not be the only problem, Mr Speaker, there is also a complicated phenomenon in my constituency in areas, which are basically landing sites. It appears every landing site is a market and to make matters worse, some of these landing sites do not even have stalls. Many of them do not even have sanitation facilities but they pay a lot of money. Everyday is a market day and there is no significant market in these landing sites.

Even those who want to grind their produce who do not have the grinding mills in some of these islands are forced to pay money as they come out of the island. Again after grinding, they pay to allow them access to the island. However small in quantity this produce is, you will still have to pay what you will be demanded to pay.  

Mr Speaker, to some extent some of the markets even do charge what I think may be termed as road toll. In some of these islands we have so many outboard engines, which use fuel and in most cases petrol. When a fuel dealer for that matter gets fuel from say, Jinja or Bugiri, as he goes past a market, he is requested to pay some charge. He leaves that market at the mainland and then enters the island, he pays at the entrance and then he takes the fuel to wherever he stores it and he is again asked to pay from that area.

Mr Speaker, this situation became so difficult for many of my people who live in such kind of circumstances and they are almost being left again with a similar situation when I read this statement. This statement seems to only apply to people who are in Kampala here and I think the situation may not be the best.  Empooza in many of those areas needs further detailed illustration and it is causing problems to our people. I request that the minister tries to go beyond this Kampala that I am seeing today.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the issue of the bus park –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, do not mix up issues; we are now dealing with market dues.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, to wind up, the best that the minister can do is to take my area as a case study because there are quite a number of things that may need thorough understanding. I am sure my people will be very grateful, if this is taken into consideration and it is dealt with very fast.  Thank you very much.

3.15
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My first concern is like my colleague’s. The people in my constituency misunderstood this and believed they were not supposed to pay “empooza”, especially the weekly markets and the others. So, you may need to inform these local governments and explain further that you did not abolish the rates for the weekly markets.

Secondly, who is supposed to enforce these guidelines? I think some people are exploiting the situation. The vacuum in between these two councils; because we have the old one and the new one coming, then the guidelines come in between. As late as yesterday, in Bugolobi market, people were still being charged the daily dues. I normally shop in that market and they said, “Honourable, we thought these daily dues were abolished” and were wondering why they are still charged. So, where do we seek redress, honourable minister? Thank you.

3.17
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable minister for his statement. I have a feeling that this statement has been prompted by the directive of the President that people should not be charged small dues on items they take to the market. I remember the President pointing out that, a man trying to build up capital, who is taking two bunches of matooke to the market, should not be paying such empooza or dues. But, then I am afraid the statement of the minister does not come out to clarify as to how the directive has been handled because this is the source of all the problems we are facing in the countryside.  

I will give you, an example, Mr Speaker. On page 2, item 4 at the top he says, “The stall owner charges the casual traders higher rates/prices sometimes far beyond what the former pays.” Now, this is prompted by the fact that these vendors who move around, who do not have lock-ups, sell cheaply in the first place. They move everywhere, they snatch all the customers and then people running lock-ups do not have any business. That is why in turn these people are forced to charge these vendors, who move around on the streets, far more so that they can make for the rental they are supposed to pay at the end of the month. 

I would expect the honourable minister to give us a solution to that problem because so long as these people sell more and the owners of the lock-ups do not sell at all, then they have only to make up by overcharging these people who move around on the streets.

Again on page 4, under collection of market dues, the minister says privatisation of collection of revenue is still the best option if it is well managed and monitored. I want to assure you that we have a problem here because for us who come from rural areas, once they award a contract to an operator, he will be squeezing as much money as possible from whoever does any kind of pity business. A man brewing just one calabash of his local beer will be charged a lot of money because he has a contract and he wants to make as much money as possible. 

In fact, there is a lot of suffering down in the villages. People are almost abandoning these pity businesses and I think this is where the President came in to say, “If you tax such a person, how do you expect him to build up capital?” But the statement of the minister, unfortunately, does not touch on this. He is only talking of what has been going on, he is talking about what he is going to do but then he has not solved the problem. I would request the honourable minister to come out boldly and tell this country what should be done. Otherwise, if he leaves matters at this stage, then we are going to get more and more confusion.  

Again, Mr Speaker, we have roadblocks along some of our roads in the villages - this regards UTODA. Now, UTODA is charging dues in Kampala and a man driving a taxi from Gomba is forced to pay dues on the way. What is the meaning of this? The man is paying in Kampala before he leaves the park and on the way to Kampala he still pays more dues. Something has to be done about these anomalies. We are really pushing our people to the walls and that is why you are getting all these complaints.
 
Mr Speaker, we have these other charges, say a man delivering matooke in Kampala. There are certain districts where they will charge you money before you drive out of that district. Then the man comes to Kampala, he pays another levy in the market. For sure, is this man going to make any profit out of what he is going to sell in the market? All these are the problems we are seeing in the countryside and we want the minister to come out boldly and give us a solution. Failure to do that, we shall remain with these probleMs 

In short, Mr Speaker, this statement leaves a lot to be desired. I am not satisfied. I want the minister to tell us more and give us a solution. Thank you.

3.22
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I must thank the ministers of Local Government before I start to react on something which was going to cause us a lot of probleMs Not only tax dues are a problem, but when commodities start moving without proper oversight and monitoring, we are going to get our population consume actually poisonous products, fake products, sub standard products because nobody is answerable. One of the reasons why markets were put there was to make sure that proper meat is sold after it has been vetted by veterinary doctors. 

One of the things, which caused markets to be established in Uganda, was to ensure that vegetables sold in these markets were being actually produced by farmers under the oversight of properly trained agricultural officers, that nothing poisonous eventually ends in the market for consumption. 

As we talk now, the situation is out of hand to the extent that even dead material, something, which should never come on market, is getting in the market. Even cats at times are being sold as though they were goats, contrary to the accepted norms of society. Now, if we do not control our markets and what goes in the market and what is consumed by the public, you will find that in the evening people who are drinking beer will be consuming meat on sticks and because it was not vetted properly, it will maybe be a cat’s meat and this is a very dangerous situation. It might be dog’s meat. So, it is very important for the Minister of Local Government not only to insist that these things have got to be done but there must be law and order.

Mr Speaker, what is happening in Uganda is not really new. Originally, everybody who produced anything was monitored right from the village up to wherever the market was. I think somewhere something has gone wrong which needs to be refocused including the local governments themselves. I would like the minister to tell us that Uganda is not an island because Rwanda is also having the same situation, Kenya is having the same situation, Tanzania is having he same situation. But is the situation equally decayed in that people are doing things the way they want freely? 

I think the reason why there is a small tax to be levied on these things, is for the Ministry of Local Government right to the lower governments: to assure the public that a Moslem is not going to consume pork when he should not; to assure the public that waragi which is being sold in buveera around is actually not poisonous to the people; to assure the public that food, which is being sold as biscuits, has not been smuggled into the country and it is actually good food not expired. 

Until we do this, we have a problem; everybody is now trading in all corners of the country freely.  If we do not look at this, our population is going to hold this government responsible for having allowed people to consume poisonous material. It is important for people to trade, but at the same time the population has got to be protected. There must be standards, which can only be ensured by the Ministry of Local Government. 

It is true that now people are celebrating because tax has been abolished, and when they hear of anybody trying to reinstate this tax anywhere - the Minister of Local Government is going to be in trouble. He has to tell us what to tell the public because every time I go to the village they say that they hear the practice has been abolished, how come there is a stupid man coming to levy taxes from them. We have to be told what type of taxation is going to be levied in the market. If you do not tell us clearly, do not cry with us when we start telling people not to pay tax, because we would be obeying what the President said that the poor people should not be taxed. 

But poor people also have got to be protected from consuming poisonous material, expired foodstuffs and junk food. It is very important for the Minister of Local Government to come back with a much more substantive paper, having consulted with all stakeholders including the academia on how they can handle the situation. It is a big problem, Mr Speaker, which require much more work than what the minister has done so far. I thank you.

3.30
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from my colleague, the honourable minister, whether the President gets technical advice from technical people before he issues such directives. 

Mr Speaker, I almost became a victim of this “mpooza” saga. I do not believe the Minister of Local Government when he comes here and says that he is going to issue another comprehensive explanation.  Mr minister, you remember that on 24 March 2004, a circular was issued by your Permanent Secretary, giving guidelines as to who should pay “mpooza” and who should not. And what I remember particularly about this letter was that, those doing business in open spaces were not allowed to pay “mpooza.” 

The reason he gave was that local governments should not harvest where they have not sown. Those were his exact words. But surprisingly, up to today, people are still fighting; local governments have used guns to collect this “mpooza” by force. Yet the authors of this letter are keeping quiet until maybe people kill one another. This is very unfortunate! 

In another situation, the Minister of Finance, then hon. Gerald Ssendaula, on the 12 June 2003, abolished roadblocks mounted by local governments to collect dues. In my constituency these roadblocks continued until I went to Mr Ssendaula, and said that I wanted an explanation, either to apologize to Ugandans that he deceived them or that he gives me a letter saying that these roadblocks were illegal. I was sent to Ministry of Local Government, where I reached after a big struggle. I got a letter from there, which was instructing the CAO, Wakiso District to remove all these roadblocks and update the ministry.

Mr Speaker, as I talk right now, these roadblocks have been put back during these campaigns. I wonder whether the ministry is going to continue issuing circulars one after another, without any mechanism to check whether what they are doing is being implemented or not. I beg to get an explanation from the minister.

3.32
CAPT (RTD) CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister’s statement has got budgetary implications and we would have benefited as Parliament, if the minister could tell us what the actual budget implications are, because one of the sources of revenue for local governments are market dues. Now with the abolition of the “empooza” and the rest, how are the local governments going to raise revenue? And the local governments have already made the budgets, how is the Ministry of Local Government going to compensate for the loss of revenue arising from this circular by the minister?

And number two, true the minister has said that they privatised the collection of taxes and some companies had already tendered and paid for these markets. So, in case there are breaches of contract to people who have already tendered for these markets and they have been collecting money from these markets, how is the Ministry of Local Government going to compensate these companies? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.33
DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bugangaizi County, Kibale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am convinced that Members want the minister to come up with another statement, which is a bit more explicit and when he finally comes with that statement, I would expect him to come this time with a list of items, which are exempted from taxation. 

Today, in a market you find people selling both new and old clothes, including people with sewing machines then there is also booze “kwete,” “waragi” and everything - even goats, chicken and cattle, yet there are supposed to be separate livestock markets. But these days you get all sorts of items in the same market.

I think the next time the minister brings a statement it should contain the intentions of the President, before it can be accepted. My view is that, he was trying to save the subsistence farmers who bring a bucket of potatoes and two bunches of matooke to sell so that they can buy paraffin, salt and a piece of soap for their homes. But now, it seems to be covering everybody, including those who are going in St Balikuddembe market and some markets in Bugolobi, as hon. Kabakumba has presented. My imagination is that he was trying to save the subsistence farmers. Could the minister in his statement be clearer - what were the intentions of the President and what were they supposed to cure? 

Mr Speaker, this issue of privatising revenue collection, maybe the minister might help the local governments on how to set these limits because when someone comes to compete, there is a limit, which the local governments set, so much money for a certain market in a certain place.  

Then with exempting certain items, there will be an indicator; a market in such a place would be assessed at such a level and that way the local governments will be helped. Otherwise, in such a situation where everything is ambiguous, we are going to have a lot of confusion in the rural areas, and God forbid, there could even be more fights and so on, which have not yet started but they could start anytime. I thank you.

3.35
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues that the statement from the minister does not tell us what the policy is meant to achieve in general. We also needed to know whether the policy is encouraging open markets vis-à-vis constructed markets, because at the end of the day, you may realize that everybody will run to the open markets because there are no taxes charged there.  

Then there is need also for consistency, when you are formulating taxes (Empooza) for people especially in the rural areas. A contradiction is likely to arise if people hear that in towns, people are charged taxes on annual basis, yet you change those in the villages on a monthly basis. 

In places like in Bugiri, people have already started fighting each other, some refuse to pay taxes. Now, if the government is deciding to put taxes, let it also be a policy that markets should be constructed in the rural areas, and then we leave the stock in open grounds to encourage the people that there is something being done. Otherwise, you do not just take away tax without giving services to the people. Thank you.

3.39
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for the report. But I have my observation, Sir. Paragraph three of the report focuses on those who bring food in bulk, pickups and lorries, but in my place people come carrying food on their heads and bicycles daily into those small markets and they sell. 

When a local government is tendering out a market, they go out and compute and say “Magale” market will collect about Shs 300,000 a week, and in a month you get about Shs 1.5 million. The daily sells on chicken, beans, and meat is part of that gross figure. This arrangement does not recognize that problem; it focuses mainly on those, which come in bulk.

Secondary, the minister mentioned something, which is not here. He said that the councils have residual powers and in this case, because of the period of transition, the CAO and the contractors must reach an understanding. My understanding is that a district council and local governments have all the powers; the organs of the council, the chairman and the executive are there and their powers have not been reduced as a result of the elections that we have just concluded. I would be grateful if the minister told the country that the councils in the districts no longer have their original powers until the new ones are sworn in. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.40
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Local Government for this statement. As most of my colleagues have observed, the minister’s statement is not meant to be a remedy of the problems being faced by the markets nationwide. In fact, for the information of this House, the minister’s statement is basically a follow up of the presidential directive during the campaigns having come to pressure by market operators and the leaders in Kampala over this issue of empooza in markets. 

The President came up with the directive to the effect that he had for the purposes of his campaigns abolished temporarily empooza and now the minister is coming up with a mechanism, a revised edition, actually following up this presidential directive.  

Mr Speaker, as a Member of Parliament representing a constituency in Kampala, I know that most of the issues raised in this statement by the minister are correct and indeed I must welcome the move to abolish the daily market dues. First of all, as you are well aware, the market vendors in Kampala have been facing a very serious problem with the way the contractors collect these dues. Most of them have considered this to be oppressive and in some cases they are considered as extortionists. I think that this move to abolish market dues, particularly in Kampala must be welcome. But our worry and as many other Members of Parliament have said, is the enforcement mechanism.

THE SPEAKER: You mean what is good for Kampala is not good for Mbarara and Jinja?

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, what is good for Kampala may equally be good for other parts of the country, but I think Kampala problems are sometimes unique to this particular setting. What we demand of the minister now is to put in place an enforcement mechanism to ensure that this is effected. We would not like to return to Makindye, Gaba and Kabalagala to find that despite this directive, we still have companies of small tendering groups continuing to collect this “mpooza.” 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Mabikke. I am just wondering, what happens with the contract if this is just implemented? Initially, there was a contract with whoever is now running the market, then what happens to that contract after the directive?

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I think that clarification is sought from the minister and not from me. But for your information, there was a point I wanted to end up with and this concerns these so-called contractors.  In the minister’s statement, he said that when they privatised the collection of market dues, we had an upsurge in the collection of our revenue. I think the minister will have to revise that statement and do more research.

I have got certain information with particular reference to a company called Victoria; this is a company collecting dues in Owino. This company collects monthly dues from Owino, to the tune of Ugshs 212 million and what is submitted in Kampala City Council is in the range of Ugshs 60-70 million. As I speak, this very company is in arrears with Kampala City Council to the tune of over Ugshs 1.5 billion. The minister is aware of this anomaly and he can even report further to the House. 

The minister is aware of the directors of this company; some of them are his personal friends- yes. So, it is not true that some of these companies contracted to collect market dues have led to an increment in the collection. In fact these companies have contributed very much to the lowering of revenue, particularly in Kampala and something must be done about it. 

As the minister puts in place enforcement mechanisms of this abolition, he should also put in place a mechanism to investigate the operation of these companies, which have been awarded tenders to collect market dues, particularly this Victoria company, which he knows very well and is operating in Kampala. 

I want to conclude by saying that it is also important that the minister emphasises that the collection of the monthly dues should be halted until the next local governments, which have been elected in the office. I am aware of the move by some of the local governments, which are continuing in office to effect this directive even before governments are elected. So, the minister must emphasise that these steps take effect after the swearing in of the new local governments, which have been elected. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement about the administration and collection of market dues. My concern is in the countryside. If I am looking for school fees, and I decide to carry 25 kilos of maize on my head and match on the road looking for a buyer, somebody may sympathises with me and buy it at his or her price. 

Now, when I come to the market, and somebody offers to buy it at his or her price, not even mine, why should I be charged because in the rural countryside it is a very serious offence? I think that the peasant farmers who have not been assisted at all by the local government, and by the central government happen to be charged for carrying, say chicken or maize. In name of selling, they have offered themselves and gone looking for whoever can buy their produce. Why should we charge them, yet there are some crazy buyers who come to the same place looking for produce and they go back uncharged?  

Now, how fair are we to these farmers? When will these farmers develop? I want to challenge the honourable Minister of Local Government, again in the countryside, what we call markets are not even owned by the local government, these are areas belonging to the local people. Whenever they ask the local government to pay for that land or even to buy it from them, they never bother to do so. 

The local government, for example, has never bought the market places in Lira; they have done nothing to pay the owners of these areas. When are we going to settle these matters with the local people? Because here is a situation where the markets are not even owned by the local government, which is charging people, so people are charged on their own land. Are we fair here, Mr Speaker? Thank you very much.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Kabwegyere Tarsis):  Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members for their views, ideas and suggestions and I hope I will clear some of the misunderstandings that seem to remain around in spite of the statement I have made. 

First, let me talk about the contribution. I think nobody in this House should leave with confusion about the word “Mpooza.” It goes back to the colonial days; it means a daily collection. The moment we talk of a weekly market, it means a market that comes once a week. The collection there is on that day when the market takes place, and you cannot make it a monthly collection because a weekly market means that people come there once a week. Those who come there this week may not come back next week and in most cases, you do not have even a permanent stall or structure. 

So, what is paid weekly is not called “empooza,” the “empooza” is that daily payment and it is the one, which has been stopped. But for markets like those in Kampala, which are there everyday, and wholesale suppliers bring in goods, commodities, foodstuffs in bulk everyday, they are going to pay, but they pay at the entrance. They are not to pay in the markets; they pay on the bulk supplies they make and that is not empooza. Empooza is a charged on a person in the market on a daily basis, but not on a supplier who comes and supplies in bulk and goes away. That should be understood.

There are different types of market: There are markets, which are built. There, we have shops with stalls like many urban markets. But also in these urban markets, we have spaces, which were originally for offloading bays. There used to be walkways but because of the demand for space in these markets, these offloading bays have been turned into places for selling things, and now people put their umbrellas there and sell.  So, in order to avoid these payments and for several other reasons - the payments were exorbitant; you would find that the people being charged everyday are paying more than those who are paying on a monthly basis from their stalls. 

Secondly, the charge was not coming into the city council treasury; nobody knew how many people were operating in these open spaces. This answers those who think that there was going to be less money collected in these markets just because we had stopped the daily dues.  

The moment you pay a monthly due on a space that has been identified, and you know that hon. Kabwegyere owns this spot, you will know how much you can collect at the end of the day. In that way, a market like St. Balikuddembe should be able to know who is paying and how much is being paid.

So, the city council, the contractor and even the vendors would now be sure of how much money is collected and they can even demand services in return for the collection because nobody can tell them that we do not have money. They can establish how much was collected by the end of each month.  

The open markets, which are not built, are very difficult to deal with and many of these are still outside the gazette because technically we have over 62 markets, but many of them are illegal. So, until city council can build more markets, the problem of chasing these people in these informal markets is very difficult because when you chase them, where do you want them to go? The reason why these current markets are congested is because we shifted everybody from the streets to go there.  

Illegal markets will be handled. Those, which can be gazetted, will be gazetted and those, which can be improved, will be improved. I call upon the officials of the city council to be around and hear your views and my answers to your questions.

Those questions that arose out of the markets outside Kampala, in the districts - if they are peculiar problems, please let us also know them. 

I want you to be very fair to us, when we are here we can know the differences between a market in Arua and a market in Kisoro and act accordingly. We can also be informed, but now we are going to intensify our contacts with the local governments on this issue.

Hon. Kabakumba Masiko, if people misunderstand something then you accept it as a misunderstanding. What else can we do? If the councils misunderstand or if the public misunderstands, it is our duty to help them understand.  

These bulk suppliers pay daily dues and anybody who wants to say that a person carrying 10 kilograms on his head is a wholesaler, as hon. Wopuwa was saying - please let us be fair to ourselves and to those listening to us in the gallery? Wholesalers must be something more than those who carry things on their heads that is why we talked of lorries and pickups. Bulk supplies cannot be associated with things delivered by head.

Hon. Kalule Ssengo, we have stopped collections on roadsides, we have sent circulars, and talked to the press. We have sent messages to the CAOs, telling them to collect only the rural markets, which are the weekly and monthly markets. Collections are allowed in there and those are not “empooza,” they are legitimate collections and the scales are provided within the bylaws.  

So, I want us to understand that for the new rates to be operational, you need the council to approve them. What I was trying to avoid, and the House will bear with me, is to call councils back to sit on one item to approve the new rates in markets. That has a problem in itself and that is the reason why we advised councils not to meet now, unless it is absolutely necessary. 

People who have stood and lost could recover their expenses by claiming exorbitant rates and this is fair and reasonable for government to have a guideline of that nature. So, let us not confuse the vendors with batembeyi.  Mutembeyi, a hawker is one who carries things. Vendors are not hawkers.  

Hon. Kalule Ssengo, a hawker and a vendor are different people because vendors have associations, so they can bargain with the contractors. They can also present their case to the local government authorities and the contractors and the local authority can sign agreements. I can be interested in finding out who contracted a certain market, but the ministry is not supposed to be involved in that until a problem arises, because the powers under decentralization are within the local governments.

Hon. Gagawala, the market act provides for the minister to be concerned about the quality and even categorize the goods sold in the market. So, if there is a market where they sell cats, as it was brought to our attention, please let us know. Even the livestock permits; we do not allow cats to be in the livestock markets, because cats are not livestock.

THE SPEAKER: Let us be brief, because there is another important – (Interruption).

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, Sir. I should also point out that the people concerned with the quality of goods are more than just the Minister of Local Government; there are other officers who are in charge.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. I had initially asked what happens to this contract where you give out a certain market. I seem to be getting the impression from the minister that it is up to them. Whatever it is, it is not really part of your business, but the fact that it is the central government that is coming in now with a change of policy concerning these markets, I thought the local governments were a government, which can be sued. Now, from nowhere, you will end up in a situation where people are going to take the districts to court because of the termination of their contracts. 

It would, therefore, be good if the Central Government comes up with something adversary; if we are going to continue with this approach where you just change policy in the middle of financial year, then you should advise the local government or at least own the responsibility and say that the local governments are going to be sued because of termination of this contract, and the Central Government is going to pay. That is what I thought I would hear.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  I cannot stop, anybody from having his or her imaginations. I have not said anywhere and I cannot imply that contracts are being stopped. We are not stopping any contract; we are not stopping collections by contractors, only that we have guided the collection from being daily to being monthly. Now where does the breach of contract come from in such an arrangement?  

Secondary, we are concerned about the fairness of the collection that is why the local government authorities are being brought in – this matter is being brought to their attention that the collections must be fair. 

Those operating in open spaces must pay a fee, a rent in relation to those who have shops, so that there is a fair pay rather than what the case has been. That is not to say that contracts are broken, and I want to inform this House that following these guidelines, the contractors and the city council are going to get more money, because the collections on the daily basis were not necessarily getting into their kit, either of the contractors or of the city authorities. So please, no contract is being broken. 

The question of taxing the poor -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have to conclude this statement. We have other statements to handle.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you Sir. There was a question from the hon. member who is not here, who asked whether the President first takes advise before he makes a statement. Hon. Kikungwe may have his own interpretation, but there is nothing to show that there was no technical advice taken. 

We have been interacting with hon. Kikungwe. When we give directions and some people do not abide by them, then they face the law. I have always been advising the honourable member to get in touch with the Police. I have written to the Police in his constituency instructing them to punish those who are doing illegal things. I don’t have to do it myself. When he gets in touch with the district in Wakiso, he says he struggled. I do not know whether this was a revolutionary struggle or a particular type of struggle.

Hon. Byaruhanga talked about the budget implications. I want to repeat here that when all is done, the local governments will have more money, only that there will be fairness in the collection of that money. That is all we are doing.  The President did not mean that you abolish payment for the running of services in markets, otherwise how would the markets run if no payments were made.  The people who are supposed to pay more, should pay more and those supposed to pay less, should pay less.  

There was this matter of exemption of certain items from taxation. The law says that, but the issue is not that there are people who are paying taxes on items, which they should not pay for; that is not the issue. If an issue of that nature arises, the law provides for that.

There was this matter about livestock markets, where everything is brought into the market, goats, pigs, sheep and people selling potatoes and bananas. This surely is to be handled by the local governments. I am hopping that the press is here. I will make it a point to send a circular to the districts that livestock markets are separate from other markets. This is the practice and the law says that these markets are separate. The moment they are mixed, you have unacceptable confusion.

Hon. Kasirivu, I do not want to be a pessimist. This question of people fighting, please do not threaten our people with fighting when it can be avoided. You as a leader make sure that fighting does not take place.

I think I have answered hon. Wopuwa about CAOs.  He was once a CAO and he knows the powers that the Chief Administrative Officers have.  Councils exist but they are quiescent for reasons I have already given.

Hon. Mabikke, please, if only there was no “sickle cell” implications in what you say, kind of sickle cell- I did not want to say, sickle cell mind, a kind of “scorpion hook.”  What is unique is probably mismanagement.  There is nothing unique in Kampala as compared to other places.  He implied that I am aware, and I know the contractor in the case of St. Balikuddembe.  

Knowing that hon. Mabikke comes from Makindye does not mean that I know everything he does wrong or correct. And with this implication, he is misguided because that person comes from my constituency, therefore, everything he does is my responsibility; he is misguided.  But more importantly, the contracts in the two markets, Nakasero and St. Balikudembe, were undertaken before Kabwegyere became the Minister for Local Government. And when you check the records, you can see whether I have a personal interest or not.  

I really despise the innuendos that were coming out of the presentation of my dear friend.  I am not going to stop knowing people because they come from my constituency or are businessmen in town.  I want to be judged from what I do. I, therefore, plead with the hon. member to keep his innuendos to the limit.

This is the final remark. Let us help each other by not seeing things going wrong and waiting to talk during simple occasions like this one. Detect where things are going wrong in your constituencies and if you are interested in the solutions, let us know.  But if you are interested in coming here and saying, “The minister is not doing his job,” and instead problems increase. It is neither in the interest of your people, of Uganda, nor that of the minister, and indeed your own because you should deliver good results to your people.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable members, this is a follow up statement because there was a statement, which was made and we debated it.  But we wanted to know whether what we discussed, -(Interruptions)- yes this is the purpose. In the fifth paragraph they say they are having a meeting on 4 April 2006.  I imagine that after that meeting the Minister for Energy should come back and make a statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.15
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. members.  I wish to take this opportunity to brief this august House on the power supply situation and the remedial measures, which government is pursuing to alleviate the current acute shortage of electricity.  

You recall that His Excellency the President made a statement to the nation on 14 February 2006 about power shortage in the country.  At that time, we were in recess, so this statement is to complement the President’s statement.  

The country is currently facing an acute electricity supply shortage, which has resulted in instituting 24-hour load shedding every other day.  The central grid connected electricity supply is 185 megawatts, out of which 135 come from Jinja and the balance comes from Lugogo. The maximum demand is between 300 and 370 megawatts, mainly in the evening, because our pattern of consumption is mainly domestic.  The dead mark stands at 260 megawatts.

I would like to elaborate on the causes of the current electricity supply shortage.  The main causes are as follows: Lack of new generation plants, the prolonged drought, which has persisted since 2003, affecting the water levels of Lake Victoria, which is the source of water used for power generation, and the growth in demand for electricity.

I will start with the failure to develop Bujagali on schedule.  It will be recalled that government together with AES Nile Power had commenced construction of Bujagali Power Plant in 2001 with a view of completing it between late 2004 and 2005.  However, the project met stiff resistance from various political and environmental groups, which coincided with the unfortunate economic and political events in the US that resulted into the project’s financial impairment.  

The process of developing the Bujagali project has had to be restarted leading to loss of time.  All the other developments, which had been sequenced by the multilateral lenders, based on Bujagali, like Karuma, were consequently delayed.  

The prolonged drought: The drought situation has affected the entire East African Region and other Sub-Saharan countries.  If you see the newspaper cut-outs attached to this statement, the effect of the regional drought is well demonstrated.  It has even affected other parts of the world.  Mexico is affected, the former Soviet Republics are affected and many other water bodies in the world have been affected. 

As a result of that, the supply, which is illustrated in Table 1, has reduced from 100 percent to four percent last year, and that demonstrated the net inflows in the lake. They have decreased from 100 percent to four percent in 2005.  This means that even if we did not have power plants at Jinja, and White Nile River maintained the natural flow out of the lake, the lake level would have dropped significantly.  It should be noted that the lake has experienced low levels in the past.  Even before Nalubale was constructed, we are told that in 1917, the water level went very low.  In 1947, it once again went very low and yet at that time there were no power stations operating.

As I have pointed out earlier, the entire region has been affected by the drought.  Our neighbours in Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania are all in the process of procuring emergency thermal power plants to fill up the gap brought about by the decreased hydropower production.  In Tanzania, for example, available reports show that power generated from water has reduced from 561 megawatts to 50.5 megawatts, which is less than 10 percent.

Another factor is that there has been an increase in demand for electricity due to increased economic activities.  The average growth in demand for electricity over the first five years has been eight percent per annum, and rural electrification has increased from one to four percent over the same period.  The net effect of these factors is the increase in consumer numbers that has led to extensive power rationing, which we are experiencing today.

Mr Speaker, government is taking measures to address this unfortunate situation.  A number of measures, which have been categorised under short, medium and long-term are underway to address the situation.  

Under the short-term measures, we have energy efficiency or demand side management or economic use of energy.  One of the immediate measures we are instituting is to procure energy efficiency bulbs.  Arrangements are under way to procure one million energy saver bulbs, which will be sold to electricity users at subsidised rates using the utility companies as implementing agencies.  This is to ensure quality because there have been a lot of complaints about the quality on the market, which appears to be fake.  Through this intervention, about 50 megawatts of power will be saved during the evening peak hours, which will minimise the extent of load shedding.

The other measure is reduction of system technical and commercial losses.  Because of the dilapidated state of our distribution and transmission system, there are a lot of energy losses in the system. And to address this, the concession for the distribution company under the agreement was obligated to invest US$ 60 million in a period of five years and to rehabilitate the system. Over the last nine months, they have invested US$ 11 million.  

On the side of commercial losses, which are mainly thefts; people bypassing meters and doing all sorts of havoc.  The concessionaire, UMEME, has instituted measures to reduce them by extending the amnesty period, which has been running for the last six months and expires tomorrow.  They are also procuring a new billing system, which is expected to commence in August 2006. This is meant to cure the complaints that some of the bills are not representative of the consumption.  Once a new billing system is installed, consumers will be able to get more accurate bills.

Mr Speaker, the other measure we are taking is procurement of additional thermal generation plants.  At least 100 megawatts of additional thermal capacity is being procured to provide relief to the consumers.  The 50 megawatts is expected to be delivered by September; the other 50 megawatts will be installed in January 2007.  Government will be offering subsidies so that the consumers do not meet the full costs of thermal power production like the case is now on the existing thermal.

Government is coming up with an intensive programme of solar photovoltaic and solar water heating as another intervention for lighting plus solar water heaters to reduce on the peak demand.  Modalities are being worked out regarding the more suitable application of this technology, whether to install a central grid connected system or to use small solar home system.

The other intervention is by government waiving duty on fuel used to operate generators owned by manufacturers. For the manufacturers and commercial enterprises operating standby generators of 100 KVA and above, a package of incentives including waiver of duty of fuel to be used for purposes of generating electricity, has been put in place.  Implementation modalities are being worked out between the key stakeholders.  

We are also proposing to promote the use of biogas, improved energy stoves and other renewable energy initiatives.  The other intervention is to explore opportunities for use of other renewable sources, which I have already alluded.  This will help to provide a holistic energy package for the household. Mr Speaker, those were the short-term interventions.  

In the medium-term we shall continue with the development of Bujagali and Karuma projects.  Development of other renewable energy resources, including small hydro power resources, solar photovoltaic systems, biomass co-generation, gasification, use of municipal waste and system technical loss reduction.  

On the Bujagali project, a consortium composed of Industrial Promotion Services (IPS) of Kenya and SITHE Global were selected to develop the Bujagali project following the withdrawal of AES.  Project agreements were signed in December 2005, and currently with due diligence, the project developers are carrying out environmental updates.  This project is expected to commence operation in 2010.  

Karuma Project: Government is also holding discussions with the developers of the Karuma project, NORPAK Power Limited.  Our intention is to reach agreement with the developers as soon as possible.  But I also wish to add that the developers have indicated their intention to strengthen their consortium through restructuring to include SN Power supported by the Norwegian Investment Fund, NORFUND.  

On the renewable energy projects, several renewable energy projects including small hydros, co-generation in the three sugar mills: Lugazi, Kinyara and Kakira, as well as biomass electrification projects will be developed in the medium term.  Kakira is expected to come on line in 2007 with six megawatts and they are expected to expand by another 12 megawatts in 2008.  SN Power has finalised the feasibility studies for a five-megawatt hydro plant at Waki and a 13-megawatt plant at Bugoye and construction of these is expected to start in December this year.  Another firm, Hydromax, is carrying out feasibility studies on Buseruka for 10 megawatts.

Mr Speaker, in the medium-term, production of bio fuels will also be pursued.  A number of companies have expressed interest in producing bio fuels, which can be used to run automatic generators for production of electricity using municipal waste, which is a menace. A number of companies have shown interest in generating electricity from solid municipal waste.  We are encouraging them to progress these ideas because of the many advantages, which include, power production, fertiliser production and waste management.  

In the long-term, we shall pursue the development of other hydro sites namely: Ayago North to generate 300 megawatts, Ayago South to generate 200 megawatts, Murchison Falls which is called Uhuru Falls to generate 600 megawatts and Kalagala to generate 400 megawatts.  Appropriate interventions like degazetting corridors of the power plants especially those, which are located in game parks will be made to develop the Ayago and Murchison Hydro Power sites so that we do not get complaints from environmentalists.  

Mr Speaker, for energy security at least 100 megawatts of thermal electricity based on local fuel like furnace oil and natural gas, if resources are proven where it’s operation is taking place would be maintained in the energy mix.  

In the long-term, we are also pursuing the interconnection of the regional grid system. Under the East African Power Master Plan efforts, we shall interconnect the regional networks to facilitate power trade within the region.  A feasibility study on grid interconnection is already in progress under the Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Programme.  

Again in the long-term renewable energy development and energy efficiency will be pursued. Efforts will continue to develop renewable energy resources like geo-thermal, so that they contribute to the energy mix. The geo-thermal potential is estimated at 450 megawatts. Currently shallow drilling is taking place in Kibiro and Katwe/Kikilongo to determine the temperature gradients.  Energy efficiency programmes will also continue to be implemented.  

About a National Energy Policy and Plan for meeting the country’s electricity needs, there has been criticism that government has no Energy Policy and that the current electricity supply shortage is due to absence of a plan to meet the country’s electricity supply needs.  I wish to inform you, hon. members, that government has an energy policy, which was approved by Cabinet in 2002. This policy incorporated a 10-year plan for meeting the country’s energy needs regarding rural electrification through the rural electrification strategy and plan covering the period 2001 – 2010.  Mr Speaker, I would like to lay these two plans on the Table for reference.  

The Kiira Power Station formerly called Owen Falls Extension is another area, which requires clarification because some people blame it for the current electricity supply shortage.  Honourable members, after the rehabilitation of Nalubale Power Station, it was recognised that the power from this facility would be consumed very quickly due to the rapid economic growth at the time.  ACAS of Canada carried out studies under the sponsorship of the World Bank to establish the quickest and most effective way of meeting the current and future demand for electricity.  

Three alternatives were examined namely, building a power plant at Bujagali or Murchison Falls or construction of an extension to the then Owen Falls Power station now called Nalubale.  The Owen Falls extension project was the preferred option for the following reasons. The project was the least expensive, as it would not involve construction of a new dam.  

Kiira Power Station uses the dam contrary to what most people have been saying that Nalubale Power Station has two dams at Jinja. There is only one dam, which was designed to utilise the excess water, which used to be spilled through the process.  Kiira Power Station with a total capacity of 200 megawatts was meant to replace the aged Nalubale Power Station because Nalubale has been in existence for over 50 years and very soon it will have to be decommissioned.  So, Kiira was supposed to be its successor.  

The power station incorporated is the largest and was to protect the dam in case of a large flooding if at all there was an Eli-Nino and there was too much water.  Kiira Power Station was meant to operate as the main basement plant and the Nalubale Generating Unit to be used as the picking power plant, to be operating when there is maximum demand in the evening. The operation of these facilities also anticipated the commissioning of the Bujagali Power Plant down stream by 2004 so that the trio could be operated together in an optimal manner. 

The Kiira Power Project, which commenced in 1993, had been planned for completion in 1999.  It was, however, slowed down due to the termination of the Chinese contractor, SIETICO. The first two units of the power plants were, however, commissioned in 2000 while the third one was commissioned in 2002 giving a total of 120 megawatts, which has been commissioned on a new plant and that was the time when we got some relief on load shading.  Installation of the last two units has now been completed and final tests are underway.  The capacity of those two, which are under completion, is 80 megawatts. These units will become operational when the lake level improves.  

Conclusion: A number of measures are being implemented to address the current electricity supply shortage in the country, and I am requesting the hon. members to note and support these measures.  Mr Speaker, some of the measures above, for example, future mandatory installation of solar water heaters and solar lighting will need legal instruments to enforce their implementation.  There are a number of countries where it is a law for every commercial building and buildings of certain standards to have solar systems in place as standby power. We are proposing to do the same. I, therefore, call upon this august House to deal with relevant bills diligently when they are presented to Parliament.  

Honourable colleagues as people’s representatives, I am requesting you to convey this information on the measures being taken to the people, and also take leadership in practicing energy efficiency and alternative supplying measures as outlined above.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. minister for the statement.

4.40
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. It is good that the hon. minister has come and presented the statement.  But, I am rather disappointed. I am very disappointed because the statement does not in anyway take cognisance of the gravity of the situation as it is impacting on the lives in this country.  

I wish the minister had undertaken a compilation of the economic and social cost of power shortage to this country, probably the tone in which this statement has been given would have been more pro-active and more promising than it is now. I also thought the minister would have at some point come out to say that she is very sorry to Ugandans. To at least regret the inconvenience caused by this energy crisis. I understand - I can see the minister saying, “For what”? I can give her some examples where a responsible government would apologise to its citizenry. 

In hospitals people are dying. You go into a theatre knowing that you will come back alive then because of the load shedding, somehow power goes off. Only last week in Soroti Hospital we lost Rev. Washington Otala. The man walked into the theatre hoping to come back alive but somehow whoever is in charge of the load shading, the ministry in charge of load shedding did it. And then there was no light; they tried to stitch up the reverend using light from lamps, but the man died. 

So when I ask for an apology, it is a very serious thing happening out there. Many people have lost their jobs. They have been laid off because when they report to the factory and there is no power, half of the day without working, why would your employer keep you there? Schools are hiking charges because they have to buy petrol for generators. So, there is a very serious social and economic cost. Businesses are winding up. And with this statement, much similar to the one of two or three years back, as if things are not so bad, seriously I am disappointed! 

When you listen to the reasons the minister is giving like there is an increased demand now – I thought that is the reason we have a government and why we have a specific ministry handling our energy demands so that the ministry is able to project our energy requirements for the next two, five or 20 years. Are we taking this thing of, “Uganda gifted by nature” too far in that we just wake up and say because we are gifted by nature, we are not going to make projections. 

I expect the minister to understand that demands increase as the population increases - as investors increase. Sit down and make projections that address issues. Having said that, Mr Speaker, I want to seek about three clarifications:

Is this not a question of either policy failure or the fact that government did not take seriously the concerns of this Parliament? When we talked about the privatisation of the Energy sector, I remember this Parliament urged government as much as possible to retain some strategic control. The minister came here and argued that the reason for total privatisation was to improve generation, transmission and distribution of power. Now where are we? Things just do not seem to be adding up. 

We want to call on government - the reason we are now on your back is that we think that government should account for what is happening. Because if you gave this out to UMEME, by the time you gave out this to the private sector you should have at least taken note of the fact that at the end of the day government would have to account to Ugandans. You would have to ensure that Ugandans have power even if it were for basic needs like running referral hospitals. 

The minister on page 6 talks about the proposed alternative sources. I imagine that one of the alternative sources is the Mutundwe Power Project. If that is the case, Madam Minister, is it true that this project is already running into trouble before it even takes off because of the problems related to the fact that the guidelines on public procurement have been abandoned to the extent that the two very good bidders that should have given us power in a period of less than 90 days were rejected and you went for a company that is now going to give us power after six to nine months! Again oblivious to the suffering that people are going through!

I have also heard the minister saying they are going to provide waivers on generators, I suppose that would handle institutions, hospitals and firms that hire or buy generators. Is the minister conscious of the fact that for the last many months this country has been plunged into fuel shortages? You walk into a refilling station three days down the road; you keep checking and they tell you: “There is no diesel here!” So, even if you took that option, it is really not going to be very helpful. 

My appeal finally is that while every sector is suffering a lot from these shortages, is it possible for the Government of Uganda to do just one thing: raise an emergency budget for the hospitals in this country? There is no way you expect a medical superintendent to run a hospital or medical unit as if the situation is normal. Where they used to use six litres, now they need a generator to run for 24 hours. Can you find emergency money somewhere - maybe the Ministry of Energy or that of Health just to alleviate the situation? 

I am also being reminded that this is a disastrous situation. So the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should also be brought on board in order to save the people in this country from this acute energy problem. I thank you.

4.48
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I have a big problem with the minister’s statement. One is that in the short run it is not providing remedies for areas of strategic importance. Which are these areas? These areas are hospitals, industries, schools, security installations and of course Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I will borrow from the experience of UEB. When UEB was running the services, the hospitals were regarded as very important and they would remedy any problems at call. During the privatisation process some of us pointed out some of the problems that are now coming up. Because the man who is running UMEME is neither interested in the neither hospitals nor security, but in cash, so when time comes he switches off and people die. Before I proceed I would like the minister to tell me or maybe tell the House, who the proprietors or owners of UMEME are. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, if you look at page 2, on the causes of the current electricity supply shortage, I would agree with one but not all the three because this is expected, it is like breathing. Whenever there is growth in industry, you must cater for the growth. Honestly with due respect to the drought and whatever, I have not seen in this report some of the technical issues raised by the technical people especially the flow of water out of Lake Victoria via the new dam.  

The second issue I see in this report, which is vague, is the element of efficiency. When they were buying these thermo generators on the Floor of this House I mentioned that this is heading for disaster and I was proposing alternative generators that consume oil or fuel, which are less expensive and which can easily be monitored. It was ignored! You remember the response here was really not adequate and now we are back to square one. Are they bringing diesel engines again? If they are bringing diesel engines, then we have a very serious problem. 

If you look at page 6: waiving duty on fuel used to operate generators owned by manufacturers, I cannot understand! The moment you have fuel that is used by both manufacturers and the rest of the people - it cannot be separated - how are you going to waive tax? So, are they going to smuggle? You cannot do that. Currently the cost of running generators has made a very big hole in the Energy Sector’s budget to the extent that some money, which was budgeted for rural electrification including that of Isingiro, was diverted to service this area.

I would like the minister to explain how they are going to waive duty specifically for these people who are running generators. What measures are they going to take to make sure that fuel whose duty is waived does not leak to taxi operators and other transporters?

Finally on the long-term strategy, it is very important to be honest with ourselves. We do not have enough money. Uganda is not a very rich country. I think all we need now is to use any available potential, small as it is. For instance, there is potential on River Kagera at Kikagati. If you can, run that first, so that it can take care of that region. You go to the North and get where there is a possibility of generation power and utilise it. 

Generally, there is lack of seriousness. We need to identify these places and come up with a report saying:  “At point ‘X’ we are going to generate so much.” We are going to have a problem. If it is a regional problem of drought, then we must be prepared; we must tap any small potential without losing focus on efficiency. I thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister on whether they operate as a government or she is operating as an individual minister, and whether this statement is coming from her as an individual minister? 

Why I ask this question, a couple of days ago the Minister of State for Water issued a statement about the remedial action that has been adopted by government in order to contain the current power crisis in the country. 

What the Minister of State for Water said is not part of this statement. That is why I am asking: are they operating as a government, because one of the measures then specified by the Minister of State for Water was that the outflow of water from the dam at Nalubaale is going to be drastically reduced in order to buffer for future generation and raise the water levels. What the Minister of State for Water proposed is not part of this. Was it a hearsay statement, a guess or is the Minister of State for Energy operating as an individual? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

4.57
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one concern: if the Ministry of Energy is not quickly revisited in terms of looking at its capacity to run its affairs, I do not see how we are going to get out of this problem. I am saying this because I personally worked in this ministry many years ago. What had been proposed many years ago is being reported here today as what should be done. Yes, and I would refer you to all the reports presented in this House, it is the same things being presented. 

So my request is simple, let government look at that ministry, consider that ministry in detail and evaluate the capacity of both technical and political leadership. Without that I see a problem. We may talk about drought and many other things, but it is not until we have capable and technical people that the ministry will become credible. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.00
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, it is now becoming very clear that we have reached a very critical stage of realising that there is energy crisis in the country. It cuts across and adversely affects all areas of our life in terms of development, industrialisation, social services and many others. However, my disappointment, which I know is shared by many others, is the way the Government has handled this crisis. The minister has requested us in her conclusion to convey information on the measures being taken. 

Mr Speaker, I as a Member of Parliament would find it extremely difficult to go and convey information on the measures being taken because first of all I am not satisfied with her insufficient measures. I am not sufficiently informed about these measures and I think the minister may have to come up with something more elaborate than this. 

I would have thought that this being a very serious energy crisis, it was not simply sufficient for the minister to say that this statement, therefore, is to complement the elaborate statement made by His Excellency the President. What it means is that the minister herself is not giving us a complete and elaborate statement but she is only complementing what the President said outside this House. 

The minister knows very well that the President made this statement at the heat of a political crisis and some of us like Otuke do not even have the luxury of electricity in our area. We do not have a television, Radio Uganda does not reach, and this is the first time I have heard that the President made this statement. Therefore, the minister should have done more than the President’s statement. 

One of the major things the minister should have done is to have this statement as part of the appendix to her statement. She says that this statement is just a mere complement to the elaborate statement of the President. Where is the statement she is talking about? The President’s statement must become a record of this Parliament so that Parliament even debates what the President said. I, therefore, hope that without further delay the minister will come back to the House with the President’s statement so we could add our input. 

Mr Speaker, the minister also talked about the central grid connected electricity supply, which stands at a total of 185 mega watts, with 135 mega watts generated at Jinja, Nalubaale, Kiira and 50 generated by thermo power. I would have liked the minister to tell us, out of this 135 mega watts generated at Jinja, how much comes out of Nalubaale and how much comes out of Kiira? 

On causes of the current electricity supply shortage, the minister says one of the main causes is lack of new generation plans. I would have loved to hear from the minister a very elaborate statement on what caused this lack of new generation. She is talking about Karuma, Bujagali - was this foreseeable? Why hasn’t Karuma taken off? Why haven’t all these other important mini hydro projects like Nyagak and others taken off? She has not been kind enough to mention these projects in her statement. She has given us a third reason about growth in the demand for electricity. 

This is really not something new because growth in demand for electricity in every simplistic sense goes with growth of population. The population of Uganda makes the Movement Government very proud. They came to power 20 years ago and during this duration the population has grown from 15 million to 26 million. They claim this is because of stability, peace and many others of their stories. The Government should also have foreseen that just as a prudent father knows that when the population of his family increases, he has to increase the quantity of the food, the number of beds and the size of the house. 

The Government has of course done well in terms of education, in UPE, which started under trees and now is graduating to permanent buildings; hospitals have been increased in Gombololas and so on. There are certain areas where the Government has commendably done well because of increase in population and demand. If the Government has succeeded in the above areas, what went wrong in the area of energy? 

The minister is very proud to come and stand in front of us and say Government in September 2002 approved the National Energy Policy. 2002? The Government has been in power for 17 years and it approved the Energy Policy in 2002? Can you imagine that? (Laughter) I am, therefore, not surprised that we are in a state of crisis. If the Government could approve the Energy Policy after 17 years in power, what kind of development do you expect? To me, the Government should have foreseen that we would need more power and therefore things like the plan for Bujagali and Karuma should have been implemented a long time ago.

Mr Speaker, I think the minister needs to go back to the drawing board. She should come back and assure this country that she is handling this crisis. It is a very grave situation for we have no future in terms of industrialisation, major developments or even social services. The minister has not even told us when to expect Bujagali power, when the project is approved. [Hon. Members: “2010”,] No, please read the English properly. 

The statement says the project is expected to commence operation by that time. Is that when power is going to be produced, “by that time?” If the power is going to be produced by that time, let the minister be concrete. I am going to tell the people of Otuke that in early 2010 – but this early also, is it January, February, March, September or October? What do these statements mean?  

Let me now end up by the one, which is very close to my heart, Karuma. Madam Minister, let me tell you on behalf of all those who are north of the Nile that Karuma is very close to our hearts and that we are not happy with the way the Government has handled the Karuma power project. To make it secondary in the first place, to say unless Bujagali takes off, Karuma will not take off, it is like saying that unless Bbumba eats, Omara Atubo will not eat, when we have two different stomachs. Surely what sort of government is this? How can you say Karuma will not take off unless Bujagali takes off? Madam Minister, let Karuma take off on its own course and merit. Some of us have very clear information that the Norwegians, who wanted to develop Karuma were even ready to do it before Bujagali but somebody said, “No Bujagali, no Karuma.” What sort of country is this?  

The minister further says, “The Government is also holding discussions with the developers of Karuma project - NOPAK Power Ltd. Our intention is to reach an agreement with the developers as soon as possible.” Can you imagine that type of language? This is a crisis. The Government must come and tell us, “We are in negotiations. We are going to conclude on such and such a specific date and Karuma will take off on such and such a specific date and we expect power to come out on such and such a date.” Mr Speaker, I should give time to other people, I thank you.

5.13
MRS BETTY UDONGO (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and I would like her to make a few clarifications. What is the rationale of sequencing Karuma with Bujagali, and yet they have different developers?

You also claim that government is holding talks and coming to agreements. At least with Bujagali there has been reasonable resistance. Tell us what exactly has been the problem. As lay people, we do not understand. NORPAK was ready to start this project but government has been dragging its feet for all this time. Could you tell us, we who do not understand those technical problems, tell us explicitly what it is that is the problem? Is it environmental assessment? Is it the funding? I am sorry to say that some of us feel there is no good will. There is no reason this project should be tied to Bujagali, for they will be serving different parts of this country. The North is different from the East and the other parts of this country.

Madam Minister, this situation is very pathetic. Your conclusion, which I thought would have given us hope, says, “… the final tests are underway. These units will become operational when the lake level improves,” could we know when the lake levels are going to improve? This is a lame excuse. It really shows that everything is out of control. We did not do our part and maybe the scientists have not helped us to project this kind of disaster. Are we going to wait for the water levels to improve and yet we have no idea when this is going to happen? 

Mr Speaker, the minister explained that Bujagali will commence operation by 2010 but she has not told us when Karuma is to commence operation. We need a timeframe. If this kind of crisis is beyond the Government and all of us, I think we should turn back to God. We all know that such crises and disasters were common during the days of the Israelites. Maybe you read the Koran, but I read the Bible; I believe that as a Christian country and as Bible readers, there is a scenario in Chronicles 7:14 which says “If I stop the heavens from giving rain and send plagues and disasters; if my people who are called by my name shall humble themselves, turn from their sins, seek my face and pray, I will hear from heaven and heal their land.” [Hon. Members: “Amen!”] Don’t you think we need a day of prayer to ask God to forgive our sins and heal this land? This is now beyond us, if we are surely waiting for the waters levels to improve. It is only God who can give us rain. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Will it be out of order to confer the title of “Canon” to Hon. Betty Pacuto? (Laughter)

5.18
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report worries me. The energy situation in the country is surely worrying. There is no direction or even a proposed concrete solution in this report. Let me for instance refer to one of the contradictions on page 10. After rehabilitating Nalubaale, the ministry realised that there is high power consumption and there was need for a second power station. They were looking at Bujagali, Murchison Falls construction and extension of Owen Falls. The extension of Kiira Dam was intended to increase the power supply to the system. It was chosen because of the realisation that there was need for more power to be produced. 

On page 11, Kiira power station with a total of 200 mega watts was to replace Nalubale power station. It was to replace it, not to increase power. These are the contradictions throughout this report. In fact this report is total rubbish. There are many reasons why I say so. Even the data quoted here about the recent net basin supply is strange. Net basin supply figures are not in conformity with the available hydrological figures. The figures represented here are five times less.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. I thank the minister for stating it here because she has knowingly or unknowingly stated what you have been talking about all along. She says the two dams have been run concurrently and, therefore, the lake has been drained.

MR ONEK: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise for saying the word “rubbish” which is not parliamentary language. Kiira extension as an alternative was intended to increase power, together with Nalubale. These drew over 380 cubic meters of water per second. When the three turbines were commissioned at Kiira, they were releasing about 1400 cubic meters of water per second, which is far above the nominal release average for the Nile. The Nile ranges between 800 and 900. In fact they were releasing 63 percent more water than the Nile could afford. There has been several literature from scientists, which even the Minister of Water has acknowledged. The fact is that over release has caused a disaster in the lake.  

Mr Speaker, fundamentally, what is a dam meant to do? The dam does two functions: it raises the level of the water higher up so that it falls through that height to generate electricity. It is also supposed to maintain a certain reservoir level during which whether drought or no drought that level is maintained within fluctuating limits. 

Owen Falls Dam was built to maintain the height of the dam at between 18.4 meters and 19.4 fluctuating within one meter. If there were no water at all going to the lake due to a long drought, that one meter drop would run those turbines for one and half years. There was drought in 1981, just like the prolonged drought between 1985 and 1987 but the water levels never dropped to today’s level. Therefore, really, to cover up a scientific fact is very bad, Mr Speaker.

I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. I have never seen any plan from the Ministry of Energy. These plans are mere wishes; just like their policy statement. These wishes are not backed with any concrete plan of action, which is measurable or even achievable. Therefore, we are in a problem for we are just going around the same point, in the name of developing other alternative sources of energy like biogas and others. These have been talked of for the last 20 years and there is no concrete plan to get the villagers oriented to use those biogas technologies. 

The solar energy has been talked about but it is still very expensive. I use solar energy myself and know how expensive it is for the ordinary person. Shs 2 million to buy a solar system that supplies power in an average house with a TV set and a fridge is not little money. These are the difficulties we are facing. What is the way forward? 

Technically, I cannot argue in Parliament because there are no technicians here. One time I wanted to meet ECAS international people and argue with them on the hydrology of the lake but up to now they have failed to meet me. I only met a Norwegian agent who fully agreed with me on the problems of hydropower here. Therefore, according to me we must have a national plan, which must be done by various technical bodies together with the ministry. 

The ministry must be helped by other ministries and experts so that we have a plan, which is based on a measurable and achievable programme. That plan must have a programme action and budget attached to it. It would make sense if the country sacrificed say 10 percent of the national budget for the next two years. We would just forfeit it and reserve the whole of it for energy.  We need a dam to generate additional power. (Applause) 

In addition, there are bonds that interested people could buy. Treasury Bills are on sale but the money is just lying there, unutilised. There is also NSSF money, which we could put to use. We must have to sacrifice if we need electricity and give it a priority. Let those who own that money be promised some reasonable interest from the power. 

Mr Speaker, the demand for power is now over 560 mega watts although the ministry it talking about 380. Jinja produces less than 140 mega watts. Together with thermal power of about 100 mega watts, the total would be a mere 240, which is less than half the amount of power the country needs. If Bujagali is finished by 2010, we shall have added only 200 mega watts. By that time our demand will be beyond 750 mega watts and yet we will be having a total power production of about 400. Therefore, we shall be chasing the tail of load shedding through and through, which we shall never catch. There must be serious planning. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it appears that a number of you have very good ideas to solve this problem. The problem does not belong to the Ministry of Energy alone. This is a national problem and, therefore, we need to involve all the experts who have very good ideas that may result in the proper policy. Don’t you think that this being an emergency it needs more serious consideration? 

The Committee on Natural Resources will take up some time to study the minister’s statement and invite those who have good ideas so that as a result of a discussion between the ministry officials, we come out with a solution more so that we are now going to start the budget process. This matter is referred to that committee and may be next week they should start dealing with this matter. In a week or ten days’ time they will come out with a report so that we adopt it and use it to solve our problem instead of this general debate.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to move that this matter be referred to the relevant Committee on Natural Resources for scrutiny.

THE SPEAKER: Not only scrutiny; they should enrich it. There is a formal motion now that we refer this matter to the appropriate committee. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.30
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the proposal to take the report to the committee, but there are some issues of a general nature, which we need to clarify especially since the press is here. 

The Karuma project has been on this Floor for discussion for the last six years. Every time members stand up to speak about this project they speak as if it is something new. They sound as if government were insensitive to the development of Karuma, which is not true. 

I will repeat what I have said on this Floor several times. The Government wants to develop Karuma, Bujagali, and the other hydro power projects. However, the only impediment is the source of funding. I have talked to the local contractor over Karuma and I have asked him to stop peddling lies that Karuma can find money outside the World Bank. They need guarantees from the World Bank and it is the World Bank where they have to queue up the guarantees that have set up this sequence. It is not government whatsoever.

His Excellency the President has made it clear that he wants both projects developed at the same time, but his limitation has been the source of funding. We should clear that image and I hope this time honourable members will appreciate that explanation.

Then there is this floating of procurement guidelines for the 50 mega watt thermal plant, which is going to be supplied by Jacobson using heavy oil. There are two ways of projects coming into the system, according to the Electricity Act. A company may initiate a request to the regulatory authority, and the regulatory authority would take this project to the public, call public hearings and the initiators to present their project to the public. The result will then be based on the public evaluation, technical evaluation and the competition - because when it is being presented to the public, other people are also invited to present theirs. 

In this case three companies presented their proposals and one of them, which is getting a grant from the Norwegians, emerged as the least costly. We are sensitive about costs and Jacobson is getting grants from the Norwegian Government. We are procuring a new machine to stay in the system.

Mr Speaker, having gone through the current crisis, we realised that we need to have standby power. Therefore, I should make it clear that the procurement of Jacobson followed the proper procedures.  

Members claim that government has no plan. Mr Speaker, my brother hon. Omara Atubo was part of the earlier Cabinet, but I think he should appreciate that in the past there were no policies. However, this government though late has managed to put up a policy. All earlier regimes were unable to put up energy policies. The current drought is a natural calamity. Surely, I think you should take into account what has happened in the region before you heap all the blame on the Government.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter was closed with a motion that the appropriate committee takes it up. However, we thank you for the presentation. I want to thank the new installed Canon for hers also. There was a suggestion of receiving the other documents on the budget, but I have been advised that Cabinet will be sitting in the morning. We shall receive it on Tuesday. Therefore, take your time to complete it so that it is presented on Tuesday. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 April 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)



