

Wednesday, 9 March 2017

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It is a special sitting. Today Parliament has had both the ordinary sitting, which took place in the morning up to midday and now the special sitting where we will debate the tribute motion in respect of the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I will make the communications, which I have received once the body is in. let us proceed.


(Entry of the late Hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.)

National Anthem.

East African Community Anthem.

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO LATE HON. JOASH MAYANJA NKANGI, FORMER MINISTER/MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR MASAKA EAST, MASAKA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, moves a motion, let me make some recognition of the persons who have come to join us in paying tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

Honourable members, you will realise that this is a unique Sitting of the House. We have seen what has happened and I am sure if hon. Rukutana was asked outside this House that he is representing UPC, he would deny. (Laughter)

However, we are using the prerogative of this special moment to accommodate all. I am sure also, if the Member for Bunyoli was asked since when he became Minister in charge of Luweero - I sit on the Appointment Committee but I have not seen his name appearing there but also that is part of our generosity to accommodate those things. 

I have also seen parties crossing lines, but that speaks to the character of the person we are paying tribute to this afternoon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi was a good person. He crossed all lines that were not supposed to be crossed, brought everybody together; he never divided anybody. I am sure that is why we are speaking the way we are speaking.

This is not also the first time that this House is full, inside and its galleries; it is because this is a special moment, which we should take to recognise the contribution of the departed hero. 

On the technical bench right behind me, we have Mrs Ruth Mayanja Nkangi and the family. (Applause) We also have children from prefectural body of Kawempe Muslim School and their patron. They have also come to observe the proceedings of the House and pay their respects. (Applause)

In the VIP gallery, we have full attendance of members who were in basically all the Parliaments that have been in this House. We have: 

    1. H.E Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, the former Vice-President. (Applause) 
    2. Prof. Edward Kakonge. (Applause) 
    3. Hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello, the former Chua MP. (Applause) 
    4. Hon. Anthony Butele, former Member for Madi. (Applause)
    5. Hon. Israel Mayengo. (Applause)
    6. Hon. Dr David Matovu, former Member for Entebbe Municipality. (Applause)
    7. Hon. Lydia Belemezi. (Applause)
    8. Hon. Henry Kyemba. (Applause)
    9. Hon. David Migereko, former Member for Butembe County in Jinja. (Applause) 
    10. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi. (Applause)
    11. Hon. Tim Lwanga. (Applause) 
    12. Hon. Kassiano Wadri. (Applause)
    13. Hon. Florence Ibi. (Applause)
    14. Hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera. (Applause)
    15. Hon. Ambassador Paul Etyang. (Applause)
    16. Dr Robert Ssebunya. (Applause)
    17. Hon. Constantine Karusoke. (Applause)
    18. Hon. Paul Mwiru, former Member for Jinja Municipality East. (Applause)
    19. Hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere. (Applause)
    20. Hon. Norbert Mao, the President-General of the Democratic Party and Former MP, Gulu Municipality. (Applause)
    21.  Dr Siranda General Blacks, the DP Secretary-General. 
    22. The hon. John Kawanga. (Applause)
    23. Hon. Paul Musamali, the EALA MP-elect. (Applause)
    24. Hon. Ambassador Emmanuel Ssendawula. (Applause)
    25. Hon. Kasule Mugerwa. (Applause)
    26. Mr David Ntege, the Clerk to Buganda Lukiiko. (Applause) 
    27. Hon. John Nasasira, the former MP for Kazo. (Applause)

I have condolence messages and I will read one, which is from the Speaker of the House. It is a condolence message to Mrs Ruth Mayanja Nkangi and the family. It reads, “On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to express my and Parliament’s deepest sympathy on the death of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. 

The late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi distinguished himself as a patriot and nationalist. He diligently served this country in various government ministries and departments where he left a clean record. 

He will be remembered for his contribution to the current laws of Uganda, especially when he participated in the drafting of the 1995 Constitution during the time he was a Member of the Constituent Assembly. 

He was an accomplished legislator and advisor as well as a good servant of man and God who loved his kingdom. To crown it all, the late executed acts of courage and love for his country and left an indelible mark in the hearts of many Ugandans. 

To Mrs Ruth Nkangi, I appreciate the tremendous support you gave to your husband till his last breath. We share with you the pain of having lost your dear husband. 

Equally, I understand the pain the children are feeling for they will no longer have the care, love and wisdom they used to get from their father. 

However, the vast contribution the late made to this country should make the family members celebrate his life and look back to his milestones as a source of inspiration and strength. 

I pray that God gives you and your family, the strength and faith that transcends the current grief. 

May the grace of the Almighty sustain your family and rest the soul of the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi in eternal peace. Signed by Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament.” 

I have another condolence message from the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. It is signed by hon. Johnson Muyanja and they have contributed Shs 4 million to the family. I also have a condolence message from the Secretary-General of the National Resistance Movement and they have contributed Shs 5 million. 

The next condolence message is from Members-elect of the East African Legislative Assembly, particularly the honourables Paul Musamali, Mary Mugyenyi and Mukasa Mbidde. Those are the condolence messages I have received so far.

First Deputy Prime Minister, please present the motion.

2.55
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, this is a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi for his diligent service to Uganda. It is moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motions thus:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with, deep sorrow, the sad news of the death of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, a former Member of Parliament, which occurred on Monday, 6 March 2017 at Nakasero Hospital in Kampala;

AWARE that hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi has had a distinguished career spanning over five decades – he participated in Uganda’s pre-independence struggle and post-independence politics and also a public servant. He is remembered for founding the United Party in 1960 and later became the Secretary-General of the United National Party. He was also leader of the Conservative Party from 1980 to 2005;

RECOGNISING that the hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi served Uganda meticulously in several key positions;

APPRECIATING that the hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi was a diligent leader who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

Now, therefore, this Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi; and
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi to Uganda.”I bet to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Member for Kalungu West, Member for Mbale Municipality, Member for Gulu Municipality, Member for Kiboga, the Maj. Gen. (Rtd) hon. Kahinda Otafiire and the hon. Member for Bamunanika.

The motion is properly before the House. First Deputy Prime Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, allow me present the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

Mr Speaker, it is with deep sadness that we have learnt of the passing away of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, which occurred on the 6 March 2017, at Nakasero Hospital in Kampala. His death still remains a sad loss to this nation. 

The country has lost an accomplished lawyer, an economist, father and a statesman who stood out with humility despite all the titles he held; a statesman and a culturalist, who dedicated his life to championing the rule of law, good governance and outstanding leadership and service delivery in Uganda and beyond. He dedicated his life to the unselfish service to the people of Uganda.

Born on 22 August 1931 to Mr Sebakyalyawo and Ms Joseph Nantale in Kanyogoga, Kalungu in the present day Kalungu District, hon. Joash Mayanja, started his education in 1946 from Kabungo Primary School and Kako Junior School. 

He later joined Kings College Budo, for his O’ Level Education and Makerere College School, for A’ Level, which led him to Makerere University College of East Africa, which was then affiliated to London University where he studied Mathematics and Economics and obtained a Second Class Upper Degree of the University of London in 1954. 

A few months after graduation, the late hon. Nkangi got a scholarship for Master’s Degree in Economics and Public Finance at Oxford University. He was one of the first Ugandans to make it there. 

In 1957, he finished his degree and decided to pursue law at Lincoln's Inn of Courts in London, where he qualified as a Barrista-at-law.

Mr Speaker, from 1960 to 1962, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, practiced law as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda and the subordinate courts. 

In 1960, hon. Nkangi started his own party with an aim of bringing everyone together. His party was called the United Party, which he later changed to the United National Party. 

In 1962, he abandoned that party and joined Kabaka Yekka Youth Wing, which he cofounded KY Party. Nkangi was elected KY Member Parliament for Masaka East, in May 1962. 

In his selfless service to his country, the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi served this country in various capacities. From May to November 1962, he served as a Parliamentary Secretary and Minister without Portfolio, Ministry of Economic Affairs that was responsible for East African Economic Affairs. 

Hon. Mayanja Nkangi was later appointed the Minister of Commerce and Industry. In November 1971, Nkangi was appointed the Katikkiro (the Prime Minister) of Buganda Kingdom. 

During the Coup d'état by Dr Milton Obote, he was exiled to the United Kingdom but he continued exercising the functions of Katikkiro of Buganda Kingdom until the restoration of the Kingdom in 1994.

After the successful handover of the office as Katikkiro in 1994, he opted to work as a research fellow of the University of Lancaster, Department of Economics in the United Kingdom from 1968 to 1971. 

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi, from 1985 to 1986, was appointed a Minister of Labour, in the Government of Uganda. 

From 1968 to 2002, hon. Mayanja Nkangi held portfolios under the National Resistance Movement Government, ranging from Minister of Education, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

In 2013, hon. Mayanja Nkangi was appointed the Chairman Uganda Land Commission, a position he held till 2015, when he retired from active public service to concentrate at his law chambers where he practiced law till the time of his demise.

Whereas Mayanja Nkangi was an accomplished lawyer who would otherwise carry himself with pride and self-importance, he carried himself with simplicity; a very humble man who interacted at any given time with people from all walks of life. 

The hon. Nkangi was an honest person who cherished integrity and his personality and this was exhibited in the various portfolios. (Applause)

He held various portfolios and leaves a clean record with no single dent wherever he set foot. Despite the scramble for prime land during his tenure as the Chairman of the Land Commission, hon. Nkangi never craved for a single piece of land. This is the man who lies before us today and whose legacy we celebrate.

Mr Speaker, because of hon. Nkangi’s exemplary leadership, in 1991, he was awarded the Order of Merit, by Kings College Budo. From 2011 to 2013, he was a member of the Council of Ndejje University and finally the late was awarded the Golden Jubilee Medal by the Republic of Uganda.

Government always esteemed his audacious and constructive ideas on a number of issues and indeed several of his philosophies and aspirations informed policy discussions that have led to our dedication and commitment to improving governance in Uganda. 

The history of our country can never be complete unless the name of hon. Mayanja Nkangi, a hero has been in the struggle since independence. He has left a phenomenal record of his transformative legacy.

The Cause of Death

The late hon. Mayanja Nkangi succumbed to pneumonia, according to the postmortem report. Mr Speaker, as a nation, we have lost such a distinguished gallant statesman whose life, legacy and charisma we honour and celebrate. We share in the sorrow of this loss with the widow, Mrs Ruth Mayanja Nkangi, the children, friends, colleagues, the nation and the world at large. May his soul rest in perpetual peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you Gen. Moses Ali for reading the motion and speaking to it. The seconder of the motion and the Leader of the Opposition, in this case, is the Member of Parliament for Rukungiri Municipality. Please, proceed.

3.10
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to an icon of selflessness, a gentleman of special repute, a Ugandan recognised across the globe, a brain exemplified by his works, a professional in theory and practice, a personality whom many loved to associate with, hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has lost an icon of truth and a committed democrat. We have lost a crusader for meaningful society transformation, a humble and religious man, a complete politician and a loving and ever fulfilling man. 

Mr Speaker, we should not mourn hon. Mayanja Nkangi, but rather celebrate his life. He has left a legacy which we should all emulate as leaders: a leader who never used his leadership position for selfish gains, love for development and democratic governance.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has lost a true servant who loved his country and was instrumental in Uganda’s independence. He believed that the Conservative Party would represent both the interests of Uganda as a nation and traditional institution.

Mr Speaker, as a committed patriotic Ugandan who believed in institutions, hon. Mayanja Nkangi spearheaded the discussion of merging the three institutions of Uganda Polytechnic, Kyambogo, Institute of Teachers’ Education, Kyambogo and Uganda National Institute of Special Education that later became Kyambogo University in 2003. This explains his love for development that championed a strong education in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, while hon. Mayanja Nkangi served as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he oversaw the establishment of Uganda Investment Authority. His efforts were the Uganda Investment Authority to give equity to all investors and how to find equal incentives for all investors in Uganda to invest in Uganda to flourish. Unfortunately, foreign investors have been given priorities over Ugandan investors even when they are dealing in the same product.

Mr Speaker, his aim with the Uganda Investment Authority was to identify areas that were largely behind that needed investments in strategic products like the ARVs. He also pursued regional balance through mapping of Uganda to balance investment. The fact that the above is not yet achieved, I believe hon. Mayanja Nkangi has died a frustrated man because he has lived not to see the Uganda Investment Authority that he dreamt of.

Mr Speaker, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, as the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs between 1998 and 2002, lived a challenging period in his life. As a believer of democracy, it was challenging that political parties including his party, the Conservative Party, were limited by this current regimes to operate at their headquarters. His relieve, as a great champion of democracy and multi-partism, came in 2005 when multi-party system was restored under the 2005 Referendum.

Mr Speaker, I quote the party President of the Forum for Democratic Party, Maj. Gen, Mugisha Muntu: “Mayanja Nkangi always wanted to do things in a straight forward manner as a higher path to building the nation. His experience will be forever missed as he was one who operated under difficult time”.

Mr Speaker, Mayanja Nkangi lived a meaningful life whose footsteps shall always be an inspiration to the pro-people leaders in Uganda. Farewell, Mayanja Nkangi. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for the secondment. Honourable Members, the motion that now I propose for your debate is for resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi for is diligent service to Uganda and specifically, that Parliament collectively convey its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda. That takes cognisance of the services rendered and the contributions made by hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now.
 
Honourable Members, this House will be rising, on the advice from the family, just after 5 O’clock. Let us see how to manage the time properly. Can we agree on how much time we are going to take on this? If we are going to do free speaking, then we know we are ending at 5.15 p.m. or 5:30 p.m. utmost. We are going to take three minutes and I will start with hon. Sara Babirye, the Youth Representative Central. 

Let me take this opportunity to also recognise the presence of hon. Joyce Mpanga who I had not seen earlier.

3.17
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to say a few things that the young people from Central Region and Uganda at large shall miss from our dad, grandfather, good friend and ally, hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. 

Hon. Mayanja Nkangi always told the young people who met him, most especially when he was the chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission, that it was not good to acquire a lot of property, mostly, in a wrong way. He told us that this country needs young people. However, before we expect a lot, we need to love this country. He said before we even think about our tribes and families, we need to know we are human beings who should always fight for justice for all.

Therefore, I would kindly request the family and the young people of Uganda to always avoid conflicts just like he had always emphasised and focus on serving this country just like he did. That is all I had to say and may his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

3.19
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The gentleman lying in front of us here was the Member of Parliament of the constituency I am representing. Indeed, Kalungu West County, Kalungu as a district and Uganda as a nation has lost some one. When you look at the history of hon. Mayanja Nkangi – he went through a very poor primary school, and because of his knowledge and being very bright in class, he was given scholarships; he was taken to Kako and Buddo. The question is, can we still get this type of children in Uganda in the current UPE schools. 

I was in his area, the place where we are going to bury him and someone gave me 17 children to take them on scholarship if they had first grades, but there was none. The question to you Government is, what went wrong, you must answer. 

Secondly, he has walked the talk; in the PAC committee where I sit, we got a problem where the President had written to Mayanja Nkangi, who was the Minister of Finance then to compensate Burundi for money they had lent the NRA fighters during the bush war. The money was Shs 16 billion. By that time, the chairperson of the committee was hon. Kassiano Wadri. Mayanja Nkangi wrote back to the President saying we cannot pay money to someone who was fighting a legitimate Government; that was treasonable. Interesting enough, after he left the office, the one who took over after him paid the money. So this is the Mayanja Nkangi lying in state here. Recently, we were in Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and the minister said there was a directive and so I had to pay; Mayanja Nkangi has left a lasting legacy.

What is meant by that instrument of power in Buganda Kingdom (Ddamula) which he safeguarded during the turbulence that was in Buganda? As a young man, he managed to keep the instrument of power which was given to him by the king; he handed it over in 1993. 

When you go to the Conservative Party, he handed over power willingly; people have refused to hand over power –(Laughter)– you beseech them and tell them you cannot move any further, but still they do not hand over power; even when they see they are tired; they continue to stick themselves on the people. This is the Nkangi we are talking about, from Kalungu West Constituency represented by Sewungu Joseph Gonzaga –(Member timed out.)

3.22
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to pay our sincerer condolences to the wife of the late Mayanja Nkangi, the family, relatives and friends. 

Mr Speaker, we are politicians and there is no politician in this country who does not know the name Joash Mayanja Nkangi. There is another man called Abu Mayanja. These were the two names in the politics of Uganda – these are people who struggled for the independence of Uganda. Mayanja Joash was a wonderful person; a very simple person. 

I happened to work closely with him when I was in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. When we were on a delegation abroad, he was Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development, but can you believe, Mayanja Nkangi would live in a very simple hotel in West London around Kensington and would pay £30 per night with his officers. He never tried to go and live in those big hotels. 

What is shocking with the names of big people, they are given what is called contingency allowance, but Mayanja Nkangi as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would bring the money back to the treasurer; how many people do that? (Applause) 

He shocked many of us that the man would return the money to treasurer contingency allowance; how many people are given the money and they put it under the table; they just cover it. The man used to return that money; that is why we are mourning today. 

This man was down here in the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, he could have acquired the most expensive land in this country, but you remember what this people did. The man remained a simple person. 

When I look around, I ask Ugandans, how many of us will leave such a legacy; the man served across the whole country and he never discriminated people. 

When he appeared before us in the Public Accounts Committee, he was very simple and calm; he answered all the questions. He was very intelligent. This is the man we are mourning and I want Ugandans to emulate Mayanja Nkangi. He was dedicated to service in whatever position he was given. May the Almighty God give him eternal peace. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Rtd. Kahinda Otaffire): Mr Speaker, I rise to eulogise an icon; a great man, who lived a humble life. He was a man with right wing ideas, who tolerated left wing ideas and changed them. He was dignified; he was humble – I am proud to serve in his foot-steps as steward of the Department Of Justice and Constitutional Affairs where he did tremendous work. Tremendous work like it has been said, he had his conservative views and yet accommodated the views of us who did not believe with him, but he respected our views and those of the majority. 

I also had occasion to serve with him in the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development; he was chairman when I was the Chief Steward. I remember when we had the Butabika Land giveaway saga; there was a lot of controversy. I believed that we should give away the land and he was a bit reluctant. He came to me and said, “What do we do with the land”, I said, “Give it a way”. He said “but there will be controversy”. I said, “I will take political responsibility, give it away” and given an opportunity, I would give it away again and take the political responsibility. 

When the hospital was built, the outer reaches of Kampala were at Silver Spring. Butabika was ideal for a mental asylum. Right now, the city is at the footsteps of the hospital and it is no longer ideal for a mental asylum. So it should be relocated. 

He said, “I agree with you, but you will be buried in hell when it goes to Parliament”. Indeed when it came to Parliament, I told them that I gave away the land because I believed in what I was doing and given opportunity I would give it away again. And anybody who did not believe in what I was doing should go and dive into the lake. So he stood by me; he was a great man. 

At the end of the day, we all work for a moment like this. It is not the troubles we create while on earth, he is going down with two by two by four; that is all, nothing more. Like this young lady said, it is not the acquisitions he made while he was on earth, it is what people say on a day like this one; this is your only legacy that remains after everything else has been said and done. 

He was a great man and he has written his name in history, his script is cast in stone, nobody can wash it away. This is Joash Mayanja Nkangi –(Member timed out.) 

3.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Speaker, I received a request from Owekitibwa Christine Mugerwa Kasule who is in the gallery. She is accompanied by Ambassador Emmanuel Ssendaula, the First Deputy Katikkiro and Omukungu David Ntege, the Clerk of the Lukiiko.

At 9 o’clock in the morning, there was a special session of the Lukiiko in Mengo where it was resolved to pay tribute to the late Nkangi. I have a copy of the resolution in both English and Luganda which I beg to lay on the Table as a record in honour of the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

The special session of the Buganda Lukiiko (Parliament) today resolved that the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi be honoured for the following achievements:

a) 	Faithfulness that he exhibited in the length of time he kept the royal instruments of power (Ddamula), from 1964 to 1994 including keeping hope alive among the Baganda during the difficult times when the kingdom was abolished. This faithfulness as a leader helped restore the kingdom;
b) 	He never denied his allegiance to Buganda and the Kabaka throughout his life and this is a mark of a true hero;
c) 	Humility and respect for all people;
d) 	Integrity and honesty in everything that the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi did; 
e) 	Ability to sit and talk to those he disagreed with; 
f) 	Intelligent and well-spoken person;
g)	A patriot who fought for the independence of this country;
h) 	A good example to all people in all things especially in timeliness, cleanliness and smartness and;
i) 	Love for his culture, especially in his faithful service to the Kabaka.

The resolution is signed by Christine Mugerwa Kasule, the Minister for Lukiiko and Cabinet Affairs. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, on my own behalf, I would like to join the rest of the colleagues who have stood here to pay tribute to hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. 

There are only three areas that I identified in his history. Mr Speaker, hon. Mayanja Nkangi was put to test when he was in exile with his Kabaka and he was a young Katikkiro at that time. It was not easy because it was a very difficult time. He kept hope with everybody and also took charge of his role as the Katikkiro while abroad.

The second is that hon. Mayanja Nkangi witnessed the passing on of Kabaka Mutesa while in exile. This is the ugliest moment - when you are a Katikkiro in exile and then all of a sudden the principal collapses in your hands. How you relay the information to the subjects is not something simple.  

The other is the negotiation with President Idi Amin to retune the remains of the Kabaka; neither was this simple. You could never know how President Idi Amin was going to react, but he stood firm and pushed him to have the body of the Kabaka brought back to Uganda – and he succeeded – (Interjections)– and we appreciate President Idi Amin. But as I said, it was tricky because you could not take him for granted.

The last one was negotiating with President Museveni on the restoration of kingdoms in Uganda. At that time, in 1993, when a decision was made, the whole country was not ready for it save for Buganda which stood firm and pushed through the leadership of the person we are honouring today. 

His patience and character - he was soft spoken but that was his strength and it attracted people to listen to him –(Member timed out.)

3.36
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues in expressing the deepest sense of loss concerning the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

I came to know the late Mayanja Nkangi when I briefly served as his personal assistant in 1985. What I saw was a man like no other I had come across. He never carried the baggage of tribalism or sectarianism. He was a fine man.

I would like to challenge all of us who are privileged to be in this position of leadership to be like this man. I know one of the issues that continue to bedevil or nation is not having men and women of the kind of quality that that man was.

When I became the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, he was concerned about the state of morality in this nation. The idea that morality was quickly giving way to situations that could easily undermine the security, stability, unity and prosperity of this nation. He was so concerned that he came to me and asked what we could do. 

We agreed that we should have a national conference where we invite men and women of integrity, stakeholders across the nation to look at this question of morality and that if we do not handle it, it will quickly undermine every gain that we have made over the years.

Mr Speaker, he has gone to be with the Lord and I say so knowingly because I knew he loved the Lord, seriously. I am excited to know that one day I will meet him when the Lord himself comes to take us up there. (Laughter)

This is a serious situation that we are facing and I implore all those who are leaders in this nation that if we do not do something radical concerning the state of moral health in this nation, we are in deep trouble. 

I would like to pledge, Mr Speaker, with your help and that of the honourable members that we should have that national conference on morality this year in memory of that great man there. 

May I end by assuring the family of the deceased that we continue to keep them in our prayers – (Member timed out.)

3.39
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, the honourable Mayanja Nkangi in going to the University of London and subsequently to Oxford University did not let it get into his head. He remained true to himself.

There are some of us - and I know of a few people who secured scholarships to go abroad and they returned with changed accents, style of walk and even decided not to eat the local food anymore but not this man here. He remained a true Muganda, loyal to his King and country to his death.

Another thing that I remember hon. Mayanja Nkangi for is when I went to renew my land title while he was Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission. This man was truly and deeply a conservative man. He was a true believer in his ideals. 

Hon. Mayanja Nkangi tried but very unsuccessfully to convince me to join his party. I told him I would die with NRM and that we shall continue to rule this country forever – (Interjections) 

Hon. Mayanja Nkangi instilled a principle in me which I hope that as we go into review of our constitutional reforms, we can take into account. He deeply believed in proportional representation because of the nature of our country where we have different tribes, religions, ethnic groups and political parties. 

I too, think that proportional representation will serve us better and as we go into constitutional reforms, this is an area that we reflect on although deep in my heart I know that NRM will continue to dominate even under this arrangement.

I would like to pay my tribute to this gentleman who has left a lasting legacy of a humble man but who has contributed greatly to his country. I thank you. (Applause)

3.42
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, as a young man – I know that most of you are wondering what I have to say about the late given the age difference.

I am new Member of Parliament but I think I am the best suited person to speak about the late. Why? (Laughter). Somebody can be best known by what he did and not just physically meeting.

While a student, I used to hear comments about the late over the radio and that is how I got to understand that he was a powerful man. Even while in front of job interview panels, I would be asked about him. For example I would be asked: “What is the name of the current finance minister?” I had to cram –(Laughter)– and that was very important. People cannot cram your name if you are not a very important person for sure.

Mr Speaker, I was one evening watching NTV and there was a review of what the late had said – he was emphasising on issues of local content. He was talking about being Ugandan. He asked one of the studio people what they were wearing that was Ugandan and the value attached to it. 

I would like to thank hon. Patrick Nsamba for bringing the Local Content Bill. If the late was still around, I know he would have been very happy with hon. Nsamba. 

Let us truly front his ideas. You cannot die a great man if you have died without any idea that you have left behind for debate. This is a great man.

The issue for debate is what are we doing about local content as a country? This makes the late great. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

3.44
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you. As we pay tribute to the gallant son of this land, the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi, what must ring a bell in our minds is his contribution towards the development of our country.

I knew the late Mayanja Nkangi in the late 1990’s as one of the great customers of my late father, Al-Hajji Shaban Sebaggala at Nakasero Market.

During my holidays, I used to go and assist my father who was very close to the late Mayanja Nkangi and his wife who were ever supportive. Whenever they would come for shopping, we used to assist the late Mayanja Nkangi to carry the shopping baskets to and from our stall. 

Ever since then, I have followed how the late Mayanja Nkangi has been contributing to the development of this country. 

What I have learnt is that it is not how much you have managed to gather in as far as your various responsibilities are concerned but how you have been honest and trustworthy in far as what your mandate has been. The late Mayanja Nkangi has been very honest.

Given the fact that the late has been serving this country since the 1960’s, one would have expected him to have many arcades either in Uganda or abroad. I believe he has lived a humble life and has managed to live within his means.

We should borrow a leaf as young politicians so that whenever we are given an opportunity to serve this country, let us follow the Rotarians motto, “Service Above Self”. Mayanja Nkangi’s service has been above self and we shall miss him. 

The only gift we can give is for us to borrow a leaf and ensure that whenever we are given an opportunity to serve, we do so in line with what Mayanja Nkangi has been doing. 

Finally, I send my condolences to the family and also to the people of Kalungu for having lost such a great man. I thank you.

3.48
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On my own behalf and that of the entire legal fraternity, I rise to join my colleagues to pay tribute to this great lawyer.

Sometimes when we lawyers call ourselves “learned friends” some of you think we are just jerks of all trades and master of none – but the gentleman lying here demonstrated what we mean. He read mathematics and economics but excelled as a lawyer. 

I would like to testify that this great man was a refined, honest professional hardworking, truthful and useful lawyer to this country.

While Members of Parliament look at the Hansard, we as lawyers look at the law reports. Whenever you read the East African Law Reports or the Uganda Law Reports where the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi participated in handling any case, you acquire a lot of wisdom. I have no doubt stating to you that he was he was a professional lawyer. 

Mr Speaker, you have witnessed me here representing the Uganda People’s Congress to place a wreath on the Casket of the late Mayanja Nkangi. I did it for a purpose because I sat with him in the Constituent Assembly and I know his views. His views, when we were debating the 1995 Constitution, were such that being in different parties does not mean that we are enemies. He would have done the same if I were the one lying here. He probably would have represented some other party.

Ho. Mayanja Nkangi knew how to differentiate his role as a national figure and how to contribute to his country as a person irrespective of what he believed in. Apparently, I have been following in his footsteps –(Laughter)– he was Minister of Finance and I joined the Ministry of Finance after he had left and I saw his record there.

He was also Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and I am currently a Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I would like to assure you that everywhere that I followed him, I found his record very clean. I have been following him but I am still hanging around and not about to follow him here –(Laughter).

3.52
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very sad moment for all of us here and especially me, as the late Joshua Mayanja Nkangi lies before us. He was a friend of my late father and eventually became my friend too. I vividly remember during two personal engagements between the late and I.

Sometime back when the Government was levying tax on raw materials for all industries, I went to the late Mayanja Nkangi and told him that I wanted to refurbish my hotel. I requested him to give me a tax waiver under the industrial raw material tax waiver. He said, “No” but I told him that after refurbishing my hotel, the beddings and equipment will be my raw materials to make money. 

He sat thoughtfully and crosschecked with the law and told me that he could only waive taxes on the equipment if I labelled the beddings and engraved all the equipment. Since then, hotels are enjoying tax waivers on the refurbishment of the hotel industry. 

Further still, when I lost my wife, it was a sad moment and I decided not to remarry because I could not find anybody competent enough to replace my dear wife. When my story was published in papers, the late Mayanja Nkangi came to my house and told me that he knew my father and that I had taken a wrong decision not to remarry. He advised me to remarry because I was a young man. Indeed I complied and up to now –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, great leaders have fallen and most of you heard what happened in Greece when a great philosopher Socrates died; everybody mourned him like we are doing today. One of his friends, Plato, asked: “What are you all doing here?”  And they replied; “Don’t you see we have lost Socrates and we are crying for him?” Plato told them to stop crying for Socrates but to cry for themselves. What will you do when the great philosopher dies and a great thinker is no more? 

Likewise, Ugandans, what will you do when the monarchist before you is dead? What will you do when the senior economist, the lawyer, and the culturist before you is dead? He was a great philosopher. Buganda has lost a leader and Uganda has lost a statesman – (Member timed out.)

3.56
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to add my voice to express my condolences to the big family of the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, who became my very close friend as soon as we captured power. He would call me in confidence whenever he had tough decisions to make. Many of us here qualify to be his children and grandchildren.

It is not how much you leave behind for the children that is most important but what you leave in the children. He has left a lot in us that I can only summarise it and on a day like this, I speak less. In three sentences, he was a distinguished pillar of his culture; he was a distinguished pillar for his country and he was a distinguished humble, honest and dedicated God fearing leader. May his soul, rest in peace.

3.58
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to a distinguished gentleman who served this country in various capacities. I would like to pay tribute and extend my condolences to the family. I stand here as the Chairperson of the West Nile Parliamentary Caucus to pay tribute, on behalf of my members from that region and the people I represent.

Mr Speaker, like everybody has said, I stand here as a grandson to the late Mayanja Nkangi and I have summarised three key principles that I picked from him:

First, is his grounding and rootedness in his religious believes. All his actions, as espoused in the various positions he served, you can tell that he was a man who believed in his religion. I, therefore, would like to thank the religious foundation that mentored him from childhood up to his death because those are fundamental principles that guided him in leading this country. 

Mr Speaker, I stand here to attest to the fact that this was a cultured man. I think the motion that the Government Chief Whip laid here is testimony to that. Despite his level of education and knowledge, he lowered himself to serve his people in the cultural institution - that is the Buganda Kingdom - and that has distinguished him from other Baganda. 

Last but not least, the late Mayanja Nkangi was relevantly educated, and he put that education not only to the service of this country but to the entire globe. I am very sure there are people who must have come here in this country to consult him and get information from him by way of doing research and other studies. By so doing, he used his knowledge –(Member timed out.) 

4.01
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the honourable colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen father, friend and a senior citizen of this country. 

Mr Speaker, I had my first encounter with the fallen Joash Mayanja Nkangi in 2007, as a child who had escorted her mother to meet her lawyer. I met a humble and soft spoken person and that is the time when they agreed with my mother that she wouldn’t be going more often to his office but that she would be sending me to his office to take on the case forward. It was a land matter. 

Between 2007 and 2011, I always met hon. Mayanja Nkangi and it is during that time that I came to learn about issues of land administration, land management and how land is grabbed. In 2012, when I was appointed Minister of State for Lands, that is when we worked in the same office because he was the Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission. 

I remember him inviting me to his office and the words he said to me were not to congratulate me. He said he had known me for the last five years but since he knew my character, I was not going to have it soft. All he advised me to do was to be strong because I was taking on a very dangerous job. 

Mr Speaker, when you step in that office called the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as a minister, the first thing that you get on your table are offers from land officers. They want you to get involved in the dirt so that you are compromised. They want to silence you before you even start work. In so doing, they want you to get compromised so that you do not mention of the dirt that is therein. 

Mayanja Nkangi taught me one thing and that is what everybody has talked about - integrity; keep your hands clean and the records will speak for you. It is not easy and that is why of late, you have heard that we have patriotism classes, where we are now teaching our Ugandan children to be patriotic and love their country. However, that is not what should have been done. It is because we have lost our values. 

Mayanja Nkangi never served with selfish interests –(Member timed out.)    

4.05
MS AISHA SEKINDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Mr Speaker and fellow mourners, I rise to pay tribute to hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, not only as a woman Member of Parliament representing Kalungu District but as a daughter to the fallen.

I met uncle Mayanja Nkangi in 1976, when I was young. Muslims know that Prophet Mohamed, peace be upon him, left his parents and joined another family and that family were his foster parents. The Nkangis looked after me from the age of four years up to date and I lived with hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi’s eldest brother, uncle Grace Lumala. It is so sad today that we are going to miss uncle Mayanja Nkangi. 

Since Monday, people have said so many good things about Mayanja Nkangi and it is the truth. I will not go into those details. However, there are so many things I remember about him; he mentored me into politics. I used to move with him at the age of nine years, when he was the Chairperson and President of the Conservative Party. He was the first person to bring me to Kampala. I did not even have shoes during that time, when we came to City Square to campaign at nine years. 

Recently, when he went to visit the widow of his late brother, Mama Norah Nasejje in Kilyankuyege, is when he learnt that I was contesting for the seat of a Member of Parliament of Kalungu District - (Member timed out.) 

4.08
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about my friend, Joash Mayanja Nkangi.  I knew him in 1993 when I was working as a journalist at the New Vision and working on the political desk. 

I met him so many times and we talked a lot about politics but most importantly, I found him a very interesting person. He was humble but extremely interesting and I discovered later that he had been with my father-in-law in London several times to negotiate Uganda’s independence.

The late Joash Mayanja Nkangi was representing Buganda Kingdom and my father-in-law was representing Toro Kingdom in the Lancaster Square in 1960. They used to call them “Lancaster Conferences” to negotiate Uganda’s independence. There was Dr Lumu from here; there were leaders of political parties - Dr Obote, Dr Ssemwogerere among others, who would go to those conferences to negotiate independence.

We became friends throughout the time I worked at the political desk but in 2012, I met him again and I asked him out. I invited him to my home for a meal. I was really shocked that he accepted the invitation and came with one of our family friends, a man called Joseph Luyinda and we had lunch. He sat in my small home in Bugolobi for about three hours talking to me about politics. At that time, I had taken leave from politics; I was not a Member of Parliament, I was living a private life but he accepted my invitation and came to my home. 

I felt so humbled; he really left an indelible mark in my life when he came to visit me. I would like to implore his children to come and pay me a visit one day. Your dad was really my friend and so, the friendship should continue. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and may his soul rest in peace.

4.11
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nakaseke, my family and on my own behalf, I wish to register our condolences to the family of the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I first met the late when he came to launch cocoa growing at my father’s farm and I sung the welcome song to him in English; that was deep in the village in Bugerere. He was very excited. 

When he was leaving, he told my father that he should take me to Gayaza High School, Buddo or Makerere College School, for my secondary education. My father heed the advice and took me to Makerere College School. He told him that if he took me to those schools, I would become a great woman. I am here; as a great woman and a senior legislator because of the advice he gave to my father.

I later on met him when I was the finance manager of UDB. We had a crisis. I was very worried and anxious but when I got there, he disarmed me as he welcomed me in his soft voice. Before he attended to me concerning the issue which had taken me there, he lectured to us so many things about the economy, economics and by the time we got to discuss the subject matter, we had already calmed down.

I later met him as a colleague, when I was the Minister for Economic Monitoring and I had been given the task to popularise Value Added Tax at that time. We went to him because the public had rejected VAT. We thought that he was going to give us strong matching orders but he instead sat us down and lectured to us on how to handle the VAT in order for people to accept it. We followed his advice and VAT was accepted.

When I became one of the successors in office to him, he called me and said, “Mukyala, I would like to give you some tips on how to run that ministry…” and indeed he gave me very important tips which I followed. They led me to being awarded best Finance Minister of Africa in 2010. I got it because of the advice and the tips he gave me.

One wise man said that success is not measured so much by the levels achieved but by the number of hurdles survived. The late Joash Mayanja Nkangi survived many hurdles. They have talked about – (Member timed out.)

4.14
MR KOMAKECH LYANDRO (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality to pay tribute to the national hero. Two years ago, we worked together with the late Joash Mayanja in organising a national conference called the “National Reconciliation Conference” that took place in Munyonyo.

He spoke for three hours on the quest of bringing Uganda together as one country. In one of those statements, he made two remarks that were very critical and I remained thinking about them. He said that tribalism has been a politicised process and peaking on Buganda, he said that Baganda are not tribalist. He justified it and said that there is categorisation in Buganda that if you are foreigner – first, the true Baganda are called Baganda ggere ggere. 

Secondly, he said that if you are integrated into Buganda, you are called a Muganda wawu. Thirdly, he said that if you are rich, you are called Muganda nja n’ekikometa.  Those are three things that I remember that today we are missing a lot in terms of integration in our communities. 

I will never forget when he also stated that in Buganda, there is need for research. He said that in Buganda, there is a clan called “Nkebuka” that is actually disappearing. He said that these are the challenges the Baganda should face very seriously. He managed to write down the issues that the Buganda Kingdom should take seriously in a book titled, “Out of Empire into Servitude”. He said that that work should be accomplished. I request the Government of Uganda jointly with the Buganda Kingdom to make sure that that book titled, “Out of Empire into Servitude” should be published for the rest of Ugandans. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, you used some words that are not necessarily English and the language of this House is English. You might want to translate the “Wawu” –(Laughter)

4.18
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, at the risk of watering down the able submission of my good friend from Gulu, I rise to join the rest of the House to pay tribute to this great son of Uganda. Hitherto, he was part of the Masaka that we knew and loved before the balkanisation of Uganda into a multiplicity of minute districts. I convey my condolences to the family and Government because I believe he was an able and faithful servant of this country.

The late Mayanja Nkangi believed and had faith in the idea that the founded ideals of this country at the making of Uganda 55 years ago would be realised in our time. That is a country that served all, without fear of contradiction, of course in the knowledge that Uganda is a melting pot of so many ethnicities and therefore, we needed to live as a one country.

Unfortunately, he leaves behind a country at the blink of surrendering to personal rule, family rule and self-service. He believed and preached and of course propagated fair government, as a vehicle for promoting common good. Personally, as a centre right aorist, I do not find his conservative view of governance in contradiction but rather good in co-satirising centre-right ideals that he believed in. 

He believed and propagated federalism and he was well understood in his message of federalism, as a vehicle promoting common good. Of course as we know, he was short-changed, but – (Member timed out.)

4.20
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA: (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the House to deliver my condolences to the family. I came to know the late Mayanja Nkangi in 1992 when we visited him with Omutaka Ndugwa Ssemakula. Those were the days of the restoration of the Buganda Kingdom.

All has been said – about politics - but I admired his level of smartness. The other day when I visited the widow, Ruth, and other members of the family, I reflected on where the smartness came from.I, therefore, would like to use this opportunity to sincerely thank Mama Ruth, for taking special care of the late Mayanja Nkangi. He was exemplarily smart.

I do not know whether the late has written a book about his life journey. If not so, it is my humble request that the children do so, so that we continue knowing more about the strong man that the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi was.

As I conclude, we have talked about loyalty; I am the Chairperson of Buganda Caucus in the Tenth Parliament. I would like to appeal to Members that let us not simply be here and talk about loyalty. We changed the Buganda caucus constitution and our main emphasis is that all the members of the Buganda caucus must be loyal to the Kabaka.

I want to emphasize it here that we must be loyal to the Kabaka. As we praise him, let us continue being loyal. The late Joash Mayanja Nkangi managed to balance; he was loyal to the Kabaka and to Central Government; why can’t we be so? May his loyal soul rest in eternal peace.

4.23
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. First, I would like to convey my condolences and deep sympathies to the family of the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I would like to pay tribute to this great man lying here and join my colleagues, who have recognised his attributes in life.

I think the late Mayanja Nkangi will be remembered for his humility, truthfulness, hard work and so many attributes, which everyone here has talked about. However, the most lasting legacy of this colleague is his high level of integrity. The late Joash Mayanja Nkangi was incorruptible; he stayed clear of these handshakes. We should emulate this person. I read in the papers that he, unfortunately, had cancer of the colon that was not earlier diagnosed; I do not know whether that is true.

However, if that is true, it comes soon after the death of the late Margret Mungerera. It reminds me or it is time to reflect on our health systems. Honourable members, we keep talking about our health system but we are not able to improve it. Our main role here is oversight of the Executive but are we asking the right questions? If we are, are we getting the right answers? Why do we keep talking and get no answers? Has anyone been to Mulago and seen the Cancer Institute –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have Mr Gayo Gagayi, a farmer from Bugisu Cooperative Union. He has come to observe proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming him. He comes from Budadiri West and is represented by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. (Applause)

4.27
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mpigi and on my own behalf, I wish to extend my condolence to the bereaved family, the Kingdom of Buganda and the entire country.

The late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi has served this country diligently in different portfolios and with credibility. The first time I met him was in 2011 when I had just joined politics. There was a lot of land grabbing in my district and people would come to me as their Member of Parliament for assistance. I didn’t know how to help them; so, I decided to go to the office of the chairperson of the Uganda Lands Commission.

I arrived during lunch hours and he was getting out for lunch. The secretary advised me to come back the following day because hon. Mayanja Nkangi was going for a meeting in the afternoon. However, as he was going out, he saw me and I introduced myself. He decided to get back and help me. He said I was representing people who elected me to serve them and that he was also put in this office to serve the whole country. He let me back to the office and we talked.

He advised me on what to do and how I would do it in a very humble way. I walked out of his office amazed because of the way he handled and attended to me. We shall miss him and his guidance as a country. We shall miss this gallant son of the soil. May his soul rest in peace.

4.29
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to join this august House in expressing my sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, the kingdom of Buganda, the Republic of Uganda, the church and body of Christ, to which he was very committed; on the loss of a great family man and a friend, a great and loyal son of Buganda and a great patriotic citizen of Uganda and perhaps a great citizen of the world.

Mr Speaker, I knew the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi on a personal level since 1993 when I came back to Uganda but I also know him as many others do, through the testament of history via books, news articles, television shows and the words of many a man and many a woman. They all testify of his cool, calm, non-aggressive, non-divisive, self-respecting and respectful of others demeanour.

His love for his family and friends was unquestionable, his love for Buganda absolutely solid and enviable and his love for Uganda was one of commitment, purpose and pride. 

To all those that he cared about, he expressed his love through dedication, service, loyalty and selflessness and as a result, the man has ended up living a life that is long, fulfilling, successful and one that has left a positive impact on this nation and humanity at large. I suggest that we emulate his life and do the same.

However, most importantly, he was a man with foresight. He knew that this day would come and he prepared for it by having a great personal relationship with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. I am very sure that today he has joined God and Jesus in Heaven to begin a party that will last forever. Therefore, because the Bible teaches us that death is just a door toward a great eternity, I am not going to wish him to rest in peace, I wish his soul a most exciting, fulfilling eternal reign with the Lord Jesus Christ. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo):  Mr Speaker, I stand to pay tribute to this great man of this country. I also stand to deliver condolences from the people of Bamunanika where the late did quite a lot of work with my people. My people in Bamunanika still have a lot of many good memories about the soft-spoken, humble and clean leader in Joash Mayanja Nkangi. My people still have good memories of that clean leader, who was ever clean both inside and outside.

Mr Speaker, the late who is lying here before us was a distinguished leader. He was appointed to the highest offices in Buganda Kingdom. He held big offices in Government but he remained himself. He remained humble and selfless in service and was somebody who could be approached by everybody every time a person wanted to be served. As the Minister of Education and Sports, he had a big ear for almost everybody – the pupils, students, teachers and the parents. We shall miss this great son of the soil. 

When many of us are appointed into leadership, we change even the way we walk. Some of us start moving as if we are on the top of the world. In Joash Mayanja Nkangi, we have very good lessons to take home that you can be what you are, whether honourable or whatever, and continue interacting and treating people as human beings. 

The late Mayanja Nkangi was caring and free with almost everybody. He loved this country. He loved his tribe. He loved Buganda Kingdom and served all without fear or favour and with all the fairness there was. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have this list. Let me start with these ones; Kinkizi East, Isingiro North, Ibanda North, Obongi, Kassanda South, Mukono Municipality and Gomba County. Let us go in that order and see how to move.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I stand here to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and I would want, on behalf of the people of Kanungu, to convey condolences to the family and all Ugandans for losing a very great man.

Mr Speaker, my first physical interaction with hon. Mayanja Nkangi was shortly after the takeover by the NRM Government when he visited us at our secondary school. I was then at St Paul’s Seminary, Kabale. He came as the Minister of Education and Sports and gave us a talk on a range of issues, including the political history of this country. He articulated the Government policies and many other issues. 

When it came to question time, one of the students asked him why the Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM) had gone to the bush and he justified why. I recall him giving a rhetorical question that “If you are put in a sack and told to run, what do you do? Run, you must”. He was justifying that the UPM then had no option but go to the bush and restore order.

Even when his background was Conservative Party, he was able to justify what UPM stood for as well as the policies of Government. This is a tribute which probably most of us may not be able to do in the current political atmosphere. We saw in him an astute statesman and a patriotic Ugandan who wanted to see a transformed Uganda. 

I am happy that God gave him many more years since then to not only witness but also participate in the transformation process of this country. I would like to disabuse those who say that he has died a frustrated man. I defer from that. I think he is satisfied that the country has undergone remarkable transformation over the years, and I am sure whoever has eyes can see that transformation.

Mr Speaker, his last appointment in public life was, as earlier stated, the Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission, which falls under the ministry where I serve as the minister responsible for housing. Let me say, as has already been stated, that this was a tempting appointment because as chairman of the Land Commission, you are in charge of the Government land all over the country - (Member timed out.)

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR VETERAN AFFAIRS (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja. I have known the late while he was serving in different capacities as a polished politician and statesman. As you recall, even after he had retired, he was given a job in a very sensitive area – the Uganda Land Commission – and I have never at any one time found him wanting. As leaders, it is good that we reflect on what we do and also on the lives of people such as the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Government and the President for having identified him and given him a chance to serve this country. We have benefitted from his services as the Minister of Education and Sports; Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and as somebody who was responsible for the most volatile department of lands.

Finally, we need to reflect on our lifestyles as politicians. We have seen from people in this House – especially those who come here for us to pay tribute – that in most cases, we cause ourselves problems. By the time they identify that you are sick, you are already in advanced stages of dying. 

I think as we continue, we need to find out a mechanism for Members of Parliament and high profile people to have regular medical checks so that we can avoid situations that actually are not pleasant. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for presiding over this function and also for giving time to us to talk about his celebrated life. I thank everyone in one way or the other, who has touched the life of the late while he was sick because he is a deserving case.

Finally, we pray that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.42
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kassanda South, I would like to pay tribute to the great son of this country, hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, the one lying before us here. A lot has been spoken by the previous speakers. However, I would like to point out two important things, which I observed about the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi.

I first met hon. Nkangi in 1980 when I attended his political rally in Mityana Town and I was a very young boy. I was with parents and I saw a short man who was very humble and articulate. However, there are two things that I would like to point out.

A half a century clean record of service of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. Many of his groups have served this country but some have had scandals in public life. The man lying before us has had a scandal-free public service. For all the years he has served this country, you cannot indicate any moment when he was summoned by the police to record a statement, taken to court or even sent to Luzira Upper Prison. It has not happened in his 50 years of service. (Applause) That is very unique.

The second issue that I want to point - other Members have partly mentioned it – is his loyalty and love to the Kabaka and the kingdom is very unique. History has it that after the 1960 crisis, a number of Members of Parliament in this House crossed from Kabaka Yekka (KY) to UPC and from DP to UPC. However, Mayanja Nkangi remained in KY. He loved his Kabaka to the extent that when the king was exiled, Nkangi went to Rwanda and joined him. 

By virtue of his education, if he had remained here and joined UPC, Obote would have appointed him a minister but he refused that offer, went and joined the king and stayed with him. When the king passed on, Nkangi was very instrumental in mentoring the crowned prince. (Member timed out.)

4.46
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono municipality, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I associate myself with ethe contribution made in support of the motion by my colleagues.

The body of the late is with us in the House but he is not able to make a contribution on this microphone. I have, therefore, decided with your permission, Mr Speaker, that I will dedicate my few minutes to him and read just two paragraphs from the last interview he gave to the press. Maybe, if we put these words on the Hansard, they will be useful not only to the present generation but even in the future.

Mr Speaker, this is what the late said in his last words. It was properly quoted in the Daily Monitor, published on the 26 November 2012. He said: “This country has been a terrible place. I will tell you why I say so. Uganda became independent in 1962, Tanzania 1961, Kenya 1963 but see what has happened. Tanzania has never fought, no coup d’état. They have many more tribes than Uganda. The Kenyans only fought colonialists, Mau Mau. They never fought but look at Uganda, the first President was deposed violently. Who deposed him? President Obote. He, Obote was deposed violently although he was away in 1971. Amin took over. Amin was deposed violently in 1979. He was deposed by the Museveni group and Lule YK. Lule who was my teacher at Kings College Budo. So, he was deposed and replaced by President Godfrey Binaisa. Binaisa was also pushed out. Then in 1980, a second Obote came back after elections. When he came back, he was pushed out again in 1985 by Lutwa. In 1986, the NRA took over again by the gun. We must ask ourselves a question, what kind of life are we leading in Uganda really? Removing every President by force, what are we?” These are not my words. These are the words of the late Mayanja.

Mr Speaker, as we send off this great son of Uganda and as the Hansard captures this as his last words; we need to reward these people who fought for independence with a peaceful transition of power. If you read his last interview, he says that once you lead people unconstitutionally, you must go. That is what Mayanja said.

Mr Speaker, I would like to use this time to beg Ugandans that we should - (Member timed out.)

4.50
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Mr Speaker, I bring sincere condolences from the people of Gomba West and from my family to the family of the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi, the nation and to Buganda Kingdom.

Mrs Mayanja Nkangi, I bring you sincere condolences from Mr Francis Gureme, who is my father and who was a dear friend of your husband. He held him in high esteem. Thank you, for your role in standing by your husband for besides every great man, there is a great woman. May his deeds be emulated by his family and may his deeds and time be documented for the benefit of all Ugandans. I would beg that if you have any more memoirs, come up with something in writing.

He left a good legacy. He is a wholesome being. We have heard that he was a dedicated politician, a dedicated son of Buganda, an accomplished lawyer and I am proud to be a lawyer like he was and old Budonians. This is a calibre of old public servants that we had and who we should emulate for the good they have done for this country.

I would like to pray that we emulate his good deeds and I would like to thank him for doing all that and blending in at the sometime. It shows that actually nothing is impossible and that we can make it through life.

Thank God for his being and the work he did. May his soul rest in peace.

4.51
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to pay tribute to the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I came into direct contact with the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi about 26 years ago. I was a young graduate who had chosen to participate in the university politics at the hottest time of politics at Makerere University where the Speaker today was also a victim. I was introduced to him by my late uncle, Lt Col Katerega to do an advisory role as I chose to take part in this politics. 

In my association with him, I found him to be a political encyclopaedia of the political history of this country. It is very unfortunate and sad for this country that at such a time when we are going through a lot of distortions in the politics of this country that we lose a figure that is very useful to all of us. 

Hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi pursued whatever he believed in. In 1980, when he founded the Conservative Party, it was his party alone that pursued the restoration of the institution of Kabakaship. He did not wait to jump and claim the best outcomes of it as other politicians may have chosen to do. 

In my engagement with him, he was always advocating for pursuing the best through dialogue in whatever quotation that we have heard from the Daily Monitor. He said whatever he said because he believed in the pursuit of peace to achieve whatever goals he may have wanted at that particular time. It was –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me take this list and then see if we can still proceed. 

4.55
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. 

Mr Speaker, I joined the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 1988. I was one of the young graduates from the university and in 1989; hon. Mayanja became the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I was one of those who grew up to high ranks through him. When I joined the ministry, the Secretary to the Treasury then was Kahooza who during induction spoke very well. I said I would like to become the Secretary to the Treasury and since then, Kahooza referred to me as Secretary to the Treasury. He was the one who took me to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development then and said I was his Secretary to Treasury.

Mr Speaker, I worked under him. He was a sincere and very clear headed person unlike the ministers I have seen. I have had a number of them but I can testify that I knew who Mayanja Nkangi was because I worked under him. Some of you just met him on the road. 

All the negotiations he had with World Bank, IMF and wherever for the people of Uganda to get money, were true negotiations.  He would ask for the benefits of locals. He was not like those who would want to know how much they benefit from the money.

Mr Speaker, maybe before I continue, I also would like to ask the Government to tell us those who qualify to be brought in Parliament when they die. On Tuesday, we buried hon. Ekemu who was a Member of Parliament and he was not brought here. Hon. Joash left in 2001; I cannot blame him because he worked a lot and he has been brought here. Hon. Maumbe Mukhwana left in the NRC and he was brought here too. Therefore, I would like to know those who qualify to be brought to Parliament. Any time, I might also leave Parliament and if I die, I would like to know whether I will be brought here or not.  

Mr Speaker, I remember one thing he told me. He said Buganda and Bugisu are accommodative. In fact, I bring my condolences from Bugisu. For you who know, Bugisu was colonised by Buganda when Semei Kakungulu came to Bugisu land. He introduced mailo land and Mvule trees. When we are asked about Mvule trees, we say they were planted by Kakungulu. By the way, to show you that we are accommodative, 70 per cent of the Members of Parliament of Buganda are non-Baganda. Go ahead and do research. In Bugisu, we also have MPs who are non-Bagisus. Therefore, the only two tribes which can accommodate are Bagisu and Baganda. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I need to say something about what hon. Nandala has just raised. If anything happens to a sitting Member of Parliament, this House has a responsibility to handle it. That is what we budget for. When somebody is not a sitting Member of Parliament, the responsibility of making it an official burial or not rests with the Executive Arm of Government and it is done in consultation with Parliament so that we can adjust our calendar and accommodate such things. 

Sometimes, it is not intended that certain personalities should not come here. Hon. Auzu, a former minister, died in West Nile and the Deputy Prime Minister was the one in charge of the operation. We sat and had a meeting to brainstorm on what we should do since the Executive had decided he should be given an official burial. However, practically, it was not workable to bring his body to Parliament within the timeframe. We paid tributes here without the body. Hon. George Abola; he was an ambassador, a Member of Parliament and a minister. His body was never brought here because the family decided they wanted to bury him as quickly as possible. 

Therefore, there is no - It is just that once the decision is taken, it is implemented and it does not matter who it is. Some decisions have to be made and people take responsibilities because as Parliament, we cannot take that decision. If a person is not a sitting Member of Parliament, we cannot make that decision. The Executive takes that decision and sometimes, they also have challenges and they do not implement the decisions. 

Sometimes, we end up with only tribute motions when the body is already buried. They are not few; they are many. Therefore, let us not make something out of it because it is really not done in bad faith. When hon. Auzu died, I was the first to receive the phone call. I was the one in the Chair and we had the discussion with the Prime Minister and we agreed on the way to handle it in good spirit. 
Therefore, let us not push it out of what it is. 

5.01
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Mr Speaker, I stand here on behalf of the people of Kabweri Constituency to pay tribute to a gentleman. I do not think I have a lot of time to speak because we agreed we close at 5 o’clock. I will just say the little that everybody has said points to what I was going to say.

The hon. Mayanja Nkangi who lies before us portrayed responsibility in everything he did. He portrayed integrity, compassion and most of all, excellence in whatever he did. As Members of Parliament and Government, those are the values that I would plead with all of us to portray. One honourable Member of Parliament said he spoke with a soft voice; I used to hear him talk.

Again like somebody said, yes he was a friend of my father Bishop Gonahasa. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi never shouted. May be he shouted in his house; his family is here. I wish we would sharpen our points and not our voices in all the deliberations we undertake. That is a measure of excellence in anybody’s life.

I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for bringing this to pass and I would like to pray that the soul of the deceased will rest in peace. I want to thank the Kingdom of Buganda for allowing this to happen. We are growing as a democracy and as a nation.

I came from the East but I am proud to be associated with the Mayanja Nkangi family and I thank God that I have been able to speak. In my language we say “asiliika yena akuunga omaaye.” That is not English but it means even those who do not speak mourn the death of the parent. Sometimes when I am not picked to speak on such an occasion, I know what goes on in my heart.May your soul rest in peace. 

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Sempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like on behalf of the people of Kalungu East and the people of greater Masaka to sincerely thank you, Mr Speaker, for presiding over this very important sitting today when we are paying tribute to the gallant son of Kalungu.

I would also like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for this motion and thank the Members who have contributed and said very good words to our son hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. In Luganda there is a saying that I will say in English that “a mother is always blamed for the sins of a bad child.” However, for Kalungu and Masaka in general, Joash Mayanja Nkangi has made us proud. (Applause) There is very little to what you have mentioned about hon. Nkangi. He has been a disciplined, obedient, humble, hardworking and exemplary leader even at home where we come from.

Mr Speaker, sometimes people are good when they are in Kampala, when they are with those people with whom they compare levels but not good at home. From here, we are going to the vigil at home where we are going to sleep but many people have been sleeping there since even without the body of hon. Nkangi.

Hon. Nkangi has not died with frustration like some people wanted to imply. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi went to a primary school called Kabungo in Kalungu West and they were only four primary schools in the whole of Kalungu County, which is now Kalungu District. He has died at a time when Kalungu District has over 200 primary schools and over 40 secondary schools. In fact, we had no secondary school in Kalungu; that is why he went to Kako and stayed at somebody’s home who was not even a relative.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, hon. Nkangi has really left a legacy and his contribution during his time of leadership and responsibilities he made to this country –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable. It is time and we are not adjusting it. I received a petition from the Rwenzori region. (Laughter) Therefore, for that matter, I am going to pick the honourable member for Bukonjo West (Laughter)  honourable members for Ngora, Kitagwenda and Rukungiri District. Please, briefly, in two minutes.

5.08
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I extend my deepest condolences to the family, the Buganda Kingdom, the Buganda Parliamentary caucus and Uganda at large. A lot has been already said about a great man. Many times, we get this kind of scenarios and somehow struggle to bring out the goodness and the amazing grace of somebody. 

But before us here, Mr Speaker, is someone that even if you gave me one whole week, I would be able to talk about the goodness, greatness, mercy and the grace of this great individual. I thank the Lord for him. In this world to say, anyone measuring up to hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi should be able to live the following day. To tell you, Mr Speaker, probably yourself and Madam Speaker and somebody else but I can tell you we would be emptied or depopulated as a country. 

Mr Speaker, I have about four requests: One that the book be published; two that the memory for his spirit and his distinguished service to this country to endure on or live on forever, we can sanction or work it out with Makerere University to have a scholarship in his names. And that scholarship programme could be called the “Joash Mayanja Nkangi in Public Finance in Economics”- (Member times out.)

5.11
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to say something briefly. I am publicity for Teso Parliamentary Group. It would have been unfair for Teso not to appear anywhere in our Hansard here. I have three issues to mention here:
One, I would like to thank God who created this man. God did a wonderful job from a humble beginning and took him right up to the level of being a Katikkiro and then, a finance minister in the Government of Uganda. 
For having done a great job, Mr Speaker, my view in this case is that we would name him the minister of the century. 

Secondly, since he has been a good Christian, allow me to read the Bible because it would be unfair for us to talk about him and not read the Bible. I am reading from Revelation 21:4 which says, “God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes”. As Parliament, we are crying for the loss of this great man and I am sure Ugandans are also crying. The Bible says, God shall wipe away all our tears from our eyes and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain for the former things have passed away – (Member timed out.)

5.12
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The people of Kitagwenda and I join all Ugandans to eulogise and mourn the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi because the conclusion of the life of Joash Mayanja Nkangi sheds a picture of light on the life of a typical African child. 

African children live a life of struggle and possibilities. This gives hope that a child can be born and raised in a village as far away as Kyanamukaka or Katunga and rise to be one of the most talked about Ugandans and Africans. We thank him for the great life he lived and for being a very hardworking person. 

Mr Speaker, in all the eulogies that have been made, it is clear that because he was a bright young man, he won a scholarship and that changed his life completely. Our children must be told to have hope, that they should fight and struggle against all hopes in order to make themselves and our country better. 

In 2007, while I served as Chairman of the Youth League of the NRM, I met hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I engaged him in a conversation about the corruption that was going on in Government. He asked me a question, “Young man, if you are given a sack of sugar to keep in custody for someone and that sack of sugar has a small hole on it, would you better widen the hole and the sugar pours out or is taken so that when they come, you tell them that the sack had a hole and the sugar poured?” (Member timed out.)

5.15
MS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rukungiri, I would like to join all the honourable members here to mourn and pay tribute to the gallant son of this country. 

I first met hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi during the Constituent Assembly days. One thing I vividly remember is that he took us through several land and governance issues in this country. 

What has compelled me to leave Rukungiri this morning to come to Parliament and pay tribute to him are two things that he talked about during the induction in the Uganda Land Commission. I had a short stint as a commissioner in the Uganda Land Commission before I came to the Tenth Parliament. During the induction, he took us through so many issues and told us how we could improve the issues of land, especially Government land, in this country. 

He appreciated the computerisation system that had been put in place to register Government land in this country. However, he mentioned that the pace was very slow and that it should be faster so that we can have land governance issues properly stipulated. 

Another issue that he talked about was that the land commission is a body that is clearly stipulated in the 1995 Constitution of this country. Unfortunately, up to now, there is no specific law regulating its operations –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Mayuge and on my own behalf, I convey our condolences to the family and to this nation for the loss of a wonderful man. 

When I was in primary school, I heard about the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi as the Minister of Education. Later on, he graduated to the position of Minister of Finance. I would like to say something remarkable about him. He had an argument with hon. Kawanga Ssemwogerere around 1979. Hon. Kawanga Ssemwogerere approached him three times asking him to visit the DP offices and he refused. On the fourth occasion, he reluctantly went there. That invitation was to persuade him to join DP. 

When he reached the DP offices, he said to his colleague, “My brother Ssemwogerere, I respect you so much but I know that even a poor man can cook his own food in his saucepan and eat it. Therefore, I am going to start my own party as conservatives.” Indeed, in 1980, he started a party with his colleagues and contested for the presidency. Whatever happened is history –(Member timed out.) 

5.19
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to a fallen gallant son of this country. My prayers and condolences go out to the family, especially the Buddonians. 

Many times, when we are given an opportunity to serve, we use our offices to intimidate and abuse others. However, the person lying before us here served this country diligently with a high level of integrity. He was patriotic and nationalistic. As leaders of this country, I believe we can learn a thing or two from this fallen Buddonian. 

Humility is very important. To the family, God is in control. The Bible says that when he is gone, God becomes a father and a husband. Rest in peace, our fallen father. Thank you.

5.20
MR BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mubende and on my own behalf, I would like to convey our condolences to the family of the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi, more especially the widow and the orphans. 

In addition, I would like to thank God for the life He granted to the late Joash Mayanja Nkangi. In my own words I would say, it is a life well lived. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Mama Mayanja Nkangi, the widow, for all the support she gave to hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi because there is a saying that beside every strong man, there is a great woman. That great woman is Mama Mayanja Nkangi.

My colleagues, the male honourable members, can attest to this. If you are not comfortable at home, there is nothing much you can do in public. I would like to take this opportunity to put it on record and thank Mama Mayanja Nkangi for her contribution.

As Members of Parliament, it is our duty to appropriate resources but many a time, we do not give adequate resources for the control and treatment of non-communicable diseases. Taking stock, majority of the late Members who have laid before this House, are victims of non-communicable diseases. If it is not cancer, it is hypertension or diabetes, which can easily be controlled. 

All this has not been a warning to this House that we need to put more money for non-communicable diseases, treatment and control as they always claim quality lives of people in this country and we lose a lot in those lives. Mr Speaker, as we deliberate, let this be a wake-up call to make sure that in our next budget, we put a good amount of money there. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the Government of Uganda for according hon. Mayanja Nkangi an official burial. What we see today is a big lesson to the people of Uganda, especially us the politicians. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi is giving us a yard stick of –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Katikamu County South and Luweero District, I wish to join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. 

I personally came to know the late Mayanja Nkangi in 1996 when he was a Member of Parliament for the constituency now called Kalungu West. Hon. Mayanja Nkangi used to come to my work station in the accounts section to seek more information about finances. As you may recall, at that time, the Integrated Financial Management System was not in place and everything was being done manually. 

With his soft and small voice, the late Mayanja Nkangi was humble to everybody, very intelligent and not selfish at all. He would give guidance to everybody who came his way. We have lost a very great and hardworking man.

You may recall that he was a leader of the Conservative Party and also a cabinet minister but he never mixed political issues with Government business. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank God for the life of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. We have been neighbours in Ntinda and attending the same church and so when people talk of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi being a religious person, I can attest to that.

As a member of St Luke Church, Ntinda, it is a great loss to the church because we have lost an elder in our church.

Mr Speaker, you made clarification on the issue that hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised. I wish the Minister for the Presidency made that clarification during the burial of our former colleague, the late hon. Charles Ekemu because it would have settled the matter.

I would like to ask the Government to make these things clear so that people understand because these issues were raised at the burial but we did not have an opportunity to explain because it was a matter of the Executive.

The next time when ministers are sent to represent Government, they should be able to explain these matters to the people to enable them understand. Hon. David Abala was really put to task since the burial was in his constituency.

At an opportune time, I think we need to make a rule where we harmonise the burial of our former colleagues so that they are not misunderstood. May the soul of our fallen elder rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

5.27
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I almost got –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We save the best for last.   
 
MR SSEMPALA: I met the late in the early 1980s on the streets where he had met a very good friend of his and they hugged. After hugging, his friend asked him, “Why are you destabilising us?” By then, he was starting the Conservative Party. 

During this interaction, I saw a gentleman who was very strong and determined. He told his friend, “Friendship apart, I am a nationalist. I am starting and moving.” They later parted ways.

I also have a testimony. While I was working in the Cooperative Bank, a friend of mine came and said he had taxes, which he did not know how to handle. I advised this friend to go to Joash Mayanja Nkangi for advice. At that time, he was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Affairs.

When my friend reached the late Mayanja Nkangi’s home, he was told that those were matters for the office. They went to office and the late called in the commissioner and they discussed the tax problem. As a nationalist, he immediately took a decision and told my friend that he was going to do it not only for him but for all Ugandans. In the next budget, those taxes were scrapped. That is the hon. Mayanja Nkangi that we are eulogising. He was a nationalist.

May God help him and help us all so that we may live in his footsteps. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have violated the request from the family and it is now 5.30 p.m. 

We have a message from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development thanking the late for the 10 years of service as Chairman of Uganda Land Commission. The ministry has made a contribution of Shs 5 million to the family and the letter is signed by hon. Betty Amongi Ongom.

We also have a condolence message from hon. Norbert Mao, President of the Democratic Party.

Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion after which I will ask the Government Chief Whip to make an announcement on the processes after this. 

The motion that I put the question to is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi for his diligent service to Uganda and particularly that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.

Two, that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and the contributions made by hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. I now put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, your announcement.

5.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Mama Ruth Mayanja Nkangi and the entire family, I would like to express their gratitude to you, Mr Speaker, to the Members of Parliament and the Government at large.  

The family thanks you for your words of courage for they have been encouraged. If I was speaking in Luganda, I would have used the words that would have brought out their gratitude. They are indebted to you.

Please allow me to make a few announcements. From here, we are heading to Kalungu where the late is going to be laid to rest.

We shall begin service tomorrow at their home at midday and then we shall bury at 2.00 p.m.

We have transport from here departing at 8.00 a.m. and a bus will take Members of Parliament to Kalungu. For those who will be able to go to Kalungu tomorrow, please be here by 8.00 a.m. so that we can proceed. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I also take this opportunity to inform the Prime Minister and members of the Executive that under the Public Finance Management Act, we expect the ministerial policy statements by the 15th of this month without exception. 

Please bring those ministerial policy statements by 15th of this month. This will facilitate the processes from this other side of the House so that they can also make their own contribution so that these matters are handled before the deadline that we ourselves put in the law. Thank you.

The East African Community Anthem.

The National Anthem.

(Exit of the late hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for making your time available so that we can give this tribute to the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi. I am happy with the contribution and the debate. This is what draws us together as a country and it is people like this who inspire young people and us, as the leaders, to ensure that we do the right thing. Thank you very much. This special sitting of the House is now adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.38 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 14 March 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

