

Thursday, 7 March 2019

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As we approach the International Women’s Day, I would like to remind Government that it is late by seven reports to the pseudo committee. They have not reported so this is to remind the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We would like to see you present those reports here. You are late, as a United Nations member, by seven reports.

Secondly, as you are aware, the two and half year term of the parliamentary backbench commissioners came to an end sometime in January. I did communicate that the processing of replacing the commissioners required an election, according to our Administration of Parliament Act.

In addition, this House granted leave to hon. Baryayanga to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to provide for the representation of the independent members on the Commission. The Bill was sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and I await their report.

I would like to appeal to honourable members that we discuss this matter and put it to a closure because it is one that is disrupting our work. I know that there are people who are saying that those who are handling the affairs of the Commission are doing so illegally but when you look at the Act here, it states that the member of the commission does not vacate office until another member is nominated or elected in his or her place. 

Therefore, I would like to comfort you that the Commission is officially in place, it is working and there is no vacuum. I call upon the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to quickly address the issue so that we can put it to a closure.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming students of Luzira Secondary School – they are this side – represented by hon. Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

On this side, we have citizens from Nalinaibi in Busedde Subcounty in Kamuli District. They are represented by hon. Isaac Musumba and the Speaker of Parliament. Tusangayire okubabona. (Applause)

Honourable members, on Tuesday, hon. Ssemuli came with a very difficult issue concerning evictions in Kembuya. I told you that I would give you a position. I would like to ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to go and quickly examine that situation and report to us within not more than two weeks because I am told the situation is really bad. 

As we talk about evictions, we must discuss this issue. It is now endemic; it is a way of life and operation. Interestingly, the areas where people are being evicted are those where there are minerals like oil. It is not a small matter. We need to have that debate and give some direction to the country. Thank you. (Mr Byarugaba rose_)- Was there a question? The questions are coming later.

MR BYARUGABA: I have a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: You did not record it.

MR BYARUGABA: I did.

THE SPEAKER: You did not bring it. Okay, if it is a burning issue - 

3.07
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week on Friday, at around 5.00 p.m. my area - Isingiro South - was heavily devastated by a hailstorm and about five villages were badly affected. One person lost his life and we buried him on Sunday.

A five classroom block at Kagabagaba Primary School was totally destroyed and 45 homes were completely destroyed; their roofs blown away to about five kilometres from where they were before. Banana plantations were totally wiped out in the area and these were in the subcounties of Ruborogota, Rwangunga, Nyabushenyi in Kikagati Sub-county and Katooma in Kabuyanda Sub-county. An estimated number of about 2,500 people are critically affected. They have no food yet they depend entirely on bananas and their banana plantations were badly damaged. 

My prayer is that Government urgently provides some relief food and relief items like iron sheets for those 45 homes and a primary school whose children now study under the sun because there are even no trees. We need saucepans and blankets to help the most affected families.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness said he is willing to capture all the areas that are suffering from disasters. I would like to encourage Members that even if the House is not sitting, just write to the minister and give me a copy so that they can be processed. The minister should capture and deal with the situation in Isingiro. Thank you. 

STATEMENT ON THE LEGAL REGIME UNDER WHICH THE FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT OF THE UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES [UPDF] OPERATES ON THE VARIOUS WATER BODIES IN UGANDA

3.10
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I was not in Parliament yesterday but the question that was raised was brought to my attention. We have started to prepare the response but owing to the short time between this morning and right now, I have not uploaded my statement on the Ipads. With your permission, I will do this next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is extremely serious that we must understand under what law we are operating, who the officials are handling that law and who supervises them. It is not a small matter.

MR BYARUHANGA: Which is why I think it is in everybody’s interest that I give a comprehensive statement next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, report at the next meeting and your answer will enable us to debate and make resolutions. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard him very well, he said that it is only the process of uploading the statement that is left. My assumption is that he has a hard copy, which can be reproduced for Members to follow as he reads. If it is just telling us under which law we are going to proceed, I do not see why we should take this matter up to next week because the report was given to us yesterday and we are ready to debate. What is left is under which law - therefore, if he has that opinion here with him, why can’t he table it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the answer he gives will determine the type of resolutions we make. Therefore, let us give him until next week.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE RWENSHAMA FISHING COMMUNITY, BWAMBARA SUBCOUNTY, RUJUMBURA COUNTY OF RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT

3.12
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSE (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a petition by the the Rwenshama Fishing Community in Bwambara subcounty, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri District under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Your humble petitioners are residents and members of the fishing community on Lake Edward, Bwambaro Subcounty, Rujumbura County Rukungiri District.

Your petitioners were licensed to operate on the said lake in 2001 by the fisheries department.

Your petitioners have been paying all Government dues, constructed fishing boats and fishing gears as per the standard set by the fisheries department.

Your petitioners, over that in December 2017, the Fishing Protection Unit arrested some fishing members in the community, confiscated their boats and fishing gear and have introduced new operators on the lake denying your petitioners access to the lake.

Madam Speaker, your petitioners have tried all local authorities and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animals and Fisheries without success to be heard.

Therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:

1. 	This august House intervenes in this matter and asks the minister of state for fisheries to stop any interference with the licensed operators by the Fishing Protection Unit.

Your petitioners as are duty bound and will ever pray; and hereby append their signatures.

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to examine and report back. However, as you will appreciate, the same issues we were talking about earlier are the same we need to resolve. Who is in charge of that lake? Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) REPORT ON THE PARTNERSHIP FOR MATERNAL, NEWBORN AND CHILD HEALTH (PMNCHP) MEETING HELD IN NEW DELHI, INDIA FROM 10TH – 14TH DECEMBER 2018

THE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson here? The vice chairperson is also absent. 

(II) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE AFRICAN WOMEN’S CRANS MONTANA FORUM IN DAKHLA, MOROCCO FROM 16TH – 21ST MARCH 2017

THE SPEAKER: Absent. 

(III) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE ACP PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY AND THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY HELD IN COTONOU, BENIN IN DECEMBER 2018

3.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the honour to present a report of the delegation from the Parliament of Uganda to the 56th ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the 36th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Cotonou, Benin in December 2019. I beg to lay.

I also have the pleasure to lay -
i) 	A resolution which was passed at the assembly on the development of small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) at the heart of economic transformation in ACPA countries. 

ii) 	A resolution on the impact of the rise of populism on globalisation, which was discussed extensively in the meeting.

iii) 	A resolution on the impact of climate change in particular on small island development countries.

iv) 	A resolution on combating of destabilisation effects of wildlife trafficking in ACPA countries and promoting the implementation of the external dimension of the EU action plan against wild life trafficking.

v) 	A resolution about the fight against cybercrimes and drug trafficking, which has affected so many countries. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable  members, the Clerk is instructed to study the resolutions and those which are directed to Government should be sent to Government and those directed to the House should be sent to the different committees.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 63/03/01 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): “The work plan for the Uganda National Roads Authority for Financial Year 2015/2016 included tarmacking of the 28- kilometre Bubulo-Bududa Circular Road.  The same road is reflected on page 251 of the NRM Manifesto of 2016-2021, as one of the roads that were to be worked upon.

Can the honourable minister inform the House what befell the plan to tarmac this road in the Financial Year 2015/2016 and give an update on the plan to have it eventually tarmacked?”

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works here? Can someone stand in for hon. Khainza. Can someone stand in just to say the number of the question so that we can get an answer? These things have been on the Order paper; I want them off.

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, yesterday you ordered the Minister of Foreign Affairs to bring a report on Rwanda and what is happening. However, I was perusing through the Order Paper and it is not there.

THE SPEAKER: Can we do question 63/03/01 first then we come to that? Call the next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS

A) RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER FOR ICT AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ALYEK JUDITH, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, KOLE DISTRICT ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO A MATTER OF INTIMIDATION, TORTURE, DEATH THREATS AND ARREST OF WORKERS OF MEDIA HOUSES AND SUSPENSION OF SOME RADIO PROGRAMMES IN LIRA ARISING FROM THE DEATH OF MR DICKENS OKELLO

THE SPEAKER: Minister for ICT? Call item 7(b)

B) RESPONSE BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MUHAMMAD NSEREKO, MP KAMPALA CENTRAL DIVISION, ON THE EXORBITANT RENT FEES CHARGED BY THE PURPORTED OWNERS OF QUALICEL BUILDINGS AT BUGANDA BUS PARK, MR DRAKE LUBEGA AND MR YANGA MATOVU

3.21
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, item 7 (b) is on the exorbitant rent fees charged by the purported owners of Qualicel at Buganda Bus Park, Mr Drake Lubega and Mr Yanga Matovu, raised by hon. Muhammad Nsereko. We are not aware of any exorbitant fees paid by these two. 

3.22
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, probably I will give the learned Attorney-General clarification in regard to this matter. The issue I presented was a matter of change in ownership. The people in charge now, Drake and Yanga, are seeking to charge people in a retrospective manner, even arrears, during the period in which they did not own this building. We may not have a lot of say on them doubling the rental charges, even when that is appalling. However, they are asking the tenants to pay for the months they were not in control of this building. That is the issue. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not aware that, that is what is happening. When this matter was initially raised, the question had been on how the ownership was changing hands. I think I was meant to shed light on that and that is what I am aware of; that this matter was under mediation by the Head of State. He met both parties; the two current occupants and the late Muhangi. The negotiations were on going as we waited for the final determination of the court on the ownership. 

As far as charging retrospective rent is concerned, we are not aware of that. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the learned Attorney-General ought to tell this House - because I am now informing him. I do not know whether he is aware of this. If he says he is not aware of this, he should tell us when he will ascertain this because they have been threatened with closure by the 15th. 

Since you were not around at the time this was raised, what we are trying to tell you is that when they acquired control of the building recently about three weeks ago, first of all, they told the tenants who were there during the tenure of the late Charles Muhangi to vacate it. 

Secondly, he doubled the rent and told those that had paid the last five months to the late Charles Muhangi to again pay to him. Therefore, if you were paying Shs 5,000,000, he said he had increased his fees to Shs 10,000,000 and you owed him five months. Hence, failure to do so by the 15th would lead to closure of those people’s businesses. 

As the person responsible for the interpretation of all court orders and to see that there is law and order in enforcement of these court orders in the country, this is where we have come to Parliament to represent these people to seek your indulgence: 

1. 	In telling us who should manage the affairs of these people in case the building changes hands now and then; and 
2. 	In the case of the matter of the rentals every now and then. 

I know we may not interfere with how much someone charges but charging people retrospectively when an order was issued – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, are you going to ask the Government to interfere in private contracts?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I am not asking the Government to interfere. The basis is that the return of the control and management of this building by Drake Lubega and Yanga is as a result of the letter of the Attorney-General. Therefore, indirectly or directly, Government is interfering in the ownership of that building. 

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, can we direct the Attorney-General to study this matter and address it in view of the urgency that by the 15th they may be evicted? Thank you. 

C) RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MBABAALI MUYANJA AND HON. JOSEPH SSEWUNGU ON THE HEFTY CHARGES BEING LEVIED ON THE PEOPLE OF BUKOTO SOUTH AND KALUNGU WEST CONSTITUENCIES FOR PIPED WATER CONNECTIONS

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, at the 21st Sitting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, hon. Mbabaali Muyanja, Member of Parliament for Bukoto County South raised a matter of national importance on Nkoni piped water supply and sanitation systems. In the same sitting, hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzaga, Member of Parliament for Kalungu County West, raised the issue of hefty charges levied on the people of Kalungu West Constituency for piped water connections. 

I wish to clarify and respond as follows: 

Nationwide, for any new water connection, the applicant pays for materials, labour and makes a deposit of Shs 50,000 for domestic customers and Shs 100,000 for institutional or commercial customers. This initial deposit is used to pay for the first consumption and first bill. It is issued after this initial deposit is used up. This cost of materials ranges from Shs 150,000 to a maximum of Shs 1,000,000 depending on the distance of the customer from the available water lines. 

When the calculated cost exceeds Shs 1,000,000, the Government subsidises the customer by investing in the intensification network to bring the cost within the above range. 

Most of the delays in making new connections are due to the delayed provision of this subsidy. To minimise these delays, the ministry has developed the SCAP 100 Project, which is being implemented in the National Water and Sewerage Corporation schemes and will start this Financial Year 2019/2020 in the umbrella managed schemes. 

Madam Speaker, it is not true that money was extorted from the people. The funds were collected according to the procedures. Unfortunately, the water board, at the time, lacked the capacity and the resources to make the connections to those who had paid. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment has already procured a framework contract for pipes and fittings. It will ensure that all those people who paid for the connections will be connected. 

Implementation of the contract is on-going and to date, water pipelines have been extended over a distance of seven kilometres and metre connections raised to 720. The remaining applications will be connected within the next quarter; that is April to June 2019. 

For the National Water and Sewerage Corporation to take over the responsibility of managing the system or any other systems, there is need for the respective town or subcounty councils to make a council resolution and a formal request to the minister. The honourable members of Parliament are requested to inform their relevant councils to submit the formal request. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in view of rule 42 (4) which is to the effect that it shall be disorderly conduct of a member to fail to ask or for a minister to fail to answer a question listed on the Order Paper without the leave of the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I raised an issue concerning the violation of human rights of a citizen of Uganda. Therefore, I seek your indulgence that, in view of that rule, you declare the minister as such. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I need to study the circumstances under which rule 42(4) would be applied. I will give my ruling at the next sitting. (Laughter)

D) RESPONSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER TO THE QUESTION RAISED HON. SAM BITANGARO KWIZERA ON THE PROGRESS MADE BY THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS IN RESOLVING THE BORDER IMPASSE BETWEEN UGANDA AND RWANDA

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the governments of Uganda and Rwanda are in contact with each other with the view to resolving the current situation. I would like to propose that Government comes back to inform this House on the final solution that the two governments, which are in contact with each other, have resolved the matter. We are optimistic that the matter will be resolved soon.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we had some discussions today with the President and he said that a travel advisory was going to be issued. Those other issues you can continue with but the travel advisory to the people of Uganda - whether to continue taking their goods – was to be issued today by the Government. 

However, I do not know whether it has been done so that people know whether they should continue traveling there or wait in Kampala. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the responsible departments of Government will advise accordingly.

3.33
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and to our countrymen, we asked this question and you directed that a comprehensive report be furnished to this august House. 

As we speak right, some students are unable to graduate from the other side of the border from Kampala University. Those that had their merchandise are still stuck at the borders with no clear answer. Those that had flights and intended to do business with our neighbours can no longer do that. How long shall Ugandans wait to be kept in the dark about what is going on between Uganda and Rwanda? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it does not take a lot of time for you to come to this august House and share the little you have; not that we do not have total support and commitment to our nation but bringing to light all matters that have been brought to light by the other side, like I asked recently.

The other side clearly stated that they have over 800 people deported back to Rwanda. We are in the East African Federation and we are members of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the East African Union. We are looking for common trade, deepening and widening integration. We have Uganda at heart and people who are sharing the common borders deserve an answer. 

Some have their livelihood from Rwanda and some people from Rwanda share their livelihood from Uganda; the daily markets, the transporters and operators. There are people that have been working in technology and other industries. For how long shall we be kept in this darkness?

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to the best of my knowledge, the Government of Rwanda issued an advisory to their people. It is our side which is doing nothing and people are moving and getting stuck at the border. I think the little the Ugandans want is for you advise them on whether to go or not. The other things are your business but advise them on whether they should go or not.

3.36
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujj): Madam Speaker, before the Prime Minister answers, there are media reports of troop positioning and deployment. When we speak about these matters, these are matters of almost life and death. I lost a brother when there was a problem between Uganda and Rwanda. He was arrested as a security operative and we have never seen him 10 years later.

There are Ugandans who are in Rwanda and there are also Ugandans who want to go to Rwanda and Madam Speaker, I think that is the point you are emphasising. The Prime Minister should be able to tell the country whether those who are in Rwanda should leave and those who are on the way to Rwanda should not go. I am shocked that the Leader of Government Business can tell Parliament that there is a matter he cannot handle and says other departments. Why are you then the Leader of Government Business –(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give this august House is that by last week, the price of maize had gone to Shs 850. As a result of what is happening between Uganda and Rwanda, it has now gone down to Shs 650. This has affected our exports and we are supposed to be generating foreign exchange from exports. 

Therefore, the sooner the Prime Minister and Government address this matter, the better for our farmers and traders who are now suffering as a result of this situation that has dragged on for a long time where Government is not able to commit itself. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as I have already indicated to this august House, the two governments are in contact with a view to resolving to this impasse.

Secondly, the departments of Government in Uganda are in contact with each other and it is true that the plan of Government is to issue an advisory message to the people of Uganda and efforts are being made in that direction. 

Government will give a report to this august House on what this situation is and how it has been finally resolved. We are working for that resolution. 

E) RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO AN ISSUE RAISED BY HON. PETER MUGEMA ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF MATERNAL HEALTH SERVICES AT KAWEMPE REFERRAL HOSPITAL

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This response is already on our iPads. I request Members to refer to it accordingly.

At the 9th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of the Tenth Parliament that was held here, hon. Peter Mugema, Member of Parliament for Iganga Municipality, raised concern over the deplorable state of Maternal Health care services at Kawempe Referral Hospital. He presented that when he went to the hospital, he observed that on the day he visited the hospital there were 17 mothers laboring but could not be attended to by the health care professionals because of the shortage in manpower. 

He said that upon inquiring, he was told that the Executive Director of Mulago National Referral Hospital had recalled majority of the midwives - close to 100 - to Mulago National Referral Hospital and that led to disaster.

Madam Speaker, you requested the minister to bring a response and the information here is to give our Members the findings from Kawempe Referral Hospital and the recommendation for action. 

Kawempe Hospital has, since this financial year, been managed as a semi-autonomous entity with an acting hospital director and a defined leadership structure that is continually being developed to address the hospital’s new mandate.

In terms of deliveries, Kawempe Maternal Health Services are not in a deplorable state as alleged by my colleague. That is evidenced by the high number of mothers who continue to benefit from our services as shown by the records that covered the first six months from July 2018 up to January 2019. Within this period, a total of 15,301 mothers were admitted in the hospital and out of that, we had 12,180 deliveries that were conducted, of which 70 per cent were spontaneous while 26.5 per cent were caesarean section.

From the records, an average of 2,500 mothers are delivered at the hospital per month. That translates into 80-100 mothers delivering per day. This indeed is a high volume output at Kawempe Hospital.

In terms of human resource for health, currently at the hospital, we have 399 staff that have been deployed, of which 108 are from Mulago Hospital and 291 have been newly redeployed by the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Public Service. 
 
The hospital has so far commenced on the progress of working on a human resource for health structure for the hospital under this new mandate since it is semi-autonomous. That is also a prerequisite for vote status. This is expected to be in place – approved by the Ministry Of Public Service – not later than 1 July 2019.

The hospital has got 17 specialists as indicated. Important to note, is that the hospital has got a total of 201 midwives and nurses. Of these, 51 are seconded from Mulago Referral Hospital. All the staff are deployed on a 12-hourly schedule. 

Although our Government has registered significant proportions of mothers delivering under skilled birth attendants, here in Kampala, there is overall lack and mal-distribution of staff. That remains a consistent bottleneck despite the previous massive recruitment and salary enhancement, of which we should thank this Parliament.

Uganda has about 2,000 midwives, which translates into a ratio of 1:700 as opposed to 1:200 as per the recommendation of World Health Organisation. 

Specifically, to address the human resource for maternal-newborn gap, we have got the Uganda Reproductive Maternal Child Health Services where we have recruited a number of health workers for scholarships and hopefully, these health workers will be redistributed and taken back to the hospital.

Under this new mandate for Kawempe Hospital, we are requesting Parliament for the following support;
1. Once the new revised structure for human resource is approved, we request Parliament to appropriate additional funds for human resource for health. 
2. To appropriate additional funds for medicines and medical equipment for managing maternal and new born care issues.
3. The hospital should have a number of critical staff accommodation at site. Therefore, there is need to expand duty for staff accommodation at the hospital. 

With the new mandate that Kawempe Referral Hospital has, there is need for the Parliament to support both the proposed human resource structure and the infrastructure development for the hospital to enable it to deliver its mandate effectively and efficiently. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Mugema.

F) RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO CONCERNS RAISED BY HON. CAROLINE KAMUSIIME MUHWEZI OVER THE OUTSTANDING PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE DATING BACK TO 2006 TO TARMAC THE MUHANGA-KISIIZI AND KAMWEZI ROAD

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Henry Bagiire): Madam Speaker, at the 9th sitting of the 3rd meeting of the 3rd session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on 29 January 2019, hon. Caroline Kamusiime Muhwezi, MP for Rukiiga District raised concerns over the outstanding Presidential pledge dating back to 2006 to tarmac the Muhanga-Kisiizi and Kamwezi Road. I respond as follows;

The development of Muhanga-Kisiizi and Kamwezi Road to paved bituminous standard stated, is in the National Development Plan II and in the NRM Manifesto. In addition, it is listed among the roads pledged by H.E the President, for upgrading. 

In order to inform the planning and budgeting and implementation, UNRA has commenced the procurement of a consultant, who will carry out the design of the road, Environmental Impact Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan.

Once the consultant is procured by July 2019, the designs should be ready by the end of Financial Year 2019/2020.

Once the design of the road is completed and studies for Environmental Impact Assessment and Resettlement Action Plan are finalised, the tendering process for the construction of the road will commence. The road could not be tarmacked over the years from 2006 because the sector budget for road development has been over committed. This had forced the Uganda National Roads Authority to prioritise the budget on the already made commitments. These include;

    i) ongoing projects or running contracts;
    ii) Counterpart funding for externally financed projects; 
    iii) Land acquisition for projects for which Government had secured external financing for their implementation.

These undertakings required huge multi-year financial outlay. Even then, the resources available could not adequately cover the existing financial obligations and covenants within the financing agreements with our development partners. 

The plans and commitments have been bigger than the resources allocated to the sector, which had slowed the implementation of many projects. With the increase in the Government of Uganda fiscal space by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the sector will be able to sign more contracts to expedite the implementation of road projects within the mid-term, including the Muhanga-Kisiizi and Kamwezi Road. I beg to respond. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Muhwezi

G) RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT  OVER CONCERNS RAISED BY HON. ABBAS AGABA OVER DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT IN RIVERS IN HIS CONSTITUENCY

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS)(Mr Samson Lokeris): Madam Speaker at the 11th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, 31 January 2019, hon. Abbas Agaba, MP Kitagwenda County, raised a concern over discharge of effluent in rivers in his constituency.

Madam Speaker, hon. Abbas Agaba informed Parliament that discharge of effluents from illegal mines in Ibanda is silting lakes George and Edward and endangering flora and fauna therein, as well as polluting water sources in his constituency. Therefore, hon. Agaba requested for an explanation on the effluent discharge in the water bodies and what the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has done to avert the situation.

Madam Speaker, I indeed visited the area and confirmed the prevalence of illegal mines and I wish to inform the House as follows:

The ministry is indeed aware of the problem of the illegal mining vice that is evident in many parts of the country. Madam Speaker, illegal mining is not only a Ugandan problem but rather an international problem and all mining countries attest to this statement. Illegal mining in most instances is artisanal in nature and involves use of rudimentary tools to win minerals from the earth.

Some have resorted to the use of dangerous chemicals like mercury and cyanide, which has led to destruction of the environment together with flora and fauna, not forgetting the discharge of effluents in our water bodies. 

The illegal miners use the rivers or water bodies to clear, refurbish the minerals and so, they end up polluting all the water bodies, which is actually not allowed.

The activity is nomadic in nature and many areas are being opened up and others abandoned by miners. This, therefore, requires a concerted effort by not only the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development but other stakeholders and other Government agencies to curb the vice. Madam Speaker, the artisanal miners have been noticed as a menace.

The ministry is doing the following to curb the vice:

    1. Inspections and monitoring function under the Directorate of Geological Survey and Mines, is continuously being done. We carried out this on a daily basis whenever we go there to fight this menace.

    2. Exploration, mining and location licenses have been granted to a number of Ugandan and foreign companies. Sensitisation of these companies is on-going focusing on proper mining, occupational health, safety and environmental practices.

    3. The Police Minerals Protection Unit (PMPU) was established to help the directorate in the enforcement of the provisions of the law and the officers from PMPU were deployed in these catchment areas. Actually, the police are already on the ground.

    4. Illegal mining being a nomadic kind of activity, new areas with illegal mining emerge on daily basis. The directorate has and is continuously mapping out areas that have been affected all the time. That is what we do these days such that we curb illegal mining, which is nomadic in nature.

    5. New Minerals and Mining Policy 2018, was approved by Cabinet. As I told you, Madam Speaker, the Act is still with the First Parliamentary Counsel.

Immediate and future plans

The Directorate of Geological Survey and Mines has planned to send out a team this quarter to the affected area to establish the source of the effluent and make recommendations.

The team will also investigate the allegations of illegal mining within exploration - there is someone who has a license and he is doing exploration but others say he is mining. This person is the holder of License EL1544 under M/S Yusumuga Autos (U) Limited and holds documents for all mining activities in that catchment area.

A contract has been signed with the African Centre for Energy and Mineral Policy (ACEMP) to carry out a countrywide biometric registration of all illegal and legal artisanal small miners.

Continuous training and sensitisation of artisanal small miners to improve mining methods - there are some materials, which are friendly for use and so, we have continued to sensitise people how to make use of those materials like mercury and cyanide.   We are working closely with other Government agencies like the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and other local authorities on continuous basis, to fight illegal mining and environmental damage. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Agaba and so, there is no any supplementary question. Can we go to the next?
	
RESPONSE BY MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ANNET NYAKECHO ON THE INTERFERENCE OF SECURITY AGENCIES IN THE AFFAIRS OF TORORO DISTRICT COUNCIL

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I respond, I would like to beg for your indulgence to point out that Question 54/03/01 under Item 6 (b) (i) and (ii) was answered; I answered it here adequately. I beg that it is removed from the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: That is why we did not read it.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, at the 19th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, 21 February 2019, hon. Annet Nyakecho, MP, Tororo County raised an urgent question on interference by security agencies in the affairs of Tororo District Council, including blocking councillors from Tororo County from participating in the council meeting of the district.

Madam Speaker, you directed my ministry to investigate and report back to this House. 

During the 23rd Liberation Day celebrations held in Tororo at Muwafu, His Excellency the President urged the councillors of Tororo District Local Government to work together for the development of the district.

Consultations were held between the district speaker and the councillors on how to actualise the President’s call for the two sides to work together. The normal business council was set by the business committee and all district councillors were invited for the district council meeting. 

On the eve of the meeting, the district security committee agreed to deploy, after receiving intelligence information and pronouncements from some councillors from Tororo County during their meeting at Mukuju sub-county headquarters that councillors opposed to holding of the council meeting had come with sticks and other instruments. This prompted the Police to block them from entering the gate.

The council meeting was attended by 32 out of 43 councillors and discussions were held peacefully in the council chambers. The acting district chairperson was away in Jinja attending a meeting and she had delegated the Secretary for Production, who did not show up for that meeting.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary question, hon. Nyakecho?

4.04
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for attempting to answer the question although not with facts. It is true that when the President came to Tororo for the NRM day celebrations, he called upon councillors to unite. At the same time, he also called the MPs who come from Tororo and West Budama and told us to fight; I did not get it. That was his statement.

The honourable minister is aware because she has received a lot of documents from Tororo District Council that indicate that the business committee of the council is actually non-existent because two executives resigned. Therefore, it is not true that the business council sat and came up with the business of the day.

Thirdly, it is true that there were videos of a councillor holding sticks but the honourable minister did not take it upon herself to follow the incidences and timeframes within which these events happened. You are aware, honourable minister, that by 6 o’clock, councillors from West Budama had already been fixed into the district council. Those they thought were coming to disorganise the council meeting were stopped from accessing the council premises.

Also, if I may talk about the issue of quorum –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether this House can resolve the issue of who entered and who was locked out or who had a stick and who was far from the stick. I do not think the President said, continue fighting. While in Tororo, he said that those who fight should come and fight here. He did not say that you should go back and continue fighting. 

MS NYAKECHO: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, if you look at the quorum of the councillors, indeed it is true that we have 43 councillors in Tororo District. The honourable minister is aware that regarding the composition of these councillors, only 15 councillors come from Tororo County. The 34 are from West Budama so in terms of quorum, majority of those who were inside were actually from Tororo County and a few who were pocketed were from West Budama –

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate what my colleague, hon. Nyakecho has stated. However, just last week, the issues of Tororo were on this Floor and the Minister of Internal Affairs attempted to respond. I remember you gave a directive to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who led the delegation to Tororo.

We cannot resolve this matter like this. There are issues in Tororo, which we really need to resolve. That is a fact. Madam Speaker, you asked the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to give a report to this House and this is why I am raising a procedural issue. Should we proceed in this manner? Since the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is here, can’t she respond to this issue? The next thing we will see will be hon. Oboth standing up and everybody from Tororo will want to speak and we shall end up with this confusion. Therefore – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the last meeting, I appealed to the Government to help us resolve this matter because it is on the Floor every Session. Can I ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, whom we sent together with the delegation to London, to tell us where we stand on this issue? I only want to hear from the minister otherwise hon. Othieno will stand up and then hon. Angura. They are too many.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report on our trip is ready. The certified maps that were authenticated and approved by all the members of the delegation are also ready. I submitted it to His Excellency the President on Monday. Yesterday, I met the President and he requested that I give him an opportunity to meet the two parties. Thereafter, I will come and present the report on the Floor. 

Therefore, I request for patience from the House and I hope - according to him, either this week or during the retreat of the NRM parliamentary caucus, he will be able to set aside some time and meet the two teams. After he has notified both parties - it will also be unfair for me to bring the report when he, who sent us, has not yet –(Interjection)– Not Parliament because the matter was referred by the President in a meeting at State House. The two parties requested for authentication in London and the President authorised it and asked that I lead the delegation. I felt that procedurally, he should be able to meet the parties and notify them. That is why he has requested that we give him time and then we shall bring it. That is the short report I can give you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there will be no discussion on that issue until we get the report. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. AGABA ABBASI MUGISHA ON THE DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT IN RIVERS IN KITAGWENDA DISTRICT

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, at the 19th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of the 10th Parliament held on Thursday, 21 February 2019, Parliament observed that Government had established new districts in various parts of the country, which were not operating effectively due to the absence of administrative institutions.

Madam Speaker, you directed that I present to Parliament the specific dates on which Government intends to conduct Local Council (LC) elections in the districts. 

I would like to state and report that under Article 61 of the Constitution and section 101 of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, the Electoral Commission is mandated to organise, conduct and supervise elections of local government councils. Section 187 of the Local Governments Act further mandates the Electoral Commission to organise and conduct elections of the interim chairpersons of the local governments. Therefore, the specific dates for conducting local government council elections in the new districts can be made by the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, I promise that I will liaise with the Electoral Commission in order to get the current roadmap for conducting the elections and report my findings. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Democracy in Uganda!

4.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Local Government. You have directed on this matter. We need the Government - I say this because I am the chairperson of the committee that oversees the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission was ready several months ago but they do not have the money. They are waiting for money not only for these six districts but for the six more that are coming and the subcounties and town councils. 

Madam Speaker, why do we create these local governments and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not provide the funds? The minister is here looking at me. It is an insult to this Parliament. We raise hopes and then later, people are disenfranchised. When a subcounty is created, the LC III chairperson of the old one will not serve the other side; he will remain there as a figurehead.

Districts were created in Bugweri, Kassanda, Nabilatuk, Kapelebyong. A woman Member of Parliament who is here already knows by law that she is not the Member of Parliament the other side. The voters that side do not have representation. Why are we casual about representation of people?

The Minister of Local Government can only come here and say what she has said; she does not hold the money. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is looking at me. We need to help other institutions to do their work; we need to help the Electoral Commission with funds.

We cannot continue this way; it is very painful. We have interacted with them as a committee and given them deadlines. However, they told us that the bottom line is, should they get money, they will announce the dates the next day. Therefore, there is need for your chair, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes I do not know how we plan. In the past, new constituencies only took effect in a new Parliament. I do not know why the Government came here and said every financial year, there will be new constituencies and new members of Parliament. In the past, we would wait for five years and plan to get a Member of Parliament after five years. However, in three years, I have got 60 members of Parliament and I am expecting more. They are hanging! I am told the money they want for those hanging is not much; it is around Shs 2 billion. 

4.18
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I am getting worried. I hope the honourable minister is aware that we even have residual elections for LC IIs. Those residual elections impact on the dispensation of justice because LC IIs and LC IIIs form a structure of the court system.

When we approach the Electoral Commission, they refer us to the Ministry of Local Government. I was a bit saddened therefore when the minister was also referring us to the Electoral Commission. The centre may not be holding but I would like to seek the indulgence of the Prime Minister that they hold an inter-ministerial meeting so that they resolve this matter.

Apparently, some subcounties cannot constitute the LC III structure, which is an appellant court of matters which originate from the LC I and LC II. This is a very important matter and I would like to inform the Prime Minister that in functional governments, these matters are handled administratively so that they do not come to Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of those have no public accounts committees, no district service commissions - Nothing is going on.

4.19
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Rose Mutonyi moved a private Member’s Bill to address the issue where a new district is created and a chairperson who remains in the old district faces a lot of disturbance and trouble, and we came up with a report. 

One of the recommendations we put in that report was that Government must come up with an amendment where when districts are created in a particular term of office, these districts should come in force when a new term is starting so that elections can be done once. In our investigations, we discovered that in some of the districts, which are created, the number of councillors is sometimes not enough to form an executive. Secondly, when a new district comes into force, some of the statutory bodies that operate do not have executive powers; their decisions must be approved by the ministry. 

Therefore, instead of having elections now and then, we recommended that Government must come up with an amendment such that when there are creations, these creations should come in force with the new Government. That way, elections are done once and for all. However, up to now, that amendment has not come.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the Government is asleep, your committee should bring a motion here. Can we hear from the money man? Okay, the Minister of Local Government first.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, we are not asleep; we are coming up with amendments to the Local Governments Act and that is what my chairperson is talking about. We are already at consultation stage where we have called upon all the stakeholders, especially local government leaders, to bring amendments. We are in the process and what my chairperson has mentioned is part of the amendments that we are coming with.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I appreciate what you are doing but there are dysfunctional local governments. What do you want us to do? Honourable minister, tell us about the money.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that you give us some little time so that we come here and address the issue of these specific local councils that already exist and need resources to hold elections. At the next meeting of Parliament, we can come and give a statement after we have harmonised it.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is a very serious issue. I hope you appreciate the seriousness.

MR BAHATI: Yes.

4.23
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the matter, which is on the Floor right now is much more than the Local Governments Act; I think it even requires a constitutional amendment. In the process of creating very many administrative units - municipalities and districts – of course it is a constitutional requirement that every district must be represented by a woman Member of Parliament. It is equally a requirement that every municipality must have a Member of Parliament.

As we speak, there are around seven administrative units, which require parliamentary representation. This has gone on for six to eight months and yet Government had the political expedience of creating these administrative units without preparing itself with the resources to rhyme and abide by the constitutional provision.

Therefore, as we ask the Minister of Local Government to consider coming up with an amendment of the Local Governments Act, on the other side it will require a constitutional amendment because I am sure that every other time, the powers that be will wake up and create more districts. These will have resource implications and the same problem will arise and hon. David Bahati, with due respect, the minister for borrowing or mobilisation of resources, will be asked, “Where is the money for all this?”

Let Government take some of these things seriously. It is not just a matter of political expedience but also of practicality. Are you able to live up to the challenges, which come with these new administrative units that you create? If that is not done, then do not create them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Ugandans should also stop asking for municipalities and districts. 

4.25
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The concern is about the new administrative units - the districts and lower local governments. In Nebbi it is so bad because we lost our LC V chairman, the six months have elapsed but we cannot hold a by-election. People can even take decisions of the council to court. 

The other day I was talking to the Minister for Local Government. I asked, “Can’t you provide Shs 100 million and we hold this election?” There is no answer. That is how bad it is; even Nebbi Town Council that became a municipality, had to operate for a year and two months with interim leadership. I think the laxity is extremely bad and it will affect Government. You may be dragged to court for nothing. Thank you. 

4.26
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I want it to be on record that I extend my appreciation to you for giving us directives that we should not continue demanding for more local government units. Why am I saying so? I was in this Parliament and I know very well how we, Members of Parliament, demanded for those local government units. We reached the extent –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow the Member to speak. Honourable members, one of the virtues of being in Parliament is listening to one another. You may not like what he is saying but just listen.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, the Executive used to bring these units piecemeal. It is this Parliament, which demanded that all those that had been requested for by Members of Parliament and others should be brought lump sum and should be phased in the way they are going to start. It is on record that we agreed upon that as Members of Parliament.

You know, when you overload a sack, it can break your neck. It seems we overloaded the sack and that is why I extend my appreciation to you this evening when you ordered us to stop demanding for more local units. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu is burning.

4.28
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that in the Ninth Parliament, you gave guidance to this Parliament that it was high time Government worked out a standard measure for a local government unit to qualify as a district or municipality. That is why you realise that there are some constituencies and some districts that have just one subcounty. If they give you district status with only two subcounties, how do you form an interim leadership? 

There are also districts, which are being imposed on people; for example, they are simply imposing the split of Kasese District onto the people of Kasese. Therefore, I think it is fair and in the interest of this country –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I am the minister in charge of local governments; I am not aware of a district in this country, which is composed of two subcounties. Is the honourable member in order – (Interjections) - Ik is not a district; it is a constituency in Kaabong District. Is hon. Nzoghu in order to mislead this House and the country that there are districts composed of two subcounties without naming them?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, can you substantiate the districts which have two subcounties? 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I talked of two scenarios; one of the district and that is where I emphasised that you guided in the Ninth Parliament that there is need for standardisation. I went on to talk about municipalities and constituencies and I said that there are some where you will find two subcounties constituting a constituency.

Madam Speaker, I just want to tell this Parliament that in my view, I feel that your guidance in the Ninth Parliament should be respected this time round so that we know the criteria for a district to qualify as a district. What should it have in terms of population, economic viability, size and distance from the headquarters of the mother district? We should have these criteria so that this ping pong can stop.

I would like to assure you that you may create these districts but they will turn out to be a blow in your faces because the economy is struggling.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one time the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a proposal that they would go and discuss how they would actualise the districts, which have come into operation. However, I would like you to think; if they are going to create more districts in 2020, someone will be here for a year and go back for elections. Should that be happening as well? You need to think about that. This is very serious. When can you come back to us?

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, if you give us two weeks, we can come back with a position of Government and some proposals on how to handle the current situation because as we speak, there are almost 203 local units to be operationalised. They have been created and require almost Shs 146 billion. 

Therefore, it is an issue that we can discuss together as leaders of the nation and take a decision together because when we were creating these units, we created them together. Some of them were created out of the discussions in this House. Therefore, two weeks will be sufficient for us to come back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: So, that is the third week of March? Okay. 

MS NABAYIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Wednesday, I raised a matter on the low prices of fresh fruit bunches of palm oil in Kalangala. Hon. Migadde, my colleague, raised an issue of the low prices of fish. Under your wise guidance, Madam Speaker, you directed that today, the Minister of Agriculture comes here and gives us a response but no response has been made. Are we really proceeding well, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I do not see them here. Are they here? Okay, at the next sitting, please report on those two issues of palm oil and the fishing industry. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE INSTITUTE OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE BILL”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal is not here. Let us go to Item No. 10.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE PERSONS WITH ALBINISM BILL”

4.35
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Persons with Albinism Bill”. It is moved under Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and rules 55, 120 and l2l of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of Uganda and several international treaties recognise the principle of equality and non-discrimination and advocate for equal protection before and under the law without any discrimination, and affirm that everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of a person;

NOTING THAT albinism, a rare non-contagious genetically inherited condition, which results in the lack of melanin pigment in the hair, skin and eyes causing vulnerability to sun exposure is widely misunderstood socially and medically, and this is clearly manifested by the unclear definition and little attention in the existing legal and policy framework, which lacks adequate measures to protect Persons with Albinism (PWAs) from physical and mental abuse, and is not comprehensive to provide effective remedy and redress in case of abuse, for example-
    
a. the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006 does not incorporate a number of rights recognised in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and even those recognised are in disharmony with the principles of the convention in relation to PWAs;

b. the ambiguities in laws relating to witchcraft and traditional health practices have perpetuated weak prosecution of violence against PWAs –(Interruption)

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Albinism has been declared a disability and on the Order Paper, I see a Private Member’s Bill seeking leave of Parliament to present a motion on persons with albinism. On the same Order Paper, item No. 20, there is a proposed amendment Bill by Government on persons with disabilities. Why can’t the Member harmonise with the Government so that her motion is incorporated within the Government Bill? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As my colleague has alluded, what hon. Nalule is highlighting here is ably and almost wholly catered for in the Bill that is on the Order Paper today under item No. 20. In addition, she was actually part of all the committee proceedings and the Bill is now ready for full debate at Second and Third Reading. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can you show me where albinism is in your Bill? Honourable members, I generally do not want to interfere with the rights of Members but I think you are aware that the issue of albinism has been undercover; they have been discriminated against. It is the debates here, which have brought out their issues. Hon. Nalule, where is your Bill? Let me see it. Honourable members, why should it be a problem if we have a Bill specifically on albinism? 

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance. It is known world over that albinism has now been considered as a form of disability. The main reason we amended this was to cater for albinism and it has been exhaustively handled and she was part of the committee. I thank you and I beg for your indulgence to let us exhaustively handle the Bill as scheduled on the agenda. 

MS NALULE: Madam Speaker, I stand here with a lot of authority because I am a person with disability. I have read that Bill and the report. With the exception of mentioning albinism as one of the coded types of disabilities in Uganda, the kind of issues I am raising in the private Member’s Bill are far different. 

To tell you the truth, there are peculiar issues which affect persons with albinism. As a person with a physical disability, I am neither vulnerable to trafficking nor sacrifice. When you read the Bible, it says that you cannot sacrifice an unfit animal. In the eyes of those who sacrifice others, because I have a bad leg, I cannot be sacrificed. However, albinos are sacrificed every now and then and there has never been a law to safeguard them. Just show me where the penalty is in that Bill for people who sacrifice persons with albinism.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, when the matter of albinism was brought to this House, you directed Government to come up with a Bill. They instead sat and kept quiet. Today, a private Member has come with a Bill and the minister is saying the Member should – It is not right! If they knew that there was something to do with albinism, they should have contacted hon. Safia Nalule and said, we have issues as well, let us combine them to make sure that we make one –(Interruption) 

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, it seems that the honourable member was not following very well. I said that the reason this Bill is here today, in its final stage, is because it had to cater for albinism. It is right here on page 30. It is exhaustively handled. So I request the House and the Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has been engaged on the issue of albinism since the last Parliament. Since the Ninth Parliament, we have asked Government to present the Bill. Let me ask you two questions: In your law, can you find a section governing the examination process for albinism? Can you find a section, which deals with covering their heads in that law? 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. From the time we started examining this Bill with the honourable member and the committee, she brought all her views on the table. We looked at eight areas of disability, including albinism. Certainly, not every nitty-gritty was to appear in the Bill, but what we considered first was albinism. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to highlight to you the areas of albinism that have been considered -

THE SPEAKER: Let her read. We are listening. 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first step that we took was to highlight the categories of disability and they include: 

    1. Mobility impairment caused by cerebral palsy, impulsion and limb - 
    2. Hearing disability including deafness and hard of hearing;
    3. Visual disability including blindness and low vision;
    4. Deafness and blind disability; 
    5. Mental illness; 
    6. Little people;
    7. Albinism; and
    8. Multiple disability. 

That was the subject matter for this Bill. We went ahead to categorise all the sections, which include entitlement, justice, right of way, up to elections of people with disabilities, including albinism. 

It is my humble appeal that the House listens to this Bill and we work together with her to ensure that where there is an amendment and inclusion. We can always go back and harmonise and come up with the right Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the albinos have been waiting for a long time. Hon. Nalule, proceed with your presentation.

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. How I wish the minister was so – 

“… c) laws against assault and murder provide PWAs with minimum protection of their rights to life and security of person;

FURTHER NOTING that studies demonstrate that Persons with Albinism are subjected to and experience multiple and intersectional forms of discrimination, including ritual attacks, sexual violence, trafficking of body parts, infanticide and abandonment of children, societal prejudices, and lack of access to basic rights such as health;

RECOGNISING THAT whereas there are legal and policy instruments on most of the human rights violations faced by Persons with Disabilities (PWDs), PWAs are a unique and complex group whose experiences significantly and simultaneously touch on several human rights issues including discrimination based on colour, special needs in terms of access to education, and enjoyment of the highest standards of health, harmful traditional practices, violence including killings and ritual attacks, trade and trafficking of body parts for witchcraft purposes, infanticide and abandonment of children;

RECALLING THAT at its 60th Ordinary Session, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights adopted the Africa Regional Action Plan on Albinism, a 5-year plan which seeks to address attacks and other human rights violations against Persons with Albinism, and spells out 15 specific concrete and time bound measures including public education and awareness, systematic data collection, research on the root causes of violence, legal and policy reforms to deter harmful practices related to witchcraft, trafficking in body parts, stipulate measures to fight impunity and ensure support for the victims;

CONVINCED THAT there is need for a specific legislation on Persons with Albinism to provide for comprehensive protection and promotion of their rights, to provide for their registration, rehabilitation, development and wellbeing, to provide for the role and responsibilities of both state and non-state actors, to designate national and district taskforce coordinators for Persons With Albinism, and to achieve equalisation of opportunities for Persons With Albinism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

This House grants me leave to introduce a private Members' Bill for an Act entitled, “The Persons With Albinism Bill”, a draft of which is hereto attached, and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by several Members. What is your justification? Should I put the question? Let us have one seconder to speak to the motion.

4.50
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the Member to seek leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “Persons with Albinism Bill.” Certainly, no one can beat the passion that hon. Safia Nalule has on these matters.

Albinism is still widely misunderstood socially and medically because it is not clearly defined in the laws of our nation; there is very little mention. The Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006 does not incorporate a number of rights recognised in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Even the rights that are recognised are in disharmony with the principles of the convention in relation to persons with albinism.

Persons with albinism suffer different forms of persecution and discrimination grounded in myths and superstition. Many people believe that the body parts of persons with albinism have magical powers such as providing wealth and prosperity, which has encouraged the setup of a successful black market for selling body parts of persons with albinism. Certainly, this means they are killed and their body parts extracted. 

Furthermore -

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the merits of the Bill; just support the need to make a law.

MS KAMATEEKA: The objectives of the Bill are to provide for comprehensive protection and promotion of the rights of persons with albinism; to provide for their registration, rehabilitation, development and wellbeing; to provide for the role and responsibilities of both state and non-state actors; to designate a national and district taskforce coordinator for persons with albinism; and to achieve equalisation of opportunities for persons with albinism.

Madam Speaker, despite the constitutional provisions to uphold the rights of persons with disabilities in Uganda, the persons with albinism have been ignored to a large extent. Therefore, I support the motion that a private Member’s Bill be brought to this House. I beg to move.

4.53
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and my support is premised on Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

It is only Parliament with powers to make laws. Article 79(2) is to the effect that the laws shall be made only by Parliament. It means that in the process of making laws, it is either Government, through a Bill introduced by Cabinet, or a private Member that does this. In this sense, the Government had dilly-dallied with introducing a Bill to take care of these people. 

It is not only on this matter. I will give you an example. I had given notice that I intend to introduce a private Member’s Bill on the national payment system. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stood on this Floor and said they would bring a Bill and they even wrote to the Speaker but up to now they have never brought it.

It seems it has become now a method of work for the Executive to circumvent Bills and stop Members from doing their work –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, hon. Paul Mwiru, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the colleague is telling us about situations where Cabinet takes advantage of that clause; when you are bringing a private Member’s Bill, they come and say that they are in the advanced stages of tabling the Bill.

Some time back, while we were in the advanced stage of introducing a private Member’s Bill called the Consumer Protection Bill, I met the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Ms Amelia Kyambadde, and she told me, “We are in the advanced stages and in the next two weeks, it will be on the Floor.” After those two weeks, I met her again and she said, “I am going to invite you so that we compare notes and we shall be there.” This was last year –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, about the Consumer Protection Bill, which came in the Seventh Parliament, the Government was in the final stages of bringing that Bill.

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Finally, the Bill in its current form does not address all forms of inabilities. That is why even intellectual disability is not covered in your Bill, honourable minister -(Interjections) - Yes, there is also intellectual disability -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you approve the request or not?

4.56
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving time for private Members to bring this Bill. Therefore, I would like to support this motion.

The best gift this Parliament can give to the persons with albinism is to find space within the laws of this country and provide for a law that will at least handle their issues. I would like to support the motion and request that this Parliament unanimously supports this motion that we grant leave to the honourable member intending to table this Bill.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you put the question straight away and we go to the next business. I beg to move.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of clarification. Albinism is a genetic disorder and we have got quite a number of genetic disorders like Down syndrome, sickle cell anaemia, cystic fibrosis and many others. Are we, therefore, going to put all these genetic disorders under disability where actually albinism is just one of them? In terms of grouping, it is really a genetic disorder that needed to be considered –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)
               
THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do authorise hon. Safia Nalule to publish the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PALIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sam Lyomoki is not there. Let us move on to the next item. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA

5.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA (Ms Robina Rwakoojo): Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. You can see we have different sizes. (Laughter)

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, allow me to present the report of the select Committee of Inquiry into Allegations of Sexual Violence in institutions of Learning in Uganda. I would like to lay on the Table the report, the minutes of the select committee meetings, and extracts from the verbatim transcriptions of the Hansard. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you are presenting the executive summary. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am presenting the executive summary although you will be cheated if you do not listen to the recommendations. I will, however, go by your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Read the summary and the recommendations. We shall need them.

MS RWAKOOJO: The parliamentary select committee on inquiry into allegations of sexual violence conducted an inquiry into the problem of sexual violence in institutions of learning in Uganda. The inquiry arose from a motion presented to Parliament by hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju, the National Female Youth Representative, which was instigated by the numerous and repeated media reports of gross acts of sexual violence in institutions of learning at all levels

The committee's terms of reference were to: 

    a) study the causes and extent of the vice of sexual violence in institutions of learning in the country and its negative effects on the population; 
    b) study and review laws against sexual violence in Uganda; 
    c) study policies available for the management and control of sexual violence in Uganda; 
    d) study the measures that have been put in place to address sexual violence when it occurs; 
    e) study any measures that have been put in place to create awareness on sexual violence in institutions of learning; 
    f) study the procedure of receiving, investigating and resolving complaints on reports of sexual violence in institutions of learning; and 
    g) study the support services accorded to victims of sexual violence like counselling and medical services.

In the execution of the inquiry, the committee employed both qualitative and quantitative approaches to collect and analyse the information received from various stakeholders. It interfaced with 39 institutions comprising of Government ministries, agencies and departments, professional bodies, civil society organisations and three individuals. 

In addition, the committee visited a total of 33 institutions of learning comprising of 11 primary schools, 11 secondary schools, two primary teachers’ colleges and nine universities where it interfaced with the administration of the institutions, learners and district officials from whom it elicited vital information that formed the basis of the recommendations in this report. The committee also held a public hearing where 21 witnesses appeared, testified and reviewed relevant literature on the subject matter.

Below is a summary of the key findings, observations and recommendations.

a) Extent of Sexual Violence in Institutions of Learning

The committee found out that sexual violence is widespread in virtually all the institutions of learning visited. However, the actual prevalence of the vice in the country is difficult to determine as many of the cases are never reported. Thirty-nine per cent of the respondents interviewed from primary, secondary and tertiary institutions said that they had personally experienced some form of sexual violence or harassment or knew of classmates and peers who had experienced it. 

The committee recommends as follows: 

i) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should formalize the collection of data on sexual violence in institutions of learning. The data should focus on the extent and the various forms of sexual violence, the drivers and consequences of the vice, and should disaggregate both victims and perpetrators of violence by age, position and sex. The data should be validated, consolidated and published by the Ministry of Education and Sports on an annual basis.

ii) 	Ministry of Education and Sports should annually update Parliament on the scale and magnitude of sexual violence in institutions of learning in the country and the actions taken to mitigate the vice.

b) Forms of Sexual Violence 
The committee established that sexual violence in institutions of learning manifests in various forms including defilement, rape, verbal and non-verbal sexual harassment. At university and tertiary level, the committee found out that it is common for lecturers to intentionally fail students or withhold their marks under the guise of “missing marks” to increase the students’ vulnerability to yield to their sexual demands. This form of sexual exploitation is commonly known as “sexually transmitted marks” or “sex for marks”. 

c) Perpetuators of Sexual Violence

The vice is majorly perpetuated by male teachers and lecturers and male learners against female learners. However, male learners too are vulnerable to the vice though most of them do not report due to gender stereotypes that boys or men cannot be abused.

During the inquiry, the committee was furnished with some names of notorious perpetuators of sexual violence in institutions of learning. The names have not been published in the report in view of the attendant legal implications. However, the names of the alleged perpetuators will be availed to the relevant Government institutions for investigation and prosecution, upon the adoption of the report or on request by Parliament. The committee has attached brief details of the cases to the report for purposes of aiding Parliament in reaching a decision. For this, we refer to Annex 5. 

d) Causes of Sexual Violence

The committee found out that sexual violence in institutions of learning is caused by a myriad of factors ranging from social, cu1tural, economic, institutional to environmental factors. However, poverty and moral degeneration stood out as the key driving factors for the vice. Other causes are: harmful religious and cultural beliefs and practices, societal acceptance of sexual violence, increasing levels of drug and substance abuse, exposure to pornography, lack of life skills and sexuality education, culture of silence, misuse of power and authority, lack of professionalism, laxity in the law and policy enforcement, inadequate supervision and monitoring, weaknesses in examination management systems and inadequate and unsafe physical infrastructure. The recommendations for addressing each of the above factors are detailed in the report. 

e) Negative Effects of Sexual Violence on the Population 

The committee notes that learners who experience sexual violence find it difficult to concentrate in class; some even lose interest in studying and transfer to new institutions or simply drop out of school, hindering their educational performance and curtailing their future aspirations. In addition, sexual violence is associated with numerous health risks including sexually transmitted diseases, early pregnancies which often result into school dropout and injury or death arising from unsafe abortions. 

The consequences of sexual violence on female learners are exacerbated by the absence of a clear policy framework for retention and re-entry of pregnant girls into schools. Girls who become pregnant in schools as a result of sexual violence are expelled as a disciplinary measure to deter others from getting pregnant and they are not allowed to return to the same school after giving birth, which deprives them of their right to education. 

The committee recommends that the Education Act, 2008 should be amended to give effect to the right of pregnant girls to be retained and reintegrated in education institutions after giving birth. 

In addition, the Ministry of Education and Sports should fast-track the formulation and implementation of policy guidelines for the retention and re-integration of pregnant girls in school, in any case not later than December 2O19. 

f) Review of Laws against Sexual Violence in Uganda 

The committee notes that there are several laws that provide avenues for the protection of learners against sexual violence and punishment of perpetuators. However, the committee found glaring gaps in these laws, which need to be urgently addressed. These include: the absence of a comprehensive law on sexual offences, the lack of comprehensive legal provisions in the education sector, and the lack of a witness protection law. 

To address these issues, the committee recommends that: 

i) 	Parliament should fast-track the passing of the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015 subject to the amendments proposed in this report;
 
ii) 	Government should consider amending the Education Act, 2008 to explicitly prohibit sexual relations between leaners and teachers, whether consensual or not, to reinforce existing provisions in the Teachers’ Professional Code of Code; classify sexual violence as a serious form of professional misconduct; prescribe clear sanctions for perpetuators; impose a legal duty of care on teachers and schools to protect learners against sexual violence and respond effectively to reports of abuse; provide for mandatory reporting of sexual violence to police and Ministry of Education and Sports by teachers and schools; and impose stiff penalties on schools for failure to report and/or take action against perpetuators of sexual violence.

g) Policies Available for the Management and Control of Sexual Violence in Uganda

The committee established that Uganda lacks a comprehensive policy for the prevention and management of sexual violence in institutions of learning. The National Strategic Plan on Violence against Children in Schools and the Reporting, Tracking, Referral and Response (RTRR) Guidelines, which are meant to facilitate reporting and tracking of cases of sexual violence in schools are inadequate. Incomplete distribution and lack of training on their content have impeded their impact.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Education and Sports should, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, formulate a specific and comprehensive policy for the prevention and management of sexual violence and harassment in schools.

h) Measures That Have Been Put In Place to Address Sexual Violence When It Occurs

The committee notes that legal, policy and institutional measures exist for addressing sexual violence when it occurs. However, lack of standardisation of university policies, laxity in implementation, and weak disciplinary systems have engendered an environment of impunity, effectively subduing victims into perpetual silence. In many cases, disciplinary proceedings against abusive teachers are not concluded because Ministry of Education and Sports is barred from taking disciplinary action when criminal proceedings against the teacher are still ongoing. Teachers who are allegedly involved in defiling learners are transferred to other schools further escalating the vice to other institutions.

The committee therefore recommends as follows:

i) 	The Education Service Act and the attendant subsidiary legislation should be amended for disciplinary proceedings to run parallel to criminal proceedings. This will permit the Ministry of Education and Sports to dismiss teachers on the basis of professional misconduct irrespective of the status or outcome of criminal proceedings.

ii) 	The National Council for Higher Education should fast-track the formulation of comprehensive policy guidelines for universities and tertiary institutions to foster coherence in addressing sexual harassment in these institutions not later than June 2019. The council should ensure that the policy guidelines are adopted and enforced.

iii) 	Ministry of Education and Sports should take stern action against perpetuators of sexual violence in institutions of learning and should not merely transfer them to other institutions. Teachers found culpable of sexual misconduct should have their teaching licences revoked and their names struck off the register of teachers.

i) 	Measures That Have Been Put In Place to Create Awareness on Sexual Violence in Institutions of Learning

The committee notes that there is a general lack of awareness about sexual violence in the country. Although the Ministry of Education and Sports policies recognise the need to create awareness about violence in schools, the ministry has not done much in terms of implementing these policies. Most of the awareness programmes in institutions of learning are implemented by non-governmental organisations and are, therefore, limited to the project areas of these organisations. 

The committee further observes that the awareness programmes in universities and tertiary institutions are implemented on an ad hoc basis, limited in scope and coverage, and therefore have less if any impact. For example, the orientation programme is a one-off event for only new staff and students and it is not compulsory.

The committee recommends as follows:

i) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should prioritise the implementation of programmes aimed at creating awareness on sexual violence in all schools in its budget for the financial year 2019/2020.

ii) 	Universities and tertiary institutions should adopt a widespread and consistent approach of creating awareness on sexual harassment within and outside the university community and should allocate a specific budget for the same every financial year. The availability of awareness programmes should form part of the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) quality assurance framework for licensing, routine monitoring and audit of universities and tertiary institutions.

j) 	The Procedure of Receiving, Investigating And Resolving Complaints on Reports of Sexual Violence in Institutions of Learning 

The committee notes that while administrative mechanisms for receiving, investigating and resolving complaints exist in institutions of learning, they are too weak to effectively detect and respond to incidents of sexual violence. For example, senior women teachers who are entrusted with reporting cases in schools lack a clear understanding of their roles and are not adequately skilled to deal with cases involving teachers. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education of Sports should fast-track guidelines for streamlining the position of the senior women/senior man teachers in the school structure not later than June 2019, and should prioritize training of both to bolster their capacity to detect, report and respond incidents of sexual violence.

The committee further noted several gaps and deficiencies at the various levels of the criminal justice system which inhibit victims from accessing justice. These include, among others: the mismanagement of cases by police officers and state attorneys; challenges in the forensic examination of victims including unavailability of Police Form 3 at police stations; reluctance of medical doctors to examine victims; lack of equipment in health facilities; protracted investigations and court trials; and unfriendly court environments. 

The recommendations for addressing each of the above issues are detailed in the report.

k) Support Services Accorded To Victims of Sexual Violence Like Counselling and Medical Services

The committee notes that while the Government has committed through various policies to provide medical, legal, psychosocial services and other types of service to victims of sexual and gender-based violence, the services are limited and inaccessible to victims due to several factors, including limited knowledge of the existing services; absence of medical services in some health facilities; lack of fo1low-up mechanisms; uncoordinated, lengthy and bureaucratic processes; inadequate psychosocial services; and the absence of legal support services. 

The committee stresses the need for an integrated support service provision model to improve linkages between service providers, protect victims from secondary victimization, and ease access to support services by victims of sexual violence.

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the establishment of recovery centres for victims of sexual violence across the country in a phased manner effective financial year 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, may I seek your guidance on how to move? Can I go to the introduction for the sake of my Members?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, on 12 April 2018, Parliament unanimously agreed to institute a select committee to investigate allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning in line with ru1e 186 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament. I had already talked about those who moved the motion.

Subsequently, on Tuesday, 14 August 2018, the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca A. Kadaga, constituted a select committee comprising the following Members to conduct the inquiry:

    1. Hon. Robina Gureme Rwakoojo 	Gomba West County (Committee Chairperson)
    2. Hon. Sarah Babirye Kityo 	Youth representative, Central
    3. Hon. Gideon Onyango 	Samia Bugwe North County 
    4. Hon. Stephen Kisa 	Luuka South County 
    5. Hon. Mwine Mpaka 	Youth representative, Western 
    6. Hon. Anthony Okello 	Kioga County 
    7. Hon. Atkins Katusabe 	Bukonjo West County 
    8. Hon. Mary Babirye Kabanda 	Woman Representative, Masaka 
    9. Hon. Joshua Anywarach 	Padyere County 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that they stand up. It was a wonderful team to work with and I would like to thank them for this work. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS RWAKOOJO: The committee conducted the inquiry and hereby reports. I believe Members can read the background. I had already talked about the terms of reference on page 6. Let me go to the methodology.

The committee used both qualitative and quantitative approaches to collect and analyse the information received from various stakeholders and did the following: 

    1. The committee held public hearings and these were held with various stakeholders. The list is attached in Annex 1. 
    2. The committee published an advert, inviting members of the general public to submit their views on the subject matter. In response, 21 witnesses appeared and testified. You will find that in Annex 2 but we have the minutes of the public hearing.

Field visits
a) 	In line with the terms of reference for the inquiry, the committee conducted field visits to selected institutions of learning in five regions of Uganda; that is Central, Eastern, Northern, Western and Southern. 

For every region, the committee selected at least three institutions of learning representing a primary, secondary and tertiary institution. It visited a total of 33 institutions of learning in 26 districts of Uganda. These comprised 11 primary schools, 11 secondary schools, two Primary Teachers’ Colleges and nine universities. Refer to Annex 3. 
During the field visits, the committee interfaced with several stakeholders as listed in Annex 4.

b) 	The institutions of learning were drawn from lists obtained from the Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Council for Higher Education websites. While majority of the institutions of learning were selected randomly, some were purposively selected on the basis of reported incidents of sexual violence by stakeholders.

c)	Given the sensitivity of the subject matter of the inquiry, the committee used structured questionnaires to capture the views of learners and educators, while at the same time protecting them from the risk of victimisation. The questionnaire was administered to a total of 1,150 respondents, comprising 296 educators - being lecturers and teachers - and 854 learners. In addition, learners were given blank sheets of paper, where they recorded names of perpetuators of sexual violence in their institutions or in other institutions that they were aware of. This approach protected the identity of the learners and insulated them from the risk of victimisation.

Madam Speaker, it was difficult for us, when we were sitting at first. We envisaged a situation where you go to a school and the headmaster, who is an abuser, sees a girl walking out and talking to the committee and then he suspends or expels her when we had left. Therefore, we just got these small papers and gave them to write. We wrote those names of perpetrators, which appeared a number of times. 

Document Review

We did a document review, which consisted of the documents that you see on page 8. We had national laws, international instruments, key Government policies and previous studies on sexual violence. 

Challenges faced by the committee during the inquiry

    1. The committee visited institutions of learning at a time when learners were writing their Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) examinations and end of year or semester examinations. Therefore, we were not able to interface with some of the district, school and university officials who were busy supervising exams. Nevertheless, we are confident that we captured most of the key issues related to the subject matter of the inquiry.

    2. Some respondents were hesitant to provide us with information for fear of being reprimanded by persons in authority, endangering the victims of sexual violence and denting the reputation of the institution. Learners were particularly not convinced that anything would be done after this inquiry to substantially change the way sexual violence is addressed in institutions of learning. 

    3. To allay these fears, we assured the respondents that the information gathered would be treated with utmost confidentiality and employed data collection methods that guaranteed the anonymity of the victims.

    4. Due to time constraints and the magnitude of the assignment, we were unable to conduct one-on-one interviews with victims of sexual violence. However, we endeavoured to capture the voices of the victims through the questionnaire and blank sheets of paper, where learners recorded the names of perpetrators of sexual violence in their institutions and shared their personal experiences. The public hearing further gave room to stakeholders who had been left out to share their experiences.

    5. The committee had planned to undertake study visits to Kenya and South Africa to study and compare best practices and experiences in the management and control of sexual violence in institutions of learning. However, we were unable to secure invitation letters in time to undertake the benchmarking visit. We believe that the findings from the benchmarking visits would have further enriched the recommendations in this report.

Causes and extent of sexual violence in institutions of learning

We said that we found it prevalent everywhere. However, let me just look at the recommendations.

i)	The ministry should formalise the collection of data on sexual violence in institutions of learning. The data should focus on the extent and various forms of sexual violence, the drivers and consequences of the vice and should disaggregate both victims and perpetrators. I think I had already mentioned this.

ii)	Institutions under the Justice, Law and Order Sector like Uganda Police, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Judiciary and Uganda Prisons should regularly publish disaggregated data on the reported cases of sexual violence arising from institutions of learning. This will allow for better analysis of the prevalence of the vice and to design evidence-based interventions.

iii)	Given the scale and magnitude of sexual violence in institutions of learning, we recommend that the Ministry of Education and Sports should annually update Parliament. I had said this.

Forms of sexual violence in institutions of learning

There are some tables that we came up with and which I believe Members can read. In page 15, one of the recommendations is that the 60 individuals who were repeatedly mentioned by the learners, as alleged perpetrators of sexual violence in institutions of learning should be investigated and accordingly prosecuted. For those who are going to do the investigations, we have the names. However, like I said, for legal reasons, we did not publish them here. I have the list.

Perpetuators of sexual violence outside the education setting

We found that several cases of sexual violence occur outside the education setting like in workplaces, homes and communities, perpetrated mostly by boda-boda riders, parents and relatives. For example, two girls from Kibuli Secondary School and St Lawrence Horizon Campus respectively, informed the committee that they feared returning home for holidays because they are sexually abused by their blood fathers. 

Relatedly, several learners, for example in Serere Secondary School and Moroto Municipal Council Primary School, accused boda-boda men of sexually assaulting them on their way to and from school.

In addition, university students informed the committee that they are sexually harassed at places of internship, yet university policies against sexual harassment only have jurisdiction over incidents, which occur within the university setting and most workplaces do not have anti-sexual harassment policies.

Further still, the committee interfaced with a street child who is alleged to have been sodomised by a white man of Italian origin in Kabalagala, Kampala. The case is being investigated by Kabalagala Police Station. 

The committee observes that learners are drawn from society and therefore, sexual violence in homes and communities has a tremendous impact on the learners as well.
 
Indeed, the committee found out that the causes of sexual violence in institutions of learning are rooted in the dysfunctional social, economic and cultural systems of the Ugandan society. It is, therefore, recommended that Parliament should consider conducting separate inquiries into allegations of sexual violence in homes, workplaces and the communities to find a holistic solution to the problem of sexual violence in the country.

Victims of sexual violence 

Both boys and girls are vulnerable but that the boys fear reporting because they fear being ridiculed. 

We then talked about the tricks that are used – maybe, I should mention some. In primary and secondary schools, the tricks used by perpetrators include:

    a) Inserting money and love messages in the learners’ book during marking and writing words like “see me” on the student’s education script or book;
    b) Leaking examinations to learners or giving them good marks that they do not deserve;
    c) Sending learners for short errands and waylaying them along the way or sending them to the teachers’ houses to take books or do household chores like washing clothes and later following them there;
    d) Sponsoring the child’s education in exchange for marriage or sexual favors;
    e) Giving learners spending money or buying them items that their parents cannot afford;
    f) Depositing money at the school canteen for girls to obtain special meals and other items;
    g) Paying motor cyclists to transport the girls to and from school;

At university and tertiary levels, it is common for lecturers to intentionally fail students or withhold their marks under the guise of missing marks to increase the students' vulnerability to yield to their sexual demands. This form of sexual exploitation, like we said, is called “sex for marks” or “sexually transmitted marks”. 

The committee found a disturbing trend in universities where the phenomenon of sex for marks has evolved into organised crime. University lecturers who are involved in the practice protect one another and team up against students who turn down sexual advances by any one of their peers. 

Accordingly, students who resist sexual advances by one lecturer risk being given retakes in various course units taught by different lecturers. 

Therefore, some students yield to these sexual demands for fear of failing and to avoid being reprimanded by their parents for failing to graduate. For example, a student noted that: “Because we are scared, as students we give in to the sexual advances because at the end of the day when you get retakes and take your testimonial to your parents, you are not going to tell them that you got three retakes because this lecturer asked for sex and I refused. Our parents do not always give us space to talk about it. They just tell you that you have failed, why am I even paying your tuition? You are such a bad daughter,” said one of the students of Makerere University.

The committee further found out that some lecturers harass male students who are involved in romantic relationships with the female students whom they are interested in dating by giving them retakes or demanding for cash in exchange for marks. As a result, some students are forced to repeat courses, fail to graduate or graduate late while others end up dropping out of universities.

Sexual harassment in Universities is common during research when students are closest to their supervisors. For example, the committee received information regarding a case of a male lecturer of Mbarara University of Science and Technology who demanded for sex before he could supervise a student. He was found guilty of sexual harassment and dismissed from the university. 

In addition, students are harassed by administrative staff during the registration and clearing processes. For example, the committee learnt of a case of a girl in her senior six vacation, who was sexually harassed when she had gone for registration at Makerere University.

Frequency of occurrence of sexual violence amongst learners
 
It is not a one-time event we found but occurs frequently, which further highlights the culture of impunity that allows the vice to thrive in institutions of learning. In figure 2, 63 per cent of primary school pupils responded that they have experienced sexual violence only once; 25 per cent reported that they are always sexually abused and 13 per cent stated that they have experienced sexual violence between one to three times. 

In secondary schools, 41 per cent reported that they are always sexually abused, 36 per cent responded that they had experienced sexual violence only once and 23 per cent said they had experienced sexual violence between one to three times. 

In universities and tertiary institutions, 37 per cent of the students responded that they had experienced sexual violence only once; 32 per cent responded that they are always sexually abused and 31 per cent responded that they had experienced sexual violence between one to three times.

Among the causes, we looked at poverty and moral degeneration, harmful religious and cultural practices and others. I had also talked about this but wide spread poverty - let me talk about poverty because it came about everywhere. Poverty in the country was repeatedly cited by stakeholders as a factor, which increases vulnerability to sexual violence in institutions of learning.

Due to economic hardships, parents have failed to provide basic necessities for their children, which have forced many girls to engage in transactional sex with lecturers, teachers, boda-boda riders and fellow learners in exchange for among other items scholastic materials, sanitary pads and spending money; scholastic materials like a geometry set goes for only Shs 2000.

A district official noted: “We were with Plan International and we read a report where a girl confessed and said mere knickers made her get pregnant. The parents were not even providing mere knickers. Therefore, the girls opt to look for people to support them. And you can imagine if somebody buys you a shirt and you put on and he sees how smart you are, the man will ask her to put on and see how smart she is when given knickers- I do not want to tell the story that can follow.” That was a statement by a Municipal Education Officer in Kamuli District.

Additionally, the committee notes that while Government provides free education to children at primary and secondary school levels, feeding learners remains a challenge for many parents who end up sending their children to school without adequate provision for meals. For example, in Paiula Primary School, Pader District, the committee witnessed a situation where pupils were studying on empty stomachs from morning until 5pm, an issue that affected their concentration in class and increased their vulnerability to engage in transactional sex.

University Government sponsored students are paid a meagre allowance of Shs 4,50O a day for feeding which increases their vulnerability to sexual exploitation by lecturers and fellow students. 

In addition, some parents do not provide their children with upkeep money when they get to university level under the pretext that they are mature enough to fend for themselves. 

The committee observes that lack of parental support is a key driving factor for the “sugar daddy/mummy phenomenon” which is prevalent in universities and tertiary institutions, whereby students gain financial support from older men and women in return for sexual services. 

For example, a student said “I especially blame the parents. When we join Makerere University, most of our parents think that paying the tuition fees is enough. They do not give the students money for upkeep and get they send their daughters to hostels. They give the girls only Shs 100,000 and expect that money to last a whole semester. My dad usually says, ‘In our days, we used to survive without money. How can you tell me that you cannot survive?' Our parents have that mentality and they forget that time has changed. Right now, girls have so many needs. So, you send this poor girl to the university where there are rich lecturers. A rich lecturer could come to you like the one who offered money to my best friend to plait her hair and because she did not have the money to plait her hair, she accepted the Shs 50,000.”  That is a student from Makerere University. Abusers are taking advantage of that.

In Uganda Marty’s University, Nkozi, and St Paul Mutolere Senior Secondary School, it was revealed that male students are being lured into homosexuality by foreigners in exchange for scholarships and huge sums of money. 

They further revealed that some teachers and lecturers are given hefty sums of money by foreign homosexuality cartels to recruit students into homosexuality. One student expressed her frustration with the level of homosexuality in schools and said, “Lesbianism and homosexuality is common today and it needs to be worked upon. These men use money to trap the young ones.”  That was a student from Mary Hill High School.

The recommendations of the committee in that regard are:

i) 	Government should provide scholastic materials and sanitary towels to girls as part of Universal Primary and Secondary Education programmes with effect from Financial Year 2019/2020 to mitigate the vulnerability of leaners to sexual exploitation.
ii) 	Government should review its feeding policy for schools with the view of contributing to the provision of lunch in schools especially in the rural areas and among the poorest households. In addition Government should consider an increment in the feeding allowance tor Government sponsored university students in financial year 2019/2020.
iii)	Government should scale up poverty alleviation programmes at grassroots level as a mechanism for empowering parents to provide food and other basic needs for their children. This will limit enticement of learners into early sexual behaviour due to lack of basic necessities; and
iv)	In consideration of the Sexual Offences Bill 2015, Parliament should include the offence of homosexuality to protect learners from the practice, which is prevalent in institutions of learning.

Increasing levels of drugs and alcohol abuse

The committee noted that students and staff who consume lots of alcohol and drugs are susceptible to being victims and perpetuators of sexual violence. The packaging of some alcoholic beverages into sachets has made it easy and cheaper for staff and students, especially in secondary schools, to sneak intoxicating drinks into schools. 

The committee learnt that drugs such as Banji, Marijuana and Kuber, which a narcotic drug of Indian origin, which is openly sold in shops and super markets across the country, are consumed by secondary school students. The drugs are punched in juice and water that the students carry to school making it difficult for the school administration to detect. These drugs cause the students to be uncontrollably sexually active and to engage in acts of sexual violence. 

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Education and Sports is in the final stages of formulating the School Hea1th Policy to control the use of alcohol and drugs in schools and therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should fast-track the formulation and the implementation of the School Health Policy to control drug abuse and alcoholism not later than June 2019.

Further, that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should urgently enforce the ban on alcoholic drinks packed in sachets and should work in collaboration with the Ministry of Health to prohibit importation of drugs such as Kuber and Banji into the country. 

The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that all districts urgently enact and enforce by-laws against the sale and consumption of alcoholic drinks packed in sachets.

Exposure to pornography

We learnt that social media has become a lifestyle for many learners, coupled with laxity by some parents who either bring home pornographic movies, or fail to monitor what their children watch, thereby exposing learners to pornographic content, which negatively influences their perceptions about sex. It causes them to engage in premarital sex with older men and to commit sexual assault against fellow learners.

A teacher described the impact of pornography on pupils in her school thus:

“I have interacted with two students whose performance was deteriorating but I was shocked when they confessed that they had been watching pornographic movies. They feel so addicted to the movies, which was affecting their concentration in class... I have witnessed a mother watching pornography with her daughters and when I intervened, their mother simply asked me to mind my business because we are living in a modern world.” 

This is a teacher from Lira Central Primary School in Lira district.

We observe that there is need for sensitisation of parents, teachers and the society about the dangers of pornography. This should be reinforced by sexuality education to mitigate the influence of pornography on learners and filtering online content to limit access to the same.

The committee recommends that:

    (i) The Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work in collaboration with the Pornography Control Committee established under the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014, to sensitise parents, learners and teachers on the dangers of pornography.
    (ii) The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that school rules and regulations contain specific pornography prohibitions, which should be strictly enforced.

We noted a lack of Life Skills and Sexuality Education. 

A teacher from Kamuli Girls School said, “At least, I have observed some of those things - a small hand-out every day; you are assured of a chapati from the canteen at break time with a bottle of soda. To a student at this level, that is something.” 

Lack of life skills was partly attributed to the education system, which is focused on academic achievement and less on imparting life skills. Learners' vulnerability to sexual violence is reinforced by gender stereotypes, which are entrenched in the Ugandan society, which, for example, say that “A woman is not supposed to reject a man” or omuseija tayangwa (a man cannot be rejected); or “When a woman says “No” to sex she means “Yes” even when she actually means “No”.

The committee further notes that lack of sexuality education both at home and at school has exposed children to myths about sex, hence, resulting into early sexual engagements. While the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has developed parenting guidelines, which are primarily aimed at fostering positive parenting, these have not yet been operationalised in the grass-root communities.

We observed that sexuality education, at school and at home, can provide an appropriate framework and context for educating learners about the nature of sexual violence, how to prevent and respond to it and at the same time empower learners with life skills to resist unwanted sexual advances. 

We were informed that the Ministry of Education and Sports has formulated the National Sexuality Education Framework, which, inter alia, seeks to enable learners develop and utilise life skills that are relevant to their sexuality. However, at the time of the inquiry, the po1icy had not yet been rolled out and implemented in schools.

The committee therefore recommends that:
a) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should fast track the roll out and implementation of the National Sexuality Education Framework in institutions of learning not later than December, 2O19.
b) 	Parents should not shy away from discussing sex with their children. They should educate their children about the likely dangers of sexual violence in institutions and equip them with the appropriate life skills to resist unwanted sexual advances.
c) 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work in collaboration with district local leaders to scale up the dissemination of parenting guidelines at grass root levels. This should be augmented with sensitising parents regarding their role of educating learners about sexuality issues.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that charity begins at home. If parents do not begin addressing this from home, it will be more harmful to the child. A girl must leave home knowing that a boy or a man can be dangerous to her and a boy should live knowing that a girl or a woman can be dangerous to him.

When I was in Senior Five, somebody was sent to bring me money school. The headmaster called me and when I went to receive the money, the man said, “You will come to my home in town and collect it.”  I told him, “You take it and grow rich; I am not coming.” Maybe, I would be the mother of his child - I do not know how old that child would be today.

The next morning he quickly brought it out of shame and deposited it at the headmaster’s office. This is because I had been talked to by my father. I do not think it is difficult to talk to our children. 

Societal Acceptance of Sexual Violence

The committee noted that society has accepted sexual violence. So, victims do not report because they fear they will not be believed or they would be blamed for tempting the perpetrators and causing sexual harassment to happen. This was evident in the interactions with a cross section of stakeholders who cited indecent dressing as a cause of sexual violence in institutions of learning. Female learners are particularly blamed for wearing skimpy and sexy dresses with the intention of luring male learners, teachers and lecturers into sexual relationships.

The committee observed that indecent dressing as a justification for sexual violence is based on the presumption that men cannot control their sexual urges whenever they see a female who is dressed in a manner that arouses their sexual feelings. 

While the committee does not condone indecent dressing, it deviates from this reasoning since it does not explain why adult men sexually abuse babies neither does it guarantee that decently dressed female learners cannot be sexually harassed. For example, the committee found out that sexual harassment is existent in Muslim faith-based institutions of learning where a strict Islamic dress code is enforced. In any event, lecturers and teachers have the power and authority over learners and can resist advances by learners who may attempt to seduce them.

The committee further observes that indecent dressing as a justification for sexual violence not only shifts the blame from the perpetrator to the victim but also absolves the perpetrator, which discourages learners from reporting and engenders a culture of impunity. 

There is student from Makerere University who said, “Very many people experience sexual harassment but they fear being pinned and judged. When somebody says, ‘I have been sexually harassed’, the first thing people will ask is; ‘How were you dressed?’ Does that have to do with being sexually harassed? Even some people who are decently dressed are harassed sexually.”

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should integrate compulsory studies on gender and human rights in education curricula at all educational levels. This will go a long way in transforming societal attitudes about women and demystifying gender stereotypes that perpetuate sexual violence in institutions of learning. 

Moral degeneration 

The committee recommended that in order to restore the moral fibre of the Ugandan society;

a) 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as the Ministry of Education and Sports should utilise the existing community, cultural and religious structures to scale up sensitisation of parents about the primacy of building strong, caring and functional families as a foundation for the moral upbringing of their children.
 b) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should undertake curriculum reforms to embed moral education in the training of learners and educators at all levels of the education spectrum.
 c) 	The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that all districts enact and enforce by-laws that restrict children from accessing unsuitable environments such as bars and night clubs.

Harmful social, cultural and religious norms

The committee recommended that;

(i)	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Sports should intensify sensitisation to communities to diffuse cultural, social and religious practices that promote sexual violence against the girl child. Efforts should be focused on dialoguing with the cultural, religious and community leaders with the view of eliciting their support to detach such practices from their cultural and religious values.
 
(ii) 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should regularly publish a list of harmful social, cultural and religious practices that are outlawed so that the public is made aware of the need to desist from the same.

 iii) 	In consideration of the Sexual offences Bill, 2015, Parliament should explicitly prohibit early and forced marriage of victims to perpetrators of sexual violence to stem the practice, which is prevalent in the Ugandan society.

Culture of silence 

We said that given the fear of victims to report sexual violence through formal channels, we strongly recommend that the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that institutions of learning instal facilities for anonymous reporting like hotlines, suggestion boxes and online reporting systems such as SAFE PAL.

Misuse of power and authority

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports, universities and tertiary institutions should institute effective measures for screening teachers and lecturers prior to their recruitment in the teaching service. 

This includes conducting background checks to ensure that teachers or lecturers who have a criminal record or are otherwise unsuitable to teach are not recruited.

Lack of professionalism 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that teachers, both in training and in service, are regularly oriented about behavioural expectations, in line with the Teachers' Professional Code of Conduct and other relevant laws.

Teachers and learners should be availed with copies of the relevant laws and regulations and be trained so that they understand the contents. Appreciation of the contents of the laws and policies on sexual violence by school administrators and staff should form part of the Ministry of Education and Sports mentoring and assessment framework for schools.
  
ii)	In the interest of prudence and fostering a campus environment free of sexual harassment, the committee recommends that all university polices should prohibit sexual and/or romantic relationships between academic staff and students who are under their direct supervision or evaluation.

iii) 	The National Council for Higher Education should ensure that academic staff in higher education institutions undergo pedagogical training prior to teaching practice to improve their professional competences and ethical values.
 
Laxity in law and policy enforcement 

i)	The Ministry of Education and Sports should take stern action against perpetrators of sexual violence and should not merely transfer them to other institutions.

	Teachers who are found culpable for sexual misconduct should have their teaching licences revoked and their names struck off the register of teachers. They should also be barred from practising elsewhere as educators.

 ii)  	The Ministry of Education and Sports should formulate transfer guidelines to streamline the transfer of teachers and ensure transparency in the process. In addition, transfers, as a punishment for perpetrators, should be eliminated.

Madam Speaker, in Rukungiri, we found somebody who had been sentenced to six years for defiling and impregnanting a girl and maybe, making her sick. He served the sentence and then, he came back and he was transferred to another school. It was very annoying.

Weaknesses in examination management system 

The committee recommends that;

i) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that the academic policy changes proposed in the report on Investigation on Sexual Harassment at Makerere University are replicated in all universities and tertiary institutions with necessary modifications to mitigate the occurrence of the vice of “sex for marks.”

ii) 	The National Council for Higher Education should intensify monitoring and supervision of universities and tertiary institutions to ensure that practices, such as “sex for marks”, are checked. 

As part of its routine and monitoring function, the National Council for Higher Education should interest itself in cases of students who repeatedly fail examinations to establish the root cause of the problem and should ensure that staff that are found culpable tor trading sex for marks are disciplined accordingly.

iii) 	The National Council for Higher Education should create awareness regarding its mandate to receive and investigate complaints of sexual harassment and establish a mechanism to facilitate students and the public to report cases to it.

Madam Speaker, we found a disturbing trend in Kyambogo University. They try to give different lecturers opportunities to mark the papers so that no one lecturer makes the girls to suffer. Unfortunately, the person at the end of the process, instead of giving you 50 marks, he can give you 49 and for that one mark you have to sleep with him.
 
Inadequate supervision and monitoring The committee recommends that the monitoring and inspection function at the district level should be strengthened through increasing budgetary provisions for recruitment, training and facilitation of inspectors to intensify inspection in the financial year 2019/2020.

Inadequate and safe physical infrastructure

The committee recommends that; 

a) 	Government should scale up the implementation of the policy of establishing a secondary school in every sub county and a primary school in every parish to reduce the distance the learners travel to school. We found that many girls are captured on their way to school. Some are kidnapped and others abused.

b) 	The Government should prioritise the construction of boarding facilities for girls in Seed Secondary Schools to cater for learners from distant homes. This will mitigate the risk of sexual violence as a result of travelling long distances to school.

	In addition, Government should prioritise the establishment of staff quarters in boarding schools for girls to facilitate monitoring and supervision of learners in order to safeguard them from the risk of sexual abuse.

c) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that the design of school infrastructure and the environmental set-up of schools takes into consideration the physical safety and security of learners, especially the girl-child.

	For example, by maximising the number of windows and doors in classrooms, offices and other spaces, provision of separate and adequate sanitation facilities for boys and girls, improving lighting in and around school grounds and use of a perimeter wall fencing in all schools. This should be augmented by scaling up inspection and monitoring of schools to ensure that schools, which do not meet the minimum standards for the safety and security of learners are de-licensed.

d) 	Public universities and tertiary institutions should consider Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) with private investors to develop and run hostels in their institutions. In addition, the universities and tertiary institutions should enter into memoranda of understanding with proprietors of private hostels with the view to enforcing security measures for protecting students from sexual violence.

Adverse effects of sexual violence on the population
There were direct physical health consequences but for the lack of time, I will just go to the recommendations.

(i) 	The Education Act, 2008 should be amended to give effect to the right of pregnant girls to be retained and reintegrated in education institutions after giving birth. The ministry should fast track the formulation and implementation of policy guidelines for their retention.

(ii) 	Government should make adequate budgetary provisions to the Ministry of Education and Sports in a phased manner for the establishment of appropriate facilities in schools where children of teenage mothers can be accommodated as their mothers are studying.

We also looked at psychological health consequences, educational effects, lower academic achievement and loss of confidence in the education system, as well as societal effects.

Review of Laws against Sexual Violence in Uganda

We noticed that the laws are available but they are scattered. That is why there is a need to have them put together. However, even those that are there are not properly utilised.

The committee recommends fast tracking the passing of the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015 subject to the amendments proposed in this report.

Inadequate legal provisions in the education sector 

The committee recommends that Government should consider amending the Education Act to provide for the following:

i) 	Classify sexual violence as a serious form of professional misconduct and prescribe clear sanctions for perpetrators.

ii) 	Explicitly prohibit sexual relations between learners and Teachers whether consensual or not to reinforce existing provisions in the Teachers Professional Code of Conduct.

iii) 	Impose a legal duty of care on teachers and schools to protect learners against sexual violence and respond effectively to reports of abuse.

iv) 	Mandatory reporting of sexual violence to Police and Ministry of Education and Sports by teachers and schools.

The committee recommends that in consideration of the Sexual Offences Bill, Parliament should:

i) 	Completely remove the requirement for corroboration of evidence in sexual offences in compliance with court decisions on the same. This will improve the success rate of sexual violence cases and encourage victims to report.

ii) 	Include a provision that prohibits the publication of the true names, location and other identifying information of victims of sexual offences in the media and in court records to protect victims from re-victimisation.

Lack of a witness protection law

The committee recommends that Government should urgently table the witness protection Bill to secure the rights and dignity of witnesses and to protect them from stigmatisation.

Inadequate compensation for victims 

The committee recommends that;

i) 	In consideration of the Sexual Offences Bill, 20l5, Parliament should incorporate a provision for mandatory compensation of victims of sexual violence, specifically, for the education sector. Parliament should empower courts to attach the accrued pension or social security benefits of perpetrators to support victims of sexual abuse. This will restore the hope of victims, enhance reporting and deter prospective abusers from engaging in the vice.

ii) 	Government should also consider establishing a special fund for compensation of victims of sexual violence.

Inconsistencies in the Legal Framework

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that Section 11 of the Customary Marriage Registration Act, Cap 248 and any other laws, which are inconsistent with the Constitution, be deleted from Uganda’s statute books to pave way for the smooth enforcement of the law.

Absence of Legal Provisions on Support Services

The committee recommends that, in consideration of the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015, Parliament should include “a treatment clause” that mandates Government to provide holistic support to victims of sexual violence, including medical, legal and psychosocial services. A corresponding obligation should be imposed on institutions of learning through amendments to the Education Act, 2008 and the University and Tertiary Institutions Act.

You can read the policies available. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should adopt a uniform definition of sexual violence, which should encompass all forms of the vice and ensure that schools have a clear understanding of the same. We found two different definitions and you can read them.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, formulate a specific and comprehensive policy for the prevention and management of sexual violence and harassment in schools. The policy should standardise the procedures for reporting, investigating and resolving sexual violence and should be adopted and implemented by all schools. 

Poor policy implementation 

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should utilise the administrative and community structures at district level to disseminate laws and policies on sexual violence in schools. This should be augmented by training of schools on the same and regular monitoring and supervision to ensure that policies are implemented.

On measures to address sexual violence, we noted legal, policy measures and institutional measures. 

We also looked at low levels of reporting and we had already stated the stigmatisation that people receive when they report. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that institutions of learning establish whistle blower protection policies as well as mechanisms for reward and recognition of victims who report cases of sexual violence. This will not only encourage reporting but will go a long way in diffusing stigmatisation of victims. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should regularly publish details of the disciplinary actions taken against teachers and lecturers who are found guilty of sexual violence. This will restore public confidence in the education system. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Education and Sports should take stern action against the perpetrators of sexual violence in institutions of learning and not merely transfer them, as I had also said. 

The ministry should maintain a data base on teacher sexual offenders and should routinely publish names of teachers who are convicted by court, dismissed from service or removed from the teacher’s register on the grounds of sexual misconduct to ensure that they do not re-enter the teaching profession after serving their sentences. 

On measures for creating legal awareness, we recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should prioritise the implementation of programmes aimed at creating awareness on sexual violence in institutions of learning in its budget for the financial year 2019/2020.

On institutional measures in schools, first of all, I would like to show you what happens in those schools. FAWE Uganda informed us; 

“Through one of our girl rights members, a teacher who had defiled 10 primary school girls was reported to police in Kamuli. This case was followed up and the culprit was brought to court. In Buyende, two girl rights club members reported to police a case of a 14 year-old girl who was being married off and the police intervened in time to stop this marriage and the culprit was arrested.” 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should establish child protection committees in all schools, which should be mandated with sensitising learners. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Waluswaka is holding another meeting. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is in session. 

MS RWAKOOJO: The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should establish child protection committees in all schools, which should be mandated with sensitising learners on sexual violence. To be effective, the committees should have a representation on all stakeholders in the school, namely students, teachers, school management and parents.

Measures in universities and Tertiary Institutions 

The committee recommended that universities and tertiary institutions should;

i) 	Adopt widespread and consistent approaches of creating awareness on sexual harassment within and outside the university community and should allocate a specific budget for the same every financial year. The availability of awareness programmes should form part of the National Council of Higher Education quality assurance framework for licensing, routine monitoring and audit of universities and tertiary institutions.

ii) 	Recognise and streamline the role of student bodies in creating awareness and policies against sexual harassment. The students should be adequately trained and facilitated to effectively support management in this regard. 

Procedure for receiving, investigating and resolving complaints 

I had talked about the solidarity - about how the lecturers tell each other even when they have anti-sexual harassment policies. The students told us that the lecturers now take them out of the university because if anything happens outside the university, the sexual harassment policy does not affect them. 

We realised that not all universities have polices. Therefore, we recommended that;

i) 	Universities and tertiary institutions should take stern disciplinary action against perpetrators of sexual harassment to send a strong signal to potential abusers that sexual harassment is not tolerated. 

In particular, Makerere University should immediately resuscitate disciplinary proceedings against staff that have allegedly been involved in sexually harassing students and should update Parliament of the same within one month. 

ii) 	The disciplinary actions taken by universities and tertiary institutions against perpetrators of sexual harassment should be publicised within the university community and victims be given copies of the disciplinary decisions for transparency and accountability. 

iii)	University and tertiary institutions should install facilities for anonymous reporting to encourage reporting and these are like hotlines, suggestion boxes and online reporting applications. 

We also looked at administrative procedure in schools and colleges. 

Weak institutional structures

The committee recommended that;

The Ministry of Education and Sports should fast track the guidelines for streamlining the position of senior woman and senior man teacher in the structure. They should also increase the number. 

We also found that there was an allowance which the senior man and woman teacher were getting which was no longer being paid. Therefore, they need to be properly facilitated. I am not reading this because it will be a repetition. 

Reluctance of schools to report

We found that many schools try and protect their reputations because they want students to come and enrol there. They do not want to hear anything about sexual violence. When you report, they try to remain silent about it. 

For example, the committee reviewed proceedings of a disciplinary meeting of the School Management Committee of Kanyantura Primary School, Mbarara District, in which a teacher was accused of defiling a pupil. The School Management Committee resolved to suspend the teacher without giving him a proper hearing since the records did not show that he appeared before the committee.
  
In addition, the School Management Committee advised the parent to report the case to the police, yet it is the responsibility of that committee to report and follow up such cases with the police. This goes to demonstrate that some of those School Management Committees are not abreast with their role in handling sexual violence cases. 

Therefore, we recommend that cases of sexual violence against the staff of a school should be exclusively handled at district level for primary schools and; at ministry level for secondary schools and colleges. This will mitigate the possibility of conflict of interest which is apparent in situations where the perpetrator is a high ranking official. 

The procedure for referral of cases to the district and Ministry of Education and Sports should be streamlined and publicised in all schools and colleges. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure child protection committees are established and operationalised in all schools to track cases and ensure they are reported, investigated and resolved. 

In addition, the Ministry of Education and Sports should harness parent-teacher associations to report and follow up on incidents of sexual violence in schools. 

Uganda Police Force should strengthen collaboration with institutions of learning in order to encourage learners to report directly to the police. For example, South Africa implemented a programme known as “Adopt-a-Cop” which paired each police officer with a school in his or her jurisdiction to increase visibility and accessibility of police to the learners. A similar process can be adopted here.

We recommend further that Parliament should appropriate a specific budget for the full operationalisation of the Police Family and Child Protection Units across the country in financial year 2019/2020 and these funds should be applied to training personnel to effectively operate the units and provision of exclusively designated rooms for the privacy of victims as they interface with police.

We noticed mismanagement of cases. For example, we received information about a case in Kamengo Primary School, Kabarole District, where a 14 year-old girl in Primary Seven was defiled nine times by a senior male teacher at the school. The case was reported to police but the suspect is still at large. In another case, a Senior Two girl of Namasagali College was raped by a primary school teacher who was teaching at a private school in Soroti. He was apprehended by police but he was not arraigned in court. It is alleged that he paid some money to the police and he was released on police bond. He absconded and the police could not trace him since they had not retained a copy of his identity card.

The committee observes that the general indifference by police in apprehending of perpetrators of sexual violence in schools and the unconditional release of suspects on police bond discourages victims from pursuing justice against perpetrators and engenders a culture of impunity that is evident in most institutions of learning.      

The committee recommends that:

i) 	The Uganda Police Force should establish functional oversight mechanisms to monitor the progress of cases at police stations to ensure that they are properly handled. Officers who are found culpable for mishandling cases should be disciplined accordingly. 
ii) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should establish mechanisms of monitoring and tracking the progression of sexual violence cases at police, to ensure that they are properly handled and concluded. 

iii)	The committee in charge of education at local Government level should be accorded the responsibility of superintending over sexual violence cases involving learners. This includes monitoring and follow-up of investigation and prosecutions with law enforcement agencies in their locality. 

iv)	The Justice, Law and Order Sector should develop bail and bond guidelines, to streamline bail and bond decision making in the police and the judiciary, respectively.

Challenges in the forensic examination of victims

We noted that Police Form 3 (PF3) is not available in most police stations and police posts, especially in rural areas. Therefore, victims are required to pay for the form or to photocopy it, which presents a significant hurdle for the victims because photocopying services are not accessible in remote areas. 

Also, even when the victims access the medical forms, they do not go to the health centres but use the forms as a bargaining document. One official stated: “They threaten the perpetrator and say, ‘See, I am from police, if you do not come to talk to me, I am going back to police.’” To deal with this problem, the police have adopted the practice of escorting the parent and the victim to health centres for observation.

We observed that previously, victims of sexual violence, especially in rural areas found difficulty in accessing forensic examination due to the scarcity of medical doctors and police surgeons who were the only medical practitioners mandated by law to fill PF3. However, PF3 was amended to permit clinical officers, who were formerly medical assistants and mid-wives to conduct forensic examinations. 

The new police form has also been designed specifically for medical examination of victims of sexual and gender-based violence. While the revision is laudable, stakeholders like in Bundibugyo and Ntoroko indicated that victims still find difficulty in accessing clinical officers who are mainly based at Health Centre IIIs yet most health facilities in rural areas are still at the level of Health Centre II. 

In addition, there is limited awareness about the amendments in PF3 and victims still seek for medical doctors to examine them. We noted that the medical workers in Government health facilities are reluctant to examine victims of sexual violence because they consider the process of attending court as laborious and costly since they are not adequately facilitated with transport to attend court. Medical workers resent attending court because they are made to wait for long hours and lose business as a result. Court schedules are unpredictable, with cases often postponed at short notice and long hours of waiting by witnesses who are to give short testimonies. 

To overcome this challenge, the committee noted that some courts such as Mbale High Court have adopted a practice of giving priority to medical experts to testify before any other witness so that their testimonies can be taken without delay. 

Additionally, medical workers also feel overburdened by the requirement to fi1l two forms, that is, the medical history and examination form, which is ordinarily filled by doctors and PF3. They also lack equipment for testing semen and basic sundries such as gloves for the examination of victims of sexual violence, which further discourages medical practitioners from examining the victims. We also have lack of trained and skilled health personnel to handle forensic evidence. This often results into poor quality forensic examinations, which render the evidence insufficient to sustain a conviction against a perpetrator. 

The committee was informed that police, judicial officers and health workers have been trained under the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region Regional Training Facility to enhance their capacity to conduct forensic examinations and prosecution of cases. We were further informed that health providers in Government health facilities, charge victims of sexual violence a “doctors” fee for their services yet the service is supposed to be free.

We noted that health providers are supposed to be paid a sum of Shs 25,000 for medical examination under a Justice, Law and Order Sector programme but this payment is often delayed due to bureaucracies. The victims are still being charged a fee for such examination sometimes under the pretext that the money is going to be used in court for giving evidence. 

We recommended that:

    i) Uganda Police Force should prioritise funds for the procurement of printing and photocopying equipment for reproduction of PF3 in the financial year 2019/20. In addition, police should ensure that the forms are accessible online, at police stations and at health facilities across the country. 
    ii) Government should enforce existing policies to eliminate all costs associated with reporting cases of sexual violence. This includes costs of medical examination and reproduction of PF3. 
    iii) The Ministry of Health should work in collaboration with institutions such as the Justice, Law and Order Sector to streamline case management procedures for clarity and better coordination. This includes designing one comprehensive medical examination form to ease the work of health practitioners and to minimise the need for the victims to undergo medical examination twice. 
    iv) The Ministry of Health should prioritise retooling of health facilities across the country with post-rape kits, forensic exanimation equipment and training of medical personnel in forensic examinations within its budget for financial year 2019/20.

On low prosecution rates, the District Police Officer in Bunyangabu noted that;

“When a case is reported to police, especially defilement, as police is trying to handle the case, you find people going down and carrying out negotiations in villages. Should you by bad luck fail to get the suspect in time, you only realise the complainant or relatives of the victim telling you that the suspect is not there. They keep telling you that the suspect is not there only to realise that these people have settled their issues down there and you are left there with the file. By the time you try to follow up, it is too late.” 

The committee further established that some Resident State Attorneys are complicit in handling cases of sexual violence, which has partly contributed to the low case attrition rates. For example, the committee learnt of a case of defilement of a pupil of Lwanda Primary School in Jinja District by a teacher. The case file was forwarded to the Resident State Attorney of Jinja for legal advice. However, the file was returned to police with instructions that “close and put away, because the complainant together with the victim appeared before the Resident State Attorney and withdrew the case against the suspect.”

In another case, a pupil of Kibale Primary School, Rukungiri District, was defiled and impregnated by a teacher. The matter was reported to police and the accused arrested. However, the Resident State Attorney refused to sanction the file on grounds that he had received information from the wife of the accused that the accused had previously undergone a vasectomy and was therefore, incapable of fathering a child. The Resident State Attorney advised the police to wait for the child to give birth so that a DNA test can be conducted to establish the paternity of the child. In this case, I wondered who the Resident State Attorney was working for.

The above cases demonstrate the abuse of prosecutorial discretion, which is bestowed upon the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) by the Constitution. While the committee was informed that the office of the DPP follows established guidelines in deciding whether or not to prosecute, the situation on the ground tells of a story of abuse of prosecutorial powers by Resident State Attorneys.

The committee observes that there is need for accountability either by disciplinary action or criminal prosecution of prosecutors who misuse their power and discretion to discontinue investigations or prosecution without sufficient legal bases. 

We recommend, therefore, that: 

    1. The office of the DPP should establish functional oversight mechanisms to monitor the exercise of prosecutorial powers by its officers, especially in regional offices. Officers who are found culpable for mishandling cases should be accordingly disciplined.
    2.  The Constitution should be amended so that the DPP may not discontinue criminal prosecution in capital offences, such as defilement, except with the permission of court. 
    3. Parents of victims of sexual violence who conceal evidence and collude with perpetrators to defeat the ends of justice are accomplices in crime. Police should, therefore, arrest and prosecute them to deter others from engaging in the practice. 

Protracted Investigations and Court Trials

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the establishment of specialised Sexual Gender-Based Violence (SGBV) courts across the country to facilitate the expeditious disposal of sexual violence cases. 

In consideration of the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015, Parliament should prescribe a timeframe within which courts should dispose of cases of sexual violence, as is the case in the Children’s Act which prescribes a timeframe for disposal of cases involving juvenile offenders.

Unfriendly Court Environments

The committee recommends that Government should allocate adequate resources to the Judiciary in the financial year 2019/20 to improve its ICT infrastructure and scale up the installation of audio-visual equipment in all courts to make the justice system more victim-friendly.

Support Services Accorded to Victims of Sexual Violence

National Policy Imperatives

We looked at the national policy imperatives, support services accorded to victims like medical and legal services, Post Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) to prevent HIV and Emergency Contraceptives (EC) to prevent unwanted pregnancies once someone has been raped. We found that there was limited knowledge on medical services and so we recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports works in collaboration with the Ministry of Health to distribute sexual assault information kits in institutions of learning to increase awareness about post-sexual assault procedures and services. 

Reporting as a Precondition for Accessing Services

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should hold a joint meeting with the JLOS to work out modalities of ensuring that victims of sexual violence access medical care as a matter of priority.

Absence of Medical Services in Health Facilities

We recommended that:

    a) The Ministry of Health should prioritise the recruitment of health workers especially in upcountry health facilities to treat sexual violence victims in the budget for the financial year 2019/20.
    b) The Ministry of Education and Sports should work in collaboration with the Ministry of Health to develop professionally accredited training programmes for health personnel on the treatment of victims of rape/sexual assault; medico-legal documentation, courtroom appearance and the psychological consequences of rape/sexual assault.

Lack of Follow up Mechanisms

We recommend that the Ministry of Education and Sports should maintain a database of learners who drop out of school as a result of sexual violence, and should design mechanisms for following up of the learners to ensure that they have access to support services.

The need for Integrated Service Provision
The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the establishment of the recovery centres for victims of sexual violence across the country in a phased manner effective 2020/21.

Inadequate Psychosocial Services

The committee recommends that: 

    i) The Ministry of Health should allocate specific funds for training of healthcare practitioners to provide comprehensive healthcare services for victims of sexual violence, including counselling and other therapeutic services.
    ii) The Ministry of Education and Sports should streamline the provision of psychosocial services in institutions of learning and should prioritise resources for capacity building of senior women teachers/senior men teachers, school matrons and counsellors to effectively provide the same to victims of sexual violence.

Inadequate Legal Support

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should work in collaboration with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the police and other justice dispensing agencies to establish a coherent referral system to ensure that learners who are sexually abused receive comprehensive support services.

The Government should prioritise funding for strengthening the capacity of child protection institutions at the district and lower local government levels to engender a comprehensive response to sexual violence in institutions of learning.

Inadequate Temporary Shelters

We recommend that Government should fulfill its commitment under the existing policies to provide temporary shelters to victims of sexual violence in a phased manner effective financial year 2020/21.

If you note, our Annex 1 is a list of stakeholders who we interfaced with and who gave us written memoranda. 

Annex 2 is the list of witnesses; Annex 3 is the list of districts and institutions we visited; Annex 4 is list of stakeholders in institutions of learning and the districts; Annex 5 shows brief details of alleged perpetrators of sexual violence repeatedly mentioned by learners in the institutions of learning visited by the committee. You can see in Busitema, there was one faculty dean and four lecturers; in Busitema College Primary School, there were four teachers; in Serere there were seven teachers; Moroto one teacher, Mbarara in Maryhill, three teachers; Mbarara University, two lecturers; Kisoro in Mutolere Secondary School, two teachers; Ntoroko, two teachers in the primary school, Kanara Seed Secondary School, one school bursar and two teachers; Bundibugyo in Bukwanga Secondary School, two teachers; Kibaale in Kibogo Primary School, four teachers; Nateete Muslim Primary School, six teachers; Kibuli, one teacher; Kyambogo, one lecturer and one administrative staff in charge of entering marks in the system; Makerere University, seven lecturers; St. Lawrence University, three teachers; Ediofe Girls, three teachers; IUIU, one faculty dean and two lecturers. 

Madam Speaker, my conclusion would be a repetition of what I have been saying. We discovered that sexual violence is real and it exists. Learners are not protected because of ignorance.

One other thing I would like to stress is how the evidence gets destroyed between the time a girl gets defiled and the time the evidence gets to the state attorney. If you force the girl to go and bathe, you destroy that evidence or if it is not captured between then and maybe the signing of the police form - because you cannot get it, you have to photocopy, you have to pay the doctor; if you destroy the evidence before it gets to the state attorney – between the time the girl is defiled and when it gets to the state attorney, you have already bungled up the case. However, if it is properly collected and given to the state attorney, most of those cases are won.

I would like to commend the Judiciary, which during October to December 2018 handled 700 cases of sexual violence to completion. They decided to set aside time to do that. They said 60 per cent of their criminal cases were on rape and defilement (sexual violence). You can see the magnitude! 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much hon. Rwakoojo and your select committee for the work, the movements around the country and the long hours. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, the report has been read. I do not know whether you are ready to debate it or not.

6.27
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join you in appreciating the chairperson of the select committee for the good work they have done. I see value for money. 

Some of the issues that she has presented are just a sample of what is happening in the institutions and the districts. 

It is, therefore, important to allow members to use this report to consult with other stakeholders in their districts or in their constituencies so that when we are coming here to debate this report, we have some of the information that is not captured by the committee so that we enrich whatever resolution that we will come up with as a Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to extract the resolutions so that after the debate, we shall deal with them separately but debate on this report is deferred. Members are free to study the report and then we shall give a date for the actual debate. 

Let us move on to the next item. We received the report but we had not debated it. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL TO ISSUE PROMISSORY NOTES NOT EXCEEDING US $379.71 MILLION TO FINASI/ROKO CONSTRUCTION SPV LIMITED FOR THE FINANCING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPECIALISED HOSPITAL OF UGANDA AT LUBOWA WAKISO

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are free to debate. 

6.30
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I looked at this report, I compared it to a situation where you are a husband and you have a wife but at home, you do not have food. As a man, you can afford to go and buy booze for women around town in order to please them and make them know that you are rich.

I stand here to bash the report. I am not supporting Government to give a promissory note, reason being that our own Uganda Heart Institute at Mulago needs Shs 200 billion, which we have not given. Madam Speaker, the information I have is that two heart surgeons have left for South Africa because they are stuck; they do not have anything to do at the hospital.

The regional referral hospitals need Shs 80 billion to buy equipment like CT scans, MRI, among others. Imagine a situation where someone from Kamuli is referred to Mulago to access these services and others move as far as Mubende to access them. 

Madam Speaker, every constituency is supposed to have a health centre IV but there are 90 constituencies – including hon. Mbwatekamwa’s constituency, Kasambya County – which do not have health centres IV.

I have a total population of 240,000 people and yet each health centre IV needs Shs 2 billion to be fully equipped. Therefore, I do not find it viable to think about someone we imagine is an investor, who has no money and we call that person an “investor” and we leave out our own – the loan would have been good if we were going to inject it in our own health facilities - (Interjections) – I am well informed about what I am speaking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow Members to –

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Honourable members, we should not support the report. Actually, the report is talking about an engineer who should be blacklisted. What about the Attorney-General who even signed these agreements without our approval? Why are we trying to look for mudfish and leave out the Nile Perch?

Madam Speaker, we are doing badly as far as the state of our health sector is concerned. Let us appeal to the Government to inject this money –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two reports. You either support the majority or the minority report.

6.34
MR BILDAD ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read both reports presented by the committee and I would like to thank the committee members.

Coming from an area called Karamoja, specifically in a district called Kotido, where people have not seen a hospital ever since they became a district – they have a very demoralised work force. They even do not have funding from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to run operations. As we speak now, they do not have water, adequate transport and they do not have enough personnel. 

Madam Speaker, I support that we need a specialised hospital but the reality is that how important is this now? What is the urgency for it? What are we pushing for when people in Kotido and somewhere in this country do not have even a district hospital? 

MS MORIKU: Madam Speaker, we have different levels of hospitals; hospitals are graded according to levels. There is a district general hospital, we have the community hospital, regional referral hospitals, national hospital and we have world-class international hospital. 

What we are tabling here is the world-class international hospital. Therefore, for that matter - (Interjections) – is my colleague honourable member in order to generalise hospitals as if hospitals are at the same level?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am in shock. Are you telling me that this country is proposing to have a world class hospital? Are you going to attract all the Arabs and Chinese to come here when there is no medicine in Luzinga?

MR ADOME: Madam Speaker, you have put it very well. I think the minister just woke up from sleep but we are sorry for her.

The reality is that we cannot talk about a “world class” hospital in a situation where the nearest hospital for my people is about 120 kilometres in this country, yet we are talking of a “world class” hospital. I think that is very unfair to the people of Karamoja. Unless we are saying these people are extremely different from this country; you can build your “world class” hospital.

Therefore, I do not support the fact that we need a specialised hospital. I want us to first strengthen the health system that is in place. Let us have health centre IIIs that are functional; health centre IVs that are very strong and hospitals in all districts. Thank you.

6.39
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the minority report. (Applause) This debate should not attract emotions but must be focused on reality. For us to go ahead and borrow about ten per cent of our national budget to build a world class hospital, which does not take into reality the policy of trying to address our health challenges from prevention, is a dodgy arrangement.

I have learnt that this is a short term financing framework which has no concessional consideration. It will, therefore, continue to indebt us as a nation, simply because we are dealing with UK’s Export Finance/Export Credit Agency, the equivalent of EXIM Bank of India or China which have caused us high levels of debt.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Point of information.

MR ACIDRI: I will not allow that information because I am very conversant with this topic. Honourable minister, can you sit down? I will not allow that information. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as we debate this important subject of having a specialised hospital at Lubowa, it is important that we debate from a point of knowledge. Government is not borrowing money to invest in this hospital. That is the first point –(Interjections)– Wait! What Government is doing is that the investor who is going to develop this hospital is investing in money to construct this hospital for two years. It is to finance, design, operate and then transfer to Government. (Applause)

During the time of construction –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Members, please listen.

MR BAHATI: During the time of construction for the two years, Government is not injecting in even a single coin. Therefore, what will happen is during the construction period at every milestone of completion the Government of Uganda will issue a Promissory Note, not to be cashed there and then but to be spread over six years.

Therefore, is it in order for the Member to tell the House that Government is borrowing money from the UK and everywhere when actually the investor herself is putting in money; operating it; giving us expertise and then transferring this facility to the Government after six years? 

This is an important hospital that we need here. It is a world-class hospital that we do not have here in Uganda and even in the region. Is it in order for the Member to misinform the House that we are borrowing money when actually we are not borrowing any single coin but instead using somebody’s money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you explain the effect of a Promissory Note? (Applause)

MR NZOGHU: I have sought for indulgence from the Speaker -

MR BAHATI: The Speaker has given me something to do. Can I –

MR NZOGHU: Additionally, I have sought the indulgence of the Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Have you allowed him?

THE SPEAKER: Yes; since he is on fire. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would also be prudent for the finance minister to define a Promissory Note to the members. He should also define what a guarantee means so that as the members debate, they are aware of what a “Promissory Note” and the “guarantee” are. 

The honourable minister should also explain to this House - as I speak right now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been notified by FINASI/ROKO about the default which fell due in January 2019. Let the honourable minister explain all that. We have the evidence here and we shall lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Please explain the impact of a Promissory Note.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am going to try to explain this matter in simple terms so that all of us in this House can understand the kind of decision we are requesting from this House, as articulated by the committee chairperson.

The Government of Uganda has entered into an agreement with FINASI/ROKO Construction – (Interjections)– I am coming to it, please –

THE SPEAKER: Order! We have asked him a question; let him answer.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, whereas the Fountain of Honour appointed people to their various dockets every Ugandan, especially the senior citizens of this country, know that it is the docket of the Attorney-General to interpret the laws and also tell us some of these terms that are in the agreements.

Is the minister, therefore, in order to come and begin fumbling to explain a Promissory Note with terms like “I my trying”, when the Government has the Attorney-General? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Members, he is the mover of the motion; that is why we asked him. However, if he falls short of the explanation, we shall look elsewhere. Minister, explain. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the investor is going to invest $249 million for construction, equipping this hospital and operating it. We have agreed that the construction will take two years. During this construction period, it has a number of stages and milestones. When the investor completes a certain milestone and this work is certified by our own engineer upon issuance of a Certificate of Completion, the Government of Uganda will issue a Promissory Note. 

This Promissory Note – if you want – could be taken in simple terms as a post-dated cheque; a promise that we will pay you at a certain date. This Promissory Note will not be cashed in two years. It is going to be cashed in two years; it is going to be spread over six years’ cash at a later time. The whole reason why-(Interjection)- just a second.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to explain. Minister you explain.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, when hon. Nzoghu was presenting a minority report, we listened in silence. It is important that we listen to each other so that we take a decision from the point of information and knowledge –(Interjection)- yes.

Therefore, the construction takes two years and the investor operates the hospital in six years and over the period of six years, these Promissory Notes; the promise to pay will be spread over six years. Therefore, in the first two years of construction, Government is not investing money but because we have been using a lot of money both private and Government to send our people abroad to be treated, we are using the same amount of resources that we have in the budget to pay back the investor.

This project, hospital and asset will be handed over to us after six years of operation. Therefore, it is as simple as that. This is our project and not an investor’s project. It is only that we do not have the resources to invest in two years; they are investing on our behalf, operate it and after that hand it over to us over the six years.

The reason we are giving Promissory Notes is that we do not want to have a promise and not to be cashed there and then so that in case somebody does not construct, then the money would be wasted. That is the reason we have said that we shall give you a Promissory Note, a promise to pay, a post-dated cheque when you have completed a certain milestone and the Government of Uganda has certified that this is the money that you have used.

Therefore, it is important that we debate from the point of knowledge that this money is not a loan; it is investor’s money and we are all struggling here to look for resources. We have been saying do not borrow, this will not put anything on our books of liability as a country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Promissory Note is a guarantee in effect that I will pay. You build, I will pay you; so it is a guarantee.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have not finished my submission. The honourable minister has tried to explain that this is not borrowing but my knowledge- Although he says I have no knowledge, I have knowledge because this $249 million he is talking about is going to be borrowed through Barclays Bank of the United Kingdom.

As the Government of Uganda- it is going to be borrowed by the company that you said is an investor and you are going to be paying back this money - it is a dodgy way of borrowing to avoid the GDP threshold, the so called GDP tax borrowing ratio. This is a very dodgy way of borrowing; it is not sustainable for this country and is not in the interest of this country to continue with this kind of arrangement.

Madam Speaker, why can’t the Government go for supplier credit facility instead of financing -?

THE SPEAKER: You allow each other to speak. What is the problem?

MR SILWANYI: I have a point of order, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SILWANYI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, when we are debating certain issues in this country especially the important issues like health, we need to be very careful. The honourable member is coming up to tell this House that we are rushing to borrow money from a bank yet it is very clear that this House does not debate in anticipation. This is a company that is coming to invest but the honourable member is already coming up to say they are going to borrow money from Barclays Bank.

Is the honourable member therefore, in order to anticipate and talk about something that has not come to this House and say that they are going to borrow money yet the company has not come up to say that they are going to borrow money from Barclays Bank? That is the point of order I would like to raise. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the Government is going to issue a Promissory Note, the money must come from somewhere. Therefore, we shall have to know where it is coming from.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. The Government of Uganda has decided to run away from Budget financing and they have gone for the supplier credit facility. The challenge with this kind of borrowing is that even our key development partners like the World Bank and IMF are in disagreement with what has been brought in this Parliament.

This is the honest truth. It is a dodgy way of disguising borrowing so that we do not hit the threshold which we have agreed within the East African Community. We should not support this kind of borrowing because it is not in our interest as a nation. I thank you.

6.55
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee and I rise to support the recommendation for Government to borrow money to put this specialised hospital. Thank you also for –(Interjection)- sorry I said borrowing but even if it was a borrowing, for me, Government has borrowed money for so many projects; this is health infrastructure and it matters  so much.

Madam Speaker, almost every other day, our people fly out to go to India for specialised treatment and we spend money. Government has even spent money on members of this House to go all the way to India. As our people go to India, we have to raise the money, they go and suffer without support and care from members of the family and they have to buy food when we have plenty of food here.

Madam Speaker, the other day about two to three months ago, a friend of mine passed away; she had gone to India for treatment and she came back. However, on her way from Entebbe, she passed away. That is because of stress; they get extra stress as they travel all the way to India and back.

Honestly, for this honourable cause of having this specialised hospital whereby we are all candidates, I would like to support this motion and to request the members to support this motion –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened attentively with pain to this debate. Is it in order for hon. Kamateeka to state that all the people who remain here die when we have seen people going out for treatment and they also die? Is she in order to say that if we have this kind of hospital, then we shall not die? 

THE SPEAKER: There is no guarantee about death.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not say that everyone who goes to India does not die but even if you have to die, you will die under the loving care of your family.

For the reasons that are given in this report and for humanity reasons for us to have this specialised hospital, so that our people can have specialised treatment and do not have to be subjected to travel outside - some of them even fly on an aeroplane for the first time. You can imagine –(Interruption)

MS AMEEDE: Is hon. Jovah Kamateeka right to insinuate that we need a specialised hospital to treat complicated cases when our newly refurbished Mulago Hospital is underutilised? I have evidence of a relative I have right now in India whereby her condition should have been handled at the newly Women’s refurbished Hospital but it could not. Why don’t we first build capacity for Mulago? 

Is she in order when the regional hospitals are deathbeds? My regional hospital, Mbale is a deathbed.  I do not refuse this specialised hospital to be built. If the investor has money, let him build the hospital and the people who can afford will go to the hospital. We must make the health system work for everybody; this is wrong. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The so much money that we are now spending taking patients to India, if saved, it will then go to improve the health services in this country.

Additionally, no one has said that our spending on this hospital stops work on improving the health services in the country because the budget for improving the health infrastructure still remains. We can even borrow –(Member timed out.)

7.00
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Government for its effort towards attainment of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) III where we want to ensure that people live healthy lives and that no one is left behind.

However, on page 3 of the report, I am at pain when we give a justification that we need a specialised hospital. The level of the referral hospitals; the Heart Institute and Mulago Specialised Hospital, even at their current state they cannot offer better services. For instance, in the report we say that much as the Mulago Specialised Hospital will be finalised, we shall require an additional 277 billion to have it operate on a business model under which patient charges will be clarified in different categories of gold, silver and platinum. 

I appeal to my Government that much as we are elevating the health sector, we should also ensure that the existing facilities are well equipped. Ugandans are of different income levels. My appeal is that we should also empower the existing levels. If we have more people coming in to give support - as Government we should also lobby. We first equip the existing ones as we think of the other level of the specialised ones.

The other issue I would like to talk about is that of equity in distributing these facilities. I am wondering why the facility, for instance could not be in Soroti or Gulu. (Applause) In future, for access and enabling other Ugandans - because we have Mulago here and Entebbe Centre of Excellence in Paediatric Surgery; so many of them around –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know from the Minister of Health as we are putting money in this hospital, what are the actual plans for strengthening the other system? 

7.03
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to support the issue of having that hospital. Some time at the end of last month, I lost an aunt who was taken to India three times before her death. Of course, she was monitored by some doctors from Mulago who advised us to take her back to India. I was out of the country and the family members around could not afford the ticket immediately. If we only had such a hospital here, she would just be driven to that hospital and I believe that she would be still living.

Where we come from we do not have everything at the same time. It is true that we have needs in our hospitals; we all know that. However, that does not stop us from putting another opportunity for Ugandans to have the best hospital around. 

Some Members have been taken out of the country and paid for by the Government to go and get such services. I think that if that opportunity is here, we should take it up – 

THE SPEAKER: Will the money for treatment be paid in dollars or in shillings?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: In dollars.

THE SPEAKER: Shall we pay in dollars here?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, my colleague hon. Sarah for giving me this opportunity. The information I am supplying to you is to the effect that we are all candidates for specialised treatment. 

Madam Speaker, in March last year, I sought permission from you to undergo treatment for what the medical personnel were calling “non-haemorrhagic contusion”, which is a bruise in the brain tissue. That level of treatment could only be afforded in a specialised hospital, which was Apollo Hospital in New Delhi. I spent Shs 75 million. It was a huge amount of money. 
Therefore, we are all candidates for specialised treatment any time. It might be a requirement for you, whether as a Member of Parliament or any other local person. For us to have this facility based in Uganda would not have required me to fly to New Delhi. The most important thing is for us to have this facility. If there are any other issues relating to the project, they are issues, which we can handle later but the facility is necessary. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello, you have taken her time.

MS SARAH BABIRYE: Thank you. In this report there is a recommendation that there should be money – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time.

7.08
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with a definition of an investor. An investor is a person that allocates capital with expectations of future financial return.

Madam Speaker, in this case, we are going to give the land to the investor, guarantee this money and now who is the investor? Yet we are the ones investing.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of money, the Ministry of Finance has just told us that they require $249 million for construction and equipping-

THE SPEAKER: Information from the chairperson.

MR KAHONDA: My time is limited. The chairperson will wind up. Yet, what is on the agenda here is $379 million. Where is the other money now going? Where is it catered for?

Madam Speaker, referrals in this country arise as a result of failure to handle those matters at lower levels. In this case, we have district hospitals. These so-called district hospitals like in Mitooma, the Health Centre IV that we have is not equipped. It does not even have enough beds to handle admissions.

Madam Speaker, for every disease there are stages and referrals arise from those stages. Therefore, if they are handled properly at lower levels, there would be no need for referrals. 

Madam Speaker, we rather strengthen and equip our existing hospitals like Mulago -

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order against my friend. What we are talking about is constructing a hospital that shall be accredited by the Joint Commission International and then it will enjoy that level like the way hotels are classified as five stars, four or three star.

The class of people is of those who will have medical conditions that cannot be handled in the country at the moment -

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, who is going to pay for this treatment?

MS AMEEDE: The world is operating on market forces let the investor come and invest his money and then those who will afford will pay, but Government should not guarantee money.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is on the floor.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Can I be listened to. Madam Speaker, currently, the way our hospitals are structured including Mulago, cannot be remodelled to provide some of these services. The kind of hospital that is going to be built, from the structures, it will be built to the standards acceptable to Joint Commission International and that is why we are calling it a “world class” level hospital like what is in India and South Africa.

Therefore, is it in order for the hon. Kahonda to say that patients are referred outside currently because the doctors down there cannot manage them? It is because the facilities which we have are inadequate in the way they are.  However, what is being proposed is to put a structure, a hospital which has capacity to manage these conditions and then reduce on the expenditure which we are incurring as a Government. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to know who the beneficiaries are of this money. If you are going to say that we bring a facility for the ministers, MPs, what about the man in Kidera, when will he access that? Who are going to benefit from this?

DR BARYOMUNSI:  Madam Speaker, let me try to answer the question posed by the Speaker. At the moment, when you have a condition and our specialists cannot handle you, then –(Interjection)– I do not know when you qualified as a doctor.

I am saying once our specialists cannot handle you, then they refer you outside because of better facilities and then the medical board has to ascertain that yes, you have to go and the Ministry of Health confirms.

The challenge that we are meeting today is that it is very costly because of the medical cost but most importantly the transport cost, accommodation and the accompanying person.

Therefore, what will happen is that once we have this hospital in Uganda, it will be much cheaper to the extent that even more Ugandans will afford to be treated in this hospital.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know if Members of Parliament are sick, the money comes from here; if the Minister are sick money comes from the Government. I want to know, the other Ugandans, where does the money come from? (Applause)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, at the moment, because we work for Government, it budgets for its workers. In addition, we are spending huge sums of money. The arrangement which is being made is that once this hospital is here, and you have been referred and you are a Government worker, now Government will be referring all its workers to this hospital. It will be that part of the budget that is going to repay the money invested by this investor over the six years.

In addition-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is really the problem because this is a hospital for the rich.

DR BARYOMUNSI: No.  

THE SPEAKER: Where will the market people in Nakasero, get money to go to that hospital? This is for 300,000 civil servants, 100 ministers, 400 Members of Parliament because they have a budget.

DR BARYOMUNSI: No. Madam Speaker, this hospital will be available for all Ugandans like Mulago is and the new hospital in Mulago. This hospital will not be for Government workers. It will be for all Ugandans who require super specialized treatment.

THE SPEAKER: But who will fund them? Who will fund the other Ugandans to access treatment? That is my question.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, it is the same question -

THE SPEAKER: Order members!

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, it is the same question one would ask; who funds those who go to Mulago? First of all, the committee has recommended that we should have exemption criteria for the poor, which is a very good recommendation. 

What we are saying is that those who are paid for by Government will not be referred to India or South Africa but will be referred to that hospital. That money will repay the amount invested by this investor. 

For the ordinary Ugandans, they will still be able to pay, because it will be much cheaper, but there will be mechanisms to exempt the very poor who cannot raise this money. All this will be worked out.

7.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true and indeed everybody will agree with the principles behind constructing such a hospital, given the fact that conditions that came in the country could not be managed within the country due to one reason or another. I think that is why we all agree with the principles that we need such an international specialised facility within the country.  

However, given the experience of the International Women Hospital, that was debated on this Floor, I think we supported that women should pay for the services in that hospital, which of course some people thought was high and others thought it was okay. 

Given that experience and putting it with this hospital that we all desire to see in our country, certainly the procedure will be the usual one where the Board has to approve. Thereafter, you get through the normal procedures. Probably the difference may be the transportation. Whereas you fly to India or to whatever country, here you do within the country. 

What I can say is that, according to their document, the committee recommended that this specialised hospital should be for all Ugandans. That is something which this House should debate and we see how the ordinary Ugandan benefits from this service like they are benefiting from women service. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again, when you talk about the medical board, it addresses a particular budget. It applies to the civil servants, the ministers, Members of Parliament and probably the other corporations. Therefore, you are talking about the top 1,000 people. 

Honourable members, this is about the state of health in this country. We recently asked the minister to give us an update. Can we debate this within that update? This is because I do not know whether it was part of your strategic plan to build this hospital. If it was, tell us. 

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, it is true that you did direct the Ministry of Health to bring a report on the state of health care in this country. I would like to indicate that we are working on the report and it will be ready for presentation next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I propose that we defer this debate to when the reports have been presented so that we finish them together? Honourable members, this matter will be concluded on Tuesday. I have asked the Minister of Health to speed up her presentation so that we finish it on Tuesday, 12 March 2019. The House has been adjourned to Tuesday next week. 

(The House rose at 7.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 March 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

