Thursday, 19 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business and honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have only two matters to communicate. The first one is that our colleague, hon. Michael Mukula, MP for Soroti Municipality, is indisposed. He is at Kampala International Hospital and has undergone two operations. I just want to let you know that he is not here because he is sick. So, if you get time, you can check on him.

Secondly, three weeks ago, this House resolved to set up a select committee to investigate the takeover of land formerly belonging to Nabagereka Primary School as well as other public schools under the Kampala Capital City Authority. I am naming the following Members, to that committee and the terms of reference will be refined and given to them. I nominate the following Members: 

    • Hon. Robert Migadde Ndugwa, MP for Buvuma Islands, as the chairperson; 
    • Hon. Kassiano Wadri, Terego County; 
    • Hon. Kabale Olivia Kwagala, MP Iganga District; 
    • Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, MP Ndorwa County East; 
    • Hon. Patrick Mulindwa, Kasambya County; and
    • Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Masaka Municipality. 

They will be required to report within two months from the time they commence their work. As I said, their terms of reference will be refined and given to them. Thank you very much. 

There were a number of Members who had urgent issues. 

2.56
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national concern - the prevailing weather situation in the country. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you will agree, Uganda’s territory is affected by prolonged drought. This drought has caused untold suffering among the people of this country, particularly in the central region, parts of the eastern region and the northern part of the country. As a result, there has been a lot of inconvenience caused especially to human life but also to animals. As a result, many local communities are losing their livestock because the animals have little or nothing to drink and there is also no pasture for these animals to survive on.  

Animals in Teso sub region have no grass, as it was reported in the newspapers, and I would like to confirm it. They have now resorted to eating soil, and this is unprecedented in the history of Teso. 

I bring this matter to the attention of Government so that they are able to put in place short-term measures, mid-term measures and long-term measures to try and mitigate the situation. This is not the first time that this country faces such a serious threat to life. I remember a few years back, a situation of this kind befell the people of mid-western Uganda and at the time it was treated as an emergency. As a result, water tanks were deployed to supply farms with water. 

I do not know whether Government has plans for the suffering people that I have described. I know they cannot make rain but something needs to be done by Government to try and mitigate the situation. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Kwizera comes up, I want you to join me in welcoming the executive committee of Kanungu Town Council. They are led by their mayor, Mr Kaheru. They are represented by hon. Baryomunsi and hon. Karungi. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.00
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are raising an issue of national concern in as far as our natural resources management is concerned. 

Parliament enacted a law, the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003, and the minister has to issue regulations under section 92 to give it effect. It is now over 10 years and there are no regulations. You realise the heat we are now facing - we are under terrible climate changes! 

We also have a number of programmes that are fragmented in different ministries. There is no coordination on who is planting trees and who is not. We want to know from Government why there are no regulations to effect the implementation of this Act that was passed over 10 years ago. I thank you.

3.00
MR WILSON ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I move under rule 46(1) of our Rules of Procedure to make a personal statement. Rt Hon. Speaker and members, I make this statement explaining a series of allegations made against me by several people.

On 16 March 2015, on Bukedde TV’s Agataliiko Nfuufu, at 10.00 p.m., I was the subject of the news. It was alleged that I defiled my own daughter several times. The allegations were made by the girl’s mother, the aunties and the grandmother. It was alleged that the said defilement began in 2003 when the girl was only 6 years old.

On March 17 2015, the same unsubstantiated allegations were repeated by our colleague in this House, hon. Florence Mutyabule, while on Eastern Voice Radio. I have unsettled financial issues with this colleague that I will continue to pursue.

I wish to state and assure this august House that I have never stayed with the child’s mother since the child’s birth. I have several other daughters whom I live with. I am not above the law and I wonder why the allegations of defilement are coming at this moment in time. There hasn’t been any complaint filed against me in Police regarding this terrible allegation, neither is there any complaint filed with the local council authorities.

Honourable colleagues, why am I being smeared with this dirt at this particular time? Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am very concerned about these malicious, unsubstantiated allegations made on TV, radio and other media by the mentioned persons. These allegations are obviously made in bad faith and intended to tarnish my otherwise good and clean name and record. We are all aware that this is the beginning of a very competitive political season and any wrong step taken by anyone of us can negatively affect our political life.

I wish to categorically state that I am going to vigorously follow up on this matter in the courts of law in order to defend my reputation. 
Madam Speaker and Members, I thank you. For God and my Country. 

(Document not laid on the Table.)

3.05
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national concern. 

The bridge in Cheptui along Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road is broken. Three or four years ago, the original bridge broke down and Government put up a temporary bridge, but as I speak, that temporary bridge is also down. 

On Monday, 16th March, I passed there and found that some young men had taken it upon themselves to put stones in the cracks of the old bridge so that small vehicles can pass. The same young men have put logs and big stones to stop people from crossing; they charge a fee and if you argue with them or negotiate, they tell you to turn back and use the Soroti Road if you are coming from Karamoja and those coming from Mbale are told to go back to Mbale. 

Madam Speaker, the young men are so rude and they cause a lot of traffic jam on the road. I was actually caught up in a jam on that day when I was there. I decided to go and see the temporary bridge that had been in use and I found that there was no work going on. I only saw road signs saying that the road was closed on both sides.

Madam Speaker, for those of us who come from Karamoja, that route is the shortest to Mbale and Kampala. However, with a broken bridge, the heavy vehicles cannot pass. Last year, there was a poor harvest in Karamoja and we have been depending on food from Mbale, Sironko and Kapchorwa and now heavy trucks cannot cross.

I call upon Government to intervene in this matter in the shortest time possible, to save people from risking their lives on a bridge that was abandoned three years ago. Also, save us from starving, those of us who come from Karamoja.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Ndeezi comes up, I just want to say that it is not necessary for Members to lay personal explanations on the Table.  So, that part of laying them on the Table should be expunged; it is already in the Hansard.

3.08
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national concern in relation to non-implementation of an important resolution we passed here on the 1st day of April 2014. This resolution related to access to sports and physical education for people with disabilities in this country. This resolution was overwhelmingly passed by this august House. Unfortunately, it has not been implemented and Government has not come out to tell us why it has not been implemented. 

This is what the resolution said and this was resolved by this Parliament on the 1st day of April 2014:

1) Government takes special interest and affirmative action on the promotion of sports and physical education for people with disabilities in line with Article 32 of the Constitution.

2) Government increases funding to the Uganda Para Olympics Committee with a view of enabling it to fulfil its mandate to participate in sports activities.

3) Government should amend the current National Physical Education and Sports Policy as well as the National Council for Sports Act in line with the Constitution of Uganda.

4) We resolved that not later than six months from the date of passing this resolution, the Minister of Education and Sports reports to Parliament on measures taken to implement this resolution as well as progress made towards the purpose of this resolution. 

Madam Speaker, six months expired on 1 October 2014 and the minister had not reported then. Since then, we as MPs representing PWDs have been urging the minister to present the report as urged by this resolution. We have written more than six letters and had a lot of interaction with the minister. I report that we have failed to urge or beg the minister to present this report as tasked by Parliament on 1st April.

Madam Speaker, we are here to request you to ensure that parliamentary resolutions passed on this day are honoured. Most importantly, we demand for an explanation as to why this resolution has not been implemented. We need to know. Tomorrow there is a big meeting of stakeholders who sponsored this resolution and they want an answer. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Education and Sports was given six months to give an update on that matter. The six months expired in October, meaning that we are now heading into one year. The minister is directed give feedback on Tuesday, 24th March. (Applause)

3.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development to explain to this country why the money for women’s councils, especially for income generating activities, is not being remitted to districts. 

In my district, Agago, we have not been receiving this money for some time and the women’s councils that have been handling this money, especially helping out with the rural women on income generating activities, are not receiving any explanation. Moreover, the Shs 3 million, which was supposed to be sent per quarter, was reduced by half in the last three years. I would like the minister to explain this because the women are asking me and yet I do not know the answer.

3.13
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would wish to know from the Minister for Internal Affairs whether the directive of the Speaker on the release of our colleague, hon. Mayende, was complied with. If it has not been complied with, then it means that orders of this Parliament were issued in vain.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, I do not know whether you can tell us how we are going to manage the drought in the country as raised by hon. Amuriat. We also want to know about the failure to issue regulations for the last 10 years under the NFA Management Act. 

We also need a response on the bridge on the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. I have directed on hon. Ndeezi’s query. Also answer hon. Franca Akello’s concern about the money of the women’s councils. On the other question, I think that the minister can answer. 

3.14
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): I thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Following the law and investigations, this afternoon, the honourable member was brought to court and released on police bond. (Applause) Others have also been brought to court. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries say something about the drought? I can see hon. Nyiira there. Honourable member, are you seeking for information or something else?

MR AYOO: The Minister for Internal Affairs has said that the honourable member was brought to court and released on police bond. This is confusing and we would like to know what exactly happened. I thank you.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: He was released on bail and not police bond.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I believe that the minister is not being honest with us. Gauging from the press reports, the preferred charge against our colleague is not bail-able by a magistrate’s court. He could not have appeared before the High Court and obtained bail at the same time. Bail before the High Court is applied for formally. 

Can the minister, therefore, tell us what the charge against our colleague is and what court he has appeared before? Can he tell us whether indeed he has been given bail and what the terms of the bail are?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, to emphasise hon. Tinkasiimire’s statement, which magistrate is this who does not understand the law and gives him bail –(Interjections)– Yes, bond. Let him help us because some of us are students of law. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you go into which offence and the rest, you will be going into the merits of the matter. Our directive was to either charge him or release him. So if he has not been released, let us know. Is there anybody who knows whether he has not been released? If there is none –

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, it is a well-known principle of law that court does not give police bond. Also, from what hon. Niwagaba is raising, if he was released on bail, the way in which the minister put it across raises doubt among all of us. This is  because there is no way a person charged with such an offence as has been alleged would be released on bail on the same day that he is produced in a magistrate’s court.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask hon. Maganda to go and call hon. Mayende and he will give us the information. 

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira):  Madam Speaker, the issue that was brought to the Floor was on drought. We are now obviously seeing the effects of climate change. We can see that the environmental degradation by human activity such as tree cutting, over grazing and tampering of the land, among others, is bringing problems. We see all this as a big problem. 

Obviously, something has to be done. In the short term, we are providing bowsers to provide water to communities and private farms that can afford it. In the mid-term 

MS ANYWAR: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are aware that as in Cabinet there is inter-connection and inter-dialogue with colleagues. The minister is already telling us that it is a problem upon us that the degradation has taken place, and yet we have stood on record and protected the environment. He is telling us this, rather than him telling us what they have agreed with his colleague, the Minister for Water and Environment, to give us a way forward. 

Is the minister in order to shake off the blame and not tell us the arrangements on how they are going to combat the effects of climate change in the Cabinet where his colleagues sit? Is he in order to mislead this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not the birds that are causing the environmental damage but the people. That is what the minister was reminding us of. Therefore, he is quite in order.

PROF NYIIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I was giving a background so that we are aware of why these things are happening so that we are able to prepare the public by bringing in more education and public awareness. 

In the short-term, we have been providing bowsers so that the communities can have water. However, in the mid and long term –

THE SPEAKER: Where are the bowsers provided from? Are they from Entebbe or the districts? 

PROF NYIIRA: The bowsers are from the districts. In the mid and long term, we have provision of excavating dams and making reservoirs. We have units that are now providing these services and there are arrangements for securing more heavy equipment so that we are able to –

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I know colleagues are aware that several districts, perhaps including Kamuli, may not have a single bowser; I wonder whether the minister is aware. Therefore, is the minister in order to misinform the House that districts are supposed to provide bowsers?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, substantiate where the bowsers are and how they can be accessed?

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Speaker, not every district has got provision for bowsers, but I know the districts of Kiruhura and Nakasongola have bowsers that are providing water. Some of them are private but others are Government owned -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the Minister is admitting that not all districts are covered. The question on the Floor, as raised by my colleague, is: how we can really combat the effects of climate change? Is the honourable minister in order to continue referring us to the same topic when he is aware that actually half of the country does not have them, including Kitgum? Is he in order, to continue derailing us and misinforming this House?

THE SPEAKER: I think let him finish what he is saying then we shall decide whether it is relevant or not.

PROF. NYIIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. I would like to reiterate that in the midterm and the long-term, we are making sure that we get water reservoirs and dams. This is already in progress and we have been able to have the units which are doing this. There will be more of this equipment that will provide these facilities. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister for Natural Resources on the NFA regulations? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want to know when the regulations for that Act are going to be made. There is the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Bridge, Minister of Works. We shall want an answer on when this bridge will be worked on. Can the outgoing Minister of Labour say something about hon. Akello’s issue?

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am sorry I do not have an answer now. However, I will undertake to cause one to be delivered to this House on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we proceed I want you to join me in welcoming students of Brilliant High School Wakiso. They are represented by hon. Robert Ssebunya and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. You are welcome. They are very neat in their uniforms. (Applause)

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have spoken to hon. Dede right now. He is on his way to Namayingo under the escort of the Police. They are trying to get him home, to integrate him into the community. 

He also told me that he was released on police bond. He did not appear in court on the many cases including terrorism, murder and several of them. So he said he will be here next week and he will definitely make a statement on the Floor. Thank you, very much.

3.27
MR WILSON ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As we are moving towards planting season, NAADS has been mobilising our people to prepare to plant various items provided by Government. They have been told to dig holes to plant Matooke and other things and spare some land. Some information I have indicates that the supplies are very few and yet people have spared particular land for particular crops. 

Can we have clarification from the Ministry of Agriculture on what they are going to distribute and where, so that our people can know how to plan for their land because they have already been caught up.  Some people have already prepared for coffee but they may not get the coffee at all. Others have planned for bananas, but they may not get them. 

Land is in scarcity. We are bound to have a crisis if we do not use a transparent method to tell the farmers what is being distributed and where. Can the Ministry of Agriculture come up with a statement so that I know what is coming to Namutumba so that my people organise themselves in a more transparent manner. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand that the rains will be coming by the end of the month. Therefore, can we direct the minister for agriculture to come and inform the House what is going to be distributed and in which part of the country and exactly when, so that we can advise our people? Thank you. Tell us what is going to be planted where, so that our people can get ready.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Minister for Agriculture - There is scientific technology where rain can be made. It is called cloud seeding. Where -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue. I am aware that Dr Chris Baryomunsi is now a minister of state and is now going to be part of Cabinet. On Wednesday next week, there will be Cabinet meeting where there will be collective responsibility involving him and the Minister of Agriculture. Is it procedurally right for him to start bringing matters of Cabinet here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned, he has not yet taken oath, therefore he is still a back bencher. So he is allowed to raise issues.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I thought hon. Nandala would see where I was seated. Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to ask from the Minister of Agriculture concerns a technology called cloud seeding, where you can artificially create rain by shooting hygroscopic substances like silver iodide and potassium iodide into the clouds and then you cause rain to fall. I am happy he is a scientist. 

This technology is being practiced mainly in Asian countries but also in West Africa. A number of countries are using it. In situations like what we are experiencing, you can cause rain. I do not know whether you have explored this - whether it is possible, how much it costs and whether we can introduce it in Uganda to address effects of drought like we are having today. I am sure hon. Nandala has benefited from this science.

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister wish to say something about making rain?

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is true that there is now technology where you can actually seed rains, that is, cloud seeding. We have looked at this matter very much because regionally, they wanted to start applying it in Eritrea and those parts of the Horn of Africa. However, I should indicate that much as we have this knowledge and we can apply it, it is expensive. That is why we decided that under IGAD, we should be able to start slowly experimenting this. Otherwise, we know about it. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

3.32
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind the House that you instituted a committee to investigate the matters of mismanagement of several issues in NSSF. I am standing in for the chair of this committee, hon. Ssempijja, who was not able to be with us today. Before I proceed, I would like to first lay on the Table a copy of the minutes and proceedings of the select committee. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to remind the members that this committee was given the following terms of reference: 

1) To investigate allegations that NSSF irregularly acquired shares in Umeme. 
2) To investigate allegations of irregularity, nepotism and unfairness in the recruitment process of staff at NSSF. 
3) To investigate allegations of irregularity in disposal of NSSF assets; and
4) To investigate any other matters related to the above.

Madam Speaker, you set up a five-member committee and I would like to acknowledge and thank the members of this committee. They include: hon. Ssempijja as the chair; I was a member of the committee; and others are: hon. Ssewungu; hon. Alex Ruhunda from Fort Portal; and the Workers’ Representative, hon. Theopista Ssentongo.

I would like to thank this committee because they sacrificed a lot. You are aware that this was a select committee. You are required to attend to business in the other sectoral committees you belong to and yet you also have to dispatch the responsibilities on the select committee. I will be laying the other documents on the Table after reading the report. It is a fairly big report, but I will try to summarise it.

As per term the terms of reference, the committee had to first of all study the structures and legal frameworks of the two bodies, NSSF and Umeme. This is because one of the issues was dealing with equity and acquiring of shares and this necessitated the committee to understand the details, functions and the mandate, legal and regulatory frameworks of these organisations.

The National Social Security Fund (NSSF) was established by an Act of this Parliament. Its responsibility is to handle social security benefits to Ugandans. It covers employees under the ages of 16 to 55 years. Madam Speaker, NSSF has the mandate to invest the funds of the members contributing to the fund so that at the age of 55 years or below if any matters arise, the member can get back a payment with interest. 

According to Section 30 of the NSSF Act, all monies in the fund, including the reserve account, which are not for the time being required to be applied for the purpose of the fund, shall be invested in such investments as may be determined by the Board in consultation with the Minister. The committee therefore looked at NSSF acquisition of Umeme shares. We looked at the procedures that the NSSF followed in acquiring the shares. 

The House may remember that Umeme put up an IPO to dispose of shares in 2012 – that is on page 6 of the report. Although NSSF acquired the first stake of Umeme in 2012 when it purchased Umeme’s initial public offer of 131,502,300 shares each at Shs 275, the relationship between the two entities seems to have started way back even before the incorporation of Umeme. We shall be laying on the Table a copy of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Umeme. 

In Article 12(b) of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Umeme Ltd with the Registrar of Companies on 6 May 2004, it was enclosed therein that, “Government shall not unreasonably withhold its approval for requests for approval of transfer of ordinary share capital. Government of Uganda hereby approves sale by the company and the initial shareholder of ordinary share capital to the National Social Security Fund of Uganda, to employees of the company who are Ugandan citizens and through public offerings on the Ugandans Securities Exchange.” This was very surprising to the committee. 

Today, Umeme is a public company because by the Companies Act, as amended recently by Parliament, if any company is to float shares, it must first change its status quo into a public company. However, by the time of its incorporation in 2004, Umeme was a private company and that is a clause in the articles and memorandum of association.

Madam Speaker, the findings of the committee were that the same provision was inserted in the support agreement signed between the Uganda Government, represented by hon. Gerald Ssendaula, and Umeme Ltd in 2004. While we interfaced with NSSF, the committee was informed by NSSF leadership that they were not aware of such a relationship with Umeme at the time and they were never invited or involved in the negotiations between the Government of Uganda and Umeme that created the relationship in 2004.

The committee further inquired from hon. Gerald Ssendaula why NSSF was married to Umeme without its knowledge. His response was that it was Government policy that privatised companies would offer shares to Ugandans, hence a clause was inserted in the support agreement that Umeme would offer shares to NSSF that belonged to Ugandans. However, this did not have any legal backing.

The committee further noted that hon. Ssendaula was at the helm of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning by that time, where the Privatisation Unit was domiciled when Government awarded a concession to Umeme – a concession that is believed to have been very generous.

The committee observed that the same hon. Ssendaula was later appointed on the board of Umeme in 2013. The committee asked hon. Ssendaula whether his appointment was as a result of the good work he executed for the company in 2004 when he provided generous terms; he categorically denied that he was appointed as a reward. 

He further indicated that there was no law that stops former ministers from getting employment. He submitted that he was approached by Umeme to serve on the board as one of their members had died, that is, the late James Mulwana. 

However, the committee further noted that hon. Gerald Ssendaula, who was and still is a board member today, was also and still is chairman of the Uganda Revenue Authority. Later in the report, the committee revisits the challenges that URA has encountered in collecting taxes from Umeme, a situation that places hon. Gerald Ssendaula in a possible position of conflict of interest.

The Legal Framework of NSSF Investment

Madam Speaker, I hope the honourable members will still allow me to summarise some of these issues, and I know they have read the report. 

We need to note that the NSSF, as per its Act, is a body corporate body having perpetual succession and a common seal, and may sue or be sued in its corporate name and may, in connection with its functions under this Act, purchase, hold, manage and dispose of any property, enter into contracts and do such other things as a body corporate may lawfully do.

It would be good for us to note section 3 of the Act, which also directs the board in the matter of investment. It provides that the board shall ensure and secure profitable and efficient financial management of the funds for the benefits of workers particularly and the country at large. Therefore, the Act places the responsibility of investing NSSF funds on the shoulders of the board and the managing director. That is section 30 of the NSSF Act.

The responsibility of investment also falls on the managing director of the fund. Under section 39(2)(c) of the Act, the managing director of the fund shall be the chief executive officer of the fund and shall, subject to the Act and the general control of the board on matters of policy, be responsible for the general management, administration and organisation of the fund. Subsection (c) says, “for the investment of surplus funds…”  – as seen earlier – “…from time to time.” 

Madam Speaker, it was prudent that this committee also examined other regulatory frameworks. The House may recall that in 2013, this House enacted the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA) which has a great role in also monitoring and supervising the pension sector. I know members will read about URBRA, but URBRA’s mandate is majorly to supervise the retirement benefits sector especially on issues of investment.

The committee also examined the issue of NSSF investment policy and the internal approvals. This is because part of the allegation was the irregular acquiring of shares in Umeme. We examined the internal approvals as we may report later.

On 2.4, the committee looked at how NSSF acquired shares in Umeme after we had examined the regulatory frameworks - the internal ones. Briefly, we examined who Umeme was. This is because for the NSSF, a public body, to acquire shares in a company, it called for the committee to first of all understand the company in which public finances, people’s money, was invested. We found out the following:

Umeme Limited was incorporated on 6 May 2004 as a private limited company, with a nominal share capital of US$ 50,000 which was divided into 50 ordinary shares as per value of US$ 1,000. The objective of the company was to carry out a lease and assignment agreement and any other auxiliary agreements to be entered into with the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd.

Umeme Ltd was a special purpose vehicle that was established with a consortium of companies, and that is, Globeleq Limited and Eskom, for purposes of taking on the electricity sector. This was not like any other business that any other company would venture into.

In 2006, it was observed that Eskom disposed of its shareholding in Umeme and left Globeleq as 100 per cent shareholders. However, because of the requirement of the law that in a company limited by shares there has to be more than one shareholder, Globeleq relinquished one share to David Grills and thereby making two shareholders at that time.

On 10 September 2007, the nominal share capital was increased from US$ 50,000 to US$ 13,550,000 by issuing 13,500 ordinary shares. On 28 June 2012, a resolution was taken for Umeme to be turned into a public company. Umeme Ltd therefore converted into a public company. On 4 July 2012, at an extraordinary meeting, shares of Umeme Limited were redenominated from - I think the honourable members can read through page 11. 

However, I can take you through the chronology of events in the acquisition of shares, 2.4.2. Between September 2011 and October 2012, the Ad hoc Committee on Energy inquired into the performance of the electricity sector. 

Honourable members, Parliament instituted the Ad hoc Committee on Energy that investigated the performance of the electricity sector. Parliament pronounced itself on the report and one of the recommendations that this Parliament adopted was the termination of the distribution concession of Umeme. 

Madam Speaker, you directed, during the adoption of that report as a House, that Government should give this House a report every three months on the status of implementation of the recommendations in the report. Therefore, the committee did not go into the details. 

Between 15th October and 7 November 2012, Umeme issued an Initial Public Offer (IPO), offering 622,387,000 shares of its 1,338,400,400 shares to the public at a cost of Shs 275. Of the 622,387,000 shares offered, 350,000,000 were for the shareholder, Umeme ltd, called Umeme Holdings.

When Umeme Ltd turned into a public company, the shares were being sold off and therefore, were now being held by Umeme Holdings. When they were selling the shares, the 350,000,000 were for Umeme Holdings. The rest of the proceeds from the share sales of 272,378,000, which were new shares being offered to Umeme Limited - The proceeds from those ones were supposed to be used for offsetting debts that were accrued by Umeme Holdings before. 

The table below also indicates how the shareholding was held after Umeme was transformed into a public company. I know members can read that. 

The reason for floating shares was to secure, as we were informed - Even the prospectus of Umeme on page 62 indicates that the reason for floating shares was to secure the single shareholder of Umeme namely, Umeme Holdings Limited. 

The use of the proceeds was indicated in the IPO prospectus on that page: “funds raised, net of related expenses, through the issue of the subscription shares will accrue to the company and will be primarily utilised for repay existing shareholder loans.” Umeme Holdings had borrowed to a tune of about US$ 65 million, which it owed to other banks. 

“Funds raised, net of related expenses, through the sale of the sale shares will accrue to Umeme Holdings, the immediate shareholder.” In other words, Madam Speaker and Members, the floating of shares by Umeme was majorly to raise capital. That is an issue that the committee had to spend a lot of energy on. The money that accrued from the sale of the majority shares, because 99 per cent of the shares were owned by Umeme Holdings, was used to pay Umeme Holdings and to offset debts. The funds that were accrued from the diluted shares that were now being given to Umeme Limited were for offsetting debts. This means that majorly, after the sale of shares the company did not remain with any funds, as was said, for liquidating it.

On 23 October 2012, the management investment committee of NSSF resolved to apply for 186,713,400 shares, worth Shs 51.3 billion at the Umeme IPO. It is on the same day that Mr Ivan Kyayonka, the chairperson of the NSSF Board, wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, making a case for investment in Umeme and requesting for a no-objection. 

On 7 November 2012, hon. Maria Kiwanuka offered a letter of no objection to investment in the Umeme IPO. The issues she raised were some of the issues that were enshrined in both the support agreement between the Government of Uganda and Umeme and also the requirements of the licence; it is called the Supply and Distribution Licence. These two were privy to the fact that in case Umeme was to sell any shares, it was limited to selling not more than 49 per cent. 

The reasons stated in section 6(d) of the support agreement and 10(d) of the Supply and Distribution Licence were very clear.  By the time Umeme came on board, and I told you it was a special purpose vehicle, it means due diligence was done by the Government of Uganda on the two companies that were forming a consortium to manage the distribution business because it was not like any other business. Therefore, in the agreement, there were clauses particular to the disposal of any of the amount - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the presenter is very good and she is giving explanations, which I believe would be read verbatim so that we can follow and understand. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that she concentrates on reading the report so that we ask questions if at all she has to clarify on something? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Stick to the report. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you. Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I thought I was summarising some of the issues and they were going to save us time. However, I will stick to the report. 

On 19 December 2012, the corporation secretary wrote to the Solicitor-General informing him that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance, had granted a “no objection” to the shares. On 10 January 2013, the Solicitor-General wrote to the corporation secretary and he expressed dismay at how the matter had been handled. He ended his letter by informing the corporation secretary that seeking legal advice from his office was not just a mere formality. This meant that the NSSF acquired shares before the minister and the Solicitor-General had approved.

Failure to Seek and Secure Approval of the board and the Solicitor-General
From the facts above, the committee established that in the process of purchasing Umeme IPO shares in 2012, the NSSF Board Chairman, Mr Kyayonka, and the Managing Director, Mr Richard Byarugaba, purchased the Umeme IPO without approval of the board of NSSF and the Solicitor-General. At a later stage, I will be laying documents to support this finding. 

The committee also examined whether the NSSF Board chairman and the MD erred in purchasing the IPO without approval of the board. The committee received evidence from NSSF members and the board members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, read the subject and the committee’s findings. The rest, the members can read by themselves. Go to page 16 and read the observations and findings.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: The committee observed that there was no requirement at the time to subject the IPO investments to the approval of the NSSF Board, hence there was no error committed when Mr Ivan Kyayonka and Mr Richard Byarugaba purchased the Umeme IPO without approval or the involvement of the NSSF Board members.

Did the NSSF chairman and the MD err in purchasing the shares without seeking legal advice from the Solicitor-General? Madam Speaker, the committee observed that whereas there was an error on the issues to do with investments of NSSF and equity, there was a problem of timing and bureaucracy. Therefore, you realise that the board chairman and the MD had to even give to Stanbic Bank an irrevocable bank guarantee of Shs 51.3 billion on 7th November before the approval of the Solicitor-General.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance and the Attorney-General should urgently institute reforms to enable quick and efficient investments of NSSF in the equity market.

We also examined the possible conflict of interest. Much as no great error was observed, we observed issues of conflict of interest. It was alleged that there was conflict of interest between Shell -independent power producer - Umeme and NSSF.

The committee tried to establish whether Mr Kyayonka acted behind his colleagues because of his vested interest where Shell, a company where he was formerly employed as managing director, would be the beneficiary of NSSF’s purchase of Umeme shares.

Madam Speaker, we examined both the board and Mr Ivan Kyayonka. The committee found that it is true that the independent power producers were demanding for huge amounts of money from the suppliers and one of the suppliers was Shell Ltd.

The committee also established and that one of the owners of the independent power producers was Mr Bitature, who was at the same time the chairman of Umeme Ltd when it was selling the IPO. Another owner of an IPP was Mr Charles Mbire, who is also a director at the Uganda Securities Exchange, where Umeme shares would eventually be traded. Of course, there is Mr Ivan Kyayonka of Shell, who needed his money back from the two gentlemen, who is the chairperson of NSSF and who at the time was anxious to buy the Umeme IPO. 

The committee observed that Mr Ivan Kyayonka appeared to have acted under conflict of interest when he pushed the NSSF to purchase the Umeme IPO even without the approval of the Solicitor-General. The committee therefore recommends that Mr Ivan Kyayonka should vacate the board of NSSF due to his irregular actions in pushing NSSF to purchase Umeme shares on the IPO, without approval of the Solicitor-General.

Acquisition of More Shares
Madam Speaker, that was at the IPO but there was also a sale of shares on the secondary market in 2014. The findings of the committee were that first of all, unlike the first trading of shares where the NSSF did not have a clear investment policy, this time they had established an investment policy. Any investment is first discussed at the management committee, the investment committee of the board and later approved by the board upon approval or a letter of “no objection” from the Solicitor-General and the Minister of Finance.

I would like us to move to page 21 on the recommendations. The committee was informed that the members of the board did not agree on the purchase of the shares. On page 20, out of the 10 members of the board, five members sent joint mail to the chairman re-affirming their earlier position that they did not support NSSF buying more shares in Umeme. However, the other three members of the board, who included the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Ochailap; the chairperson of the board; and the MD did not communicate any position, which was perceived as a “yes” - they indeed supported the buying of shares.

Here, we observed a lacuna in the law. The committee thought that as a tendency of corporate governance, an MD of an organisation or an executive secretary is a secretary to the board and therefore does not have voting powers. However, in this scenario, the MD of NSSF was participating directly in the voting. 

The committee therefore noted that the manner in which the decision by Mr Ivan Kyayonka, the NSSF Board Chairman, was taken to purchase more shares was greatly irregular because the board did not agree.

Madam Speaker, I will lay letters on the Table which will show that members like Mr Pius Bigirimana, although they said that they were in support of buying the shares, conditioned their support to the minister’s approval or issuing of a letter of no-objection; and the Solicitor-General and the Minister of Finance did not approve. A letter will still be laid on the Table.

I would like to refer you to the comment of the minister on page 22. The minister, in her advice on 13th May, wrote to the chairman declining to grant immediate approval of the transaction due to the short notice given. The minister also gave a comprehensive list of concerns that the NSSF ought to consider before they think of investing in Umeme. In her letter, she cautioned that the NSSF wants to take up 15 per cent thereby acquiring a seat on the Umeme board. However, there was no mention about who will be taking up the remaining 38 per cent divested shares among the shareholders. 

Madam Speaker, if you will allow me, this is a point that I would like to clarify to members. Section 10(d) of the Supply and Distribution Licence prohibits Umeme from selling any shares above 49 per cent so that the companies - the original shareholders - retain a controlling effect in the company. This is because the Government of Uganda had done due diligence on those companies and found that there were able to manage the electricity business. This is what the minister was asking that if the shareholding grossly went down substantially whether it would not affect the agreement between the Government of Uganda and Umeme Ltd, and whether NSSF had the capacity to run the supply of electricity and distribution business.

(b) The minister observed that the suggested shares cap price seemed to be higher than the market price of Sh 360,000 at 8 May 2014. Although it is only a snap shot view, surely the Uganda Securities Exchange Market dealings would provide a more objective platform for valuing an enlisted company like Umeme. It is also noted that Umeme had a very generous dividend pay-out policy in the period prior to the share offer and that such policy may have also artificially inflated Umeme share values. Umeme is currently enjoying a monopoly position and is protected by a contract under the public debate. 

In one of the advices of the Solicitor–General at the first acquisition of the IPO, the Solicitor-General also indicted so because this House had pronounced itself on the status quo on the company.

The minister further observed that Umeme’s debt position also needed further scrutiny. The minister observed that the total liability ration to equity was about 70-30 per cent at the time. Further, current liability is over 60 per cent of the total liabilities. The trend therefore was viable and also visible in the financial projections. I have already explained that much of the proceeds from the sale went to paying liabilities and the original shareholder. 

Umeme currently accounts for an insignificant part of NSSF investment portfolio at a time NSSF should give due thought to other long term income generating infrastructure instruments for NSSF considerations, such as a two upcoming hydropower generation project which will effectively double the national generation capacity. Madam Speaker, we are borrowing money from China bank but the minister had raised such an issue.

In summary, the minister also observed that while Umeme investments appeared to be attractive, she recommended the Board and management to get an independent, proven, expert to review the whole investment proposal including the sustainability or financial projections and the risks concern raised in the report which would affect the viability of NSSF long term objectives.

On 16 May 2014, NSSF was allocated 100 million shares at Shs 340 per share translating into a total cost of Shs 34 billion. When the committee asked Mr Ivan Kyayonka to explain why he authorised the purchase of shares without obtaining the approval of the minister, his response was that he telephoned the minister on the 8 May 2014 and the minister informed him that she would grant immediate approval and he left it to him to make choice, provided he was ready to take personal responsibility for any consequences that may arise.

I would like the members to move to page 24. Therefore in light of the above, the committee recommends that Mr Kyayonka and Ms Geraldine Ssali who was the acting managing director then at the sale of the secondary shares be reprimanded for their dubious and irregular actions in the acquisition of shares. 

We examined the African Alliance as both investment adviser to NSSF and the leading sponsoring broker. The committee found that NSSF management did not heed to advice of their legal advisers as they did not consult Capital Markets Authority on the matter and even invite Africa Alliance to comment. The committee recommends that the MD of NSSF be faulted and punished for avoiding the advice and proper procedure.
How was African Alliance Limited procured by NSSF? I know that members can read and we can go to 2.62

The committee examined whether there was any possible conflict of interest between African Alliance and NSSF or Umeme because African Alliance was acting as a lead broker. Whereas it is a lead broker with the Uganda Securities Exchange, it was also the lead adviser of NSSF. The committee found that the same broker for NSSF, African Alliance, was the lead sponsoring broker for Umeme as well as one of its authorised selling agencies.

I would like to go direct to the recommendation on this. The committee observed that there was a conflict of interest by African Alliance as both the lead broker and adviser of Umeme and NSSF. Therefore, the committee recommends that African alliance on page 29 should be visited with sanctions by the Capital Markets Authority for having inflicted its interest by working both as a seller for Umeme Limited and buyer for NSSF.

The role of Capital Markets Authority
Madam Speaker, may I remind you that this House enacted an Act on the Capital Markets Authority whose major role is to advise and protect the interests of Ugandans and government in equity business. 

What was the role of the Capital Markets Authority? The committee interacted with the CMA (Capital Markets Authority) technical team on the subject matter and was informed that the transaction of the shares between Umeme and the NSSF was done in a transparent manner. It only required approvals for issuing IPOs which were obtained by Umeme Limited. All the selling brokers for IPOs were dully licensed by the Capital Markets Authority and African Alliance did not operate under the situation of conflict of interest.

Capital Markets Authority also said that the CMA ensured that there was full disclosure by Umeme Limited in the prospectus and CMA also said they approved the prospectus. The committee however discovered that the prospectus, as said by CMA, was issued by Umeme before the final approval of the Capital Markets Authority and the CMA did not act. 

The committee observed that the application for issuing IPO was lodged to CMA on 6 June 2012. The approval by CMA was given on 12 October 2012 subject to a number of conditions, which had to be fulfilled by Umeme Limited and one of these conditions was that the transaction advisor should provide a copy of the minutes of Umeme Holdings Ltd notarised and submitted to CMA.

The amendment of the legal opinion to replace that the lawyers have reviewed the resolution by Umeme Ltd to offer a total of 350 million shares and to submit a revised prospectus to CMA for review prior to the opening of the offer.

In spite of the above clear conditions precedent on the opening of the offer, Umeme Ltd issued the prospectus on 11 October 2012, obviously before receiving an approval from the Capital Markets Authority.

The committee noted that CMA did not sanction Umeme Ltd or its sponsoring broker for the anomaly of issuing the prospectus before fulfilling all the conditions that had been set by CMA. The committee therefore recommends that the management and the board of CMA should be reprimanded for the complacency.

There was always a challenge that the committee met; that why were we investigating into a sector where NSSF was saying that they were enjoying proceeds as dividends from the purchase of the shares? Therefore, the committee had to impress itself whether Umeme’s investment was good for NSSF and in so doing, on behalf of the committee, we admit that we did not go into much detail in this. However, the committee met with the Uganda Revenue Authority to establish the returns to both the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the returns filed by Umeme Ltd and the corporation Tax paid by Umeme Ltd.

Madam Speaker, as I said, at a later stage I will lay some of these accompanying documents. In our interface with Uganda Revenue Authority, it made it clear that Umeme Ltd has been disclosing losses.

The question was, can a company which has declared losses with Uganda Revenue Authority be able to pay dividends to the shareholders knowing that according to the Income Tax it is 30 per cent of the net income of the company? However, the Uganda Revenue Authority also had to give this to the committee; that although Umeme Ltd always declared losses, they always went in detail to audit their books.

URA indicated that in one of the audits they did, Shs 66,115,136,000 billion had been assessed as tax payable but they had not broken it down into the different forms of taxes.

Madam Speaker, as I said, apart from our interface with Uganda Revenue Authority which gave us that position, we did not have time to investigate further whether the statement by NSSF that they had received Shs 3 billion as proceeds from dividends was actual.

Other findings from Uganda Revenue Authority were Capital Gains Tax because Umeme Ltd had not paid Capital Gains Tax and it was a concern when they were transferring shareholding. However, URA said that they would not collect Capital Gains Tax from Umeme Ltd as the Income Tax Act was not in support; it was silent on the transfer of shares internally.

The committee therefore recommends that the Income Tax Act be reviewed to address the loophole that concession holders in Uganda will use to avoid to pay the Capital Gains Tax.

Hon. Gerald Ssendaula and the tax dispute between URA and Umeme Ltd

We have seen that on corporation tax payment, URA and Umeme Ltd are in court. The committee found that hon. Gerald Ssendaula as a member of the Umeme Limited Board, is contesting corporation tax payment at the same time as a Chairman, Board of Directors of URA, which is responsible for assessing and collecting government taxes. In lieu of the above, the committee recommended that hon. Gerald Ssendaula should be forced to relinquish one of the positions in either URA or Umeme Ltd. Umeme Limited being a company we may not be able to force him to relinquish the position to avoid a conflict of interest.

Regulatory Issues Associated with Umeme Ltd sale of shares and the Concession

It should be recalled that Umeme Ltd has to operate under the provisions of the concession agreement it signed with the Government of Uganda in 2004. However, it would appear that the conditions under the Concession Agreement were not fully complied with during the Umeme Ltd sale of shares. In other words, Umeme Limited sold shares beyond what it was legally supposed to have been sold out. 

Section 6.2(d) and (v) of the Government Support Agreement permits the sale of ordinary shares. However, they are limited to less than 49 per cent.  

In addition, section 10 of the amended licence conditions for supplier of electricity and amended licence for distribution of electricity restricts transfer of a public offering of above 49 per cent.

The committee found that ERA, the regulator, always emphasised the above mentioned conditions to both Umeme Ltd and the Capital Markets Authority during the process of sale of shares. In addition, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, in her letter emphasised this.

However, the House should note also that this time ERA, the regulator of electricity, was bypassed during the second acquiring of the secondary shares. They were bypassed because they were strict to the issue of the licence. 

In the letter by the Minister of Finance, she said that the Ministry of Finance has no objection towards the proposed IPO, provided it is in compliance with the contractual obligations and it was copied to both the Permanent Secretary and Secretary of Treasury. Madam Speaker, to note, the Secretary of Treasury is a member of the board of the NSSF and he is represented by the Deputy Secretary to Treasury, Mr Ochailap.

The committee noted that at the second sale of Umeme Limited shares, ERA was bypassed. Consequently, original shareholders sold stakes in the company below the acceptable limits. 

The table below indicates the new shareholding in Umeme Limited with invested asset management now holding 18.5 per cent. Umeme Holdings, the original shareholder, now only has a stake of 14.3 per cent. NSSF has 14.27 per cent and that is if they have not acquired any shares yesterday, Farallon Capital 7.8 per cent, Coronation Fund 3.7 per cent, Allan Grey Africa Funds 3.3 per cent and other small shareholders.

The committee recommends that the concession agreement, therefore, with Umeme Ltd be reviewed given the major challenges that have occurred in the ownership of the company.

Madam Speaker, we made this recommendation but the committee was largely constrained having at the back of our mind that the House had already pronounced itself in the ad hoc committee report and the report had not been presented by Government on the status quo of the implementation.  

The committee further recommends that the Minister of Energy should audit the effect of violation of the concession agreement as a result of the reduction of the shares of the original shareholding below the acceptable limit, as per the concession agreement. 

The committee further recommends that the Minister of Finance should reprimand the leadership of the Capital Markets Authority for their failure to do a comprehensive due diligence that would have safeguarded the interests of Ugandans in the Umeme concession agreement.

Page 35, on the regulation protection, we can skip that.
The committee recommends that this possible fraud should be further investigated by the relevant government agencies. 

The committee further recommends that the performance of the Electricity Regulatory Authority be critically evaluated.

That was a section on acquiring of shares in Umeme Limited. However, one of the terms of references also was on the disposal of land. I will be brief on this.

The committee majorly looked at the specific asset, which was Plot 434 Kibuga Block 4 at Namirembe Road equalling to 0.2 hectares equivalent to 0.494 acres.

How the land was disposed
The committee was informed that in 2007, the Board of NSSF passed a policy on developing signature branch offices. The buildings were located on strategic sites around the country and would house the branch offices and provide some rentable space for economic gain for the fund. Consequently, branch managers were tasked to identify suitable plots for sale, which were then purchased by NSSF. One such plot 434 on Namirembe Road was then purchased.

On 29 April 2009, a one Ms Charlotte Ssali wrote to the then Managing Director NSSF, Mr David Chandi Jamwa, offering a sale of property located at Namirembe Bakuli. Consequently, NSSF management engaged three reputable firms to undertake the evaluation of the property. The firms are mentioned in the report. 

Madam Speaker, I request that we go to the findings. The committee was not able to interface with the former Managing Director, Mr Jamwa, on the purchase of this land. When the committee invited him, he indicated that he could not comment on the matter since it was sub judice and this was subsequently confirmed by his lawyer, Mr Mpanga. However, the committee went through the chronological disposal of this plot.

The committee realised that the Board of NSSF in its meeting on 2nd and 4th March 2011 took a decision to dispose of the pieces of land at Masaka, Mbarara, Hoima, Gulu, Bakuli Namirembe Road and Kibuye. The concern of Parliament was that a plot which was bought by the NSSF in 2008 at Shs 715 Million was instead sold at a less price of 650 Million in 2012. 

Through inquiry, the committee was informed that the original policy of constructing branch offices was reversed and a decision was taken to dispose of all the pieces of land in various parts of the country that had been procured for the purpose; and Most of the pieces of land that had been bought were either in wetlands or not suitable for the intended developments and Plot 434 of Namirembe Road was inaccessible as it was surrounded by Plot 435.

Madam Speaker, our findings, I know members can read through the chronology of events as the committee has listed them down. I would like to go to some of the findings and conclusion on page 44.

On 20 December 2012, an agreement of sale of land between NSSF and Malibu Holdings Ltd was signed. Mr Richard Byarugaba, the Managing Director NSSF signed on behalf of the vendor in the presence of Mr David Nambale, the Corporation Secretary.  Mr Meghani Sikander signed on behalf of the purchaser in the presence of Amin Meghani, Director at Malibu Holdings Ltd.

On 21 December 2012, Malibu Holdings Ltd transferred Shs 650 million to NSSF account at Citibank in respect of the purchase. NSSF management did not care to obtain access of land.

Madam Speaker, it is true that the committee found out that the land that had been acquired at shs 715 million was disposed of at a less figure of Shs 650 million. The committee also established that, indeed, this plot did not have access. However, the committee had to invest a lot of energies to find out whether NSSF could not undertake any other measures to obtain access.

The committee noted that the managing director NSSF did not explore the option of negotiating with the owner of the plot that surrounded the Fund’s Plot. Moreover, the NSSF Board had directed. In addition, in a letter to the select committee dated 16 October 2014, the Meghani informed the committee that there was no request by NSSF at any given time asking for access to their plot.

Inflated purchase price

It is likely that the purchase price of Plot 434 was over inflated for the benefit of the some people in NSSF. At the time NSSF bought the property, Malibu Holdings bought the neighbouring plots at far much cheaper price. In a letter by Malibu Holdings to the committee, it was stated that they bought the neighbouring land at Kibuga Block 4, which had been demarcated into several plots in the total measuring of five acres in 2008 from Mengo Hospital at a rate of Shs 468 million per acre.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee made the following observations

During the process of disposing of the Namirembe land, many private valuers such as Knight and Frank and Cathan Property Consultant and the Chief Government Valuer were engaged to advise NSSF on the current market value of Plot 434. However, the valuers were given the leasehold title instead of the freehold title. The committee thought that this was one the reasons why there was under-valuation of the plot.

NSSF management did not explore the option of acquiring an access road to its plot. The resolution of the Board to halt the sale of the Namirembe plot and explore the possibility of acquiring an access road was ignored by Mr Richard Byarugaba, the then the Managing Director NSSF and Mr Ivan Kyayonka, the Chairperson, Board of Directors. The land was sold at a price below its purchase price. There was no justifiable cause for the sale of the land and NSSF was not in short supply of money.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Managing Director, Mr Richard Byarugaba, the Chairperson of NSSF board, Mr Ivan Kyayonka be compelled to make good loss to the Fund incurred of Shs 56,170,001 that resulted from the sale of Namirembe land below the cost price.

There was another issue of human resource management. I will try to summarise this. One of the concerns raised on the Floor of the House leading to the composition of the select committee of NSSF was the allegation that the candidates that emerged best in the interviews for the position of Managing Director, Deputy Managing Director and Corporation Secretary had not been appointed by the Minister of Finance, an act that was causing anxiety amongst the staff of NSSF but also with discriminatory and anti-meritocracy.

Findings

Madam Speaker, section 39 of NSSF Act establishes the office of the Managing Director of the Fund, who shall be the Chief Executive, whose appointment shall be made by the minister for such a period on such terms and conditions as a minister may determine.

Section 40 establishes the Deputy Managing Director. The committee was informed that the above offices had been vacant since December, 2013 when the contracts of the former bearers expired. Until 29 October 2014, the office of Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director whose contracts as substantive Deputy Managing Director was extended for six months. The office of Secretary to the Fund was also being occupied by an officer in an acting capacity.

Process of filling vacant positions of senior managers. 

Members can read that.

The committee examined the procurement of a recruitment firm PricewaterhouseCoopers to conduct the recruitment of staff. The committee examined the shortlisting and interview results by the consultant and the copies are also part of the report.

Observations 

The committee observed, however, that Shs 500 million that was spent on the recruitment of the officers was a waste of the contributor’s funds.

The candidates who emerged winners from the recruitment process were not appointed for the jobs - that is as per the report of the consultancy attached.

The committee also observed that it is irregular, discriminatory and demoralising for a public body to subject Ugandans to competitive interviews and after the exercise, the successful candidates are not offered the competed for jobs.

Although the Minister of Finance is vested with the authority to appointing of the top managers of the NSSF, upon requesting the NSSF Board to recruit the said top managers and the Board hiring a reputable firm to do the preliminary recruitment, an exercise that cost Shs 500 million of the workers savings, the minister should have paid due regard to the recommendations from the reports of both the consultant and the NSSF Board.
 
The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be held responsible for the loss of Shs 500 million that was spent on the recruitment exercise whose results were largely ignored.

Management of human resources under the leadership and tenure of Ms Geraldine Busuulwa Ssali as acting Managing Director

The human resource docket can be said to be the one, which was faced with the most serious allegations in the short term of office of Ms Geraldine Ssali as acting Managing Director. There have been several claims of nepotism as well as complaints of irregular dismissal of staff. 

Claims of irregular dismissal

The committee was informed of the recruitment of several persons into the employment of NSSF on temporary basis, without following the institutional procedures. This is perceived to be irregular, especially given that the number of recruited persons is alleged to have close connections with persons capable of influencing the NSSF decisions. 

The two affected persons are: a one Liz Kakooza and a daughter of the Inspector General of Government and another Nivia Nangobi a daughter of the former head of marketing in NSSF. These positions were not advertised by NSSF, neither were the appointed officers subjected to any formal interviews before the award of a three months renewable employment contract from 10 June, 2010 to 2014. 

The committee was informed that the appointed officers’ details were in the NSSF database, having served earlier as interns in the marketing department of the NSSF. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to skip to page 54, paragraph 2.22 

Contracts for temporary staff	

The committee observed that temporary staff may also be appointed on short term contracts, where there are urgent needs. All temporary appointments must be authorised in accordance with appropriate procedures. The length of the contract depends on what needs to be done but will normally be for not more than six months. Such contracts may be considered for renewal subject to organisational requirements.

The committee observes that whereas NSSF Staff Handbook encourages commitment to principles of equity, fairness and non-discrimination and requires all recruitments to be based on merit and uphold transparency, objectivity, equal opportunity and integrity in the recruitment and selection process, management disregarded the above provisions in the hiring of the two officers. 

The managers simply relied on the database which, according to management, had only three names from which the two officers were handpicked and not subjected to any process that would guarantee merit and uphold transparency, objectivity, equal opportunity and integrity in the recruitment process. 

Consequently, the committee apportions blame on the acting Head of Marketing, Mr Birungi, the Head of Human Resources, Ms Catherine Byakika and Ms Geraldine Ssali for flouting the NSSF recruitment principles and guidelines.

The committee did not establish any role played by the Inspector General of Government, Justice Irene Mulyagonja, in securing a job for her daughter at the NSSF.

The committee, therefore, recommends that NSSF Board should reprimand Mr Birungi, Ms Catherine Byakika and Ms Geraldine Ssali for flouting the recruitment guidelines.

Claims of irregular dismissal of staff

The committee was informed that NSSF management dismissed several of their staff on grounds of alleged involvement in fraud. The police officers who conducted the investigations observed that the evidence gathered in the investigation was inadequate and as such, recommended that further inquiries be conducted to gather credible evidence to warrant a prosecution of the NSSF staff. 

Notwithstanding the police recommendation, NSSF management went ahead and summarily dismissed the officers who were being investigated without even giving them a hearing. The acting Managing Director Ms Geraldine Ssali indicated to the committee that management decided to dismiss the implicated staff without due process because of the risk posed to the Fund. 

The committee was informed by Ms Geraldine Ssali and the Head Human Resource, Ms Catherine Byakika, that NSSF was a financial institution that was duty-bound to handle cases of financial impropriety promptly and decisively.

We referred you to section 29.17 of the NSSF Staff Handbook and you can turn to page 10.2 about the summary dismissal as these prominently featured throughout the investigation. The committee received several cases of staff who were summarily dismissed without being given a fair hearing.

On the second last paragraph of page 57, the committee noted that in the case of the NSSF employees who were dismissed allegedly for fraudulent conduct, the police reported that their findings had fallen short of establishing a prima facie case and accordingly recommended that further inquiries needed to be conducted to gather credible evidence to warrant a prosecution. 

Out of those finding, the committee, therefore, made observations and recommendations as follows:
 
The committee strongly observed that the NSSF staff were wrongly, summarily dismissed as they were entitled to notice or to a right to be heard. 

The committee further observed that the Acting Managing Director, Ms Geraldine Ssali, and the Head Human Resources, Ms Catherine Byakika acted with highhandedness in handling staff. They dismissed the staff without due regard to the law.

The committee recommends that Ms Geraldine Ssali, the former Acting Managing Director and now the Deputy Managing Director NSSF, and Ms Catherine Byakika, the Head of Human Resources should be seriously reprimanded by the appointing authority for mismanaging the human resources and dismissing staff without following the law.

The committee further recommends that the dismissed staff should be reinstated to their jobs or an out of court settlement at the cost of Ms Geraldine Ssali and Ms Catherine Byakika is quickly done to protect the workers’ savings from being spent on huge compensation costs likely to be paid to the irregularly dismissed staff.

Madam Speaker, I am about to wind up. I now turn to the way forward. The committee appreciates that perhaps this was an opportunity to broadly understand this sector. We spent the first few weeks of this investigation doing research and understanding the sector. 

The committee interfaced with other social security sector players in Tanzania and Geneva. Geneva houses the ICC, which is the body governing the social securities of their association. 

The committee had references to understand whether and how NSSF was functioning properly so that the committee would make recommendations to this House. 

Below are some of the findings and recommendations that the committee would wish to propose.

The committee recommends, on page 62, that Government enacts a robust social security policy and legislation to facilitate expansion of social security coverage in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, by the time of our investigation, the NSSF money had grown to Shs 4.3 trillion but this growth was not attributed to a return on investment where NSSF had invested. It was majorly attributed to the enhanced mobilisation of workers who are saving with NSSF. The committee also realised that the membership today is majorly still a very small percentage of workers and population who are saving with NSSF.

On page 60, the  committee observed that the minister was everywhere in the financial sector regulation in general and in the regulation of the pension sector in particular; and was bound to be entangled in a very serious conflict of interest.
 
The Minister of Finance is the one appoints the board of URBRA, the regulator of the sector. The minister is the one who appoints the board of the Capital Markets Authority and almost all those boards regulating the pension sector. We thought this could cause a problem because of the monopoly.

In addition, there were many expensive layers of governance in the pension sector. For instance, the NSSF had a 10-member Board and URBRA had a six-member Board; both bodies almost drawing members from the same organisations, that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Federation of Uganda Employers.

The committee recommends that the responsibility of the Minister for Finance should stop at appointing the regulatory bodies and leave other players to do their part as good corporate governance dictates.

The committee further recommends that, as is the practice in other countries, the responsibility of investing pension funds should be vested into the Board of Trustees, which should be the final authority on matters of pension fund investment.

Regulation of the capital market – I need to refer you to 5.31 on multiplication of shares for sale on the securities exchange.

The committee was concerned about the over-multiplication or splitting of shares by companies to be sold to the public. A case at hand is of Umeme whose share capital was originally $50,000 with one 1,000 shares but ended up in millions of shares. The question is whether members of the public who acquired shares would benefit from the over-diluted and over-multiplied shares.

The committee was informed that the company law permits the practice. That once the shareholders decide to convene a meeting to multiply and/or split the shares, and register the resolution to that effect with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, then, the new shares are valid and can be traded on the stock exchange. 

The committee was concerned at the rate by which Umeme Ltd produced millions of shares that were sold under the IPO and at the secondary market. 

The committee observed that without plugging this loophole in the law, Ugandans could be sold “hot air” or artificially created shares with no accompanying value. 

Consequently, the committee recommends that the Companies Act should be reviewed in this regard.

Governance of the securities exchange

The securities exchange is the market where securities are traded. In Uganda, the securities are traded on the Uganda Securities Exchange (USE). The securities are traded according to the rules set by the securities exchange and approved by the Capital Markets Authority. However, securities are sold on the exchange; the owners of the exchange receive fees.

The committee learnt that the USE was a private entity owned by brokers namely: Africa Alliance (U) Ltd; Baroda Capital Markets (U) Ltd; Crane Financial Services Ltd; Crested Stocks and Securities Ltd, Dyer and Blair (U)Ltd; Equity Stocker Brokers, UAP Financial Services and Stanbic Bank Group Uganda.

The committee was concerned that where brokers were the owners of the market, there is bound to be a conflict of interest. When the concern of the committee was brought to the attention of the regulator, the Capital Markets Authority (CMA), it got the following response:

That CMA acknowledges that changes can be made to the governance structure of the USE to enable the USE compete favorably in the region and globally. 

The USE is a mutual company. A mutual company is a private company whose ownership is based and is made up of its clients. This has been a feature of all securities exchanges all over the world but this trend started to change globally in 1993, in order to improve governance of securities exchanges.
 
Currently, the USE has a structure of a mutual exchange and the three rights; that is, the right to trade, the right of ownership and the right to manage the exchange, which are all within the trading members. For effective governance, the rights should be separated. The governing council is currently composed of 10 members; seven represent stock brokers, one member represents listed companies, one member represents the general public and lastly, the chief executive officer. 

In a move to improve the governance structure of the USE, a consultant was engaged by the East African Community under the Financial Sector Deepening Project to advice on how the USE can become a demutualised exchange where the trading rights are separate from the ownership of the exchange. Demutualisation refers to the change in the legal status of a stock exchange from a mutual association with one-vote per member to a company limited by shares with one vote per share with majority decision making. 

It involves the separation of trading rights and ownership. The proposals made by the consultant were discussed by the relevant stakeholders and are being implemented. The demutualisation exchange is expected to have a better governance structure.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should explore the possibilities of having the stock market a public company in order to enhance transparency and separate the rights and responsibilities of traders and owners of the market, which are currently fused.

Lessons learnt from ICC and Tanzania also include recommendations that the committee proposed on page 63.

The committee recommends that the lessons from Tanzania be considered for possible adoption.
The Minister of Finance should spearhead reforms to facilitate social security sector play a more vibrant role in economic growth and transformation of the country instead of relying on foreign investors and lenders. 

The committee further recommends that the Private Partnership Bill - (Interjections) – this is because the report was written some time back. It should be urgently enacted to create a conducive environment for profitability and long term investment of pension funds.

The committee further recommends that strategies be devised urgently to expand social security coverage to include Ugandans currently engaged in informal sector. 

Madam Speaker, before I beg to move, I wish to lay on Table the following documents as support documents for this report:

I have already laid the minutes.

    i. The submission by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau on who Umeme Ltd is.
    ii. The NSSF investment policy.
    iii. The NSSF submissions on human resource recruitment and summary dismissal of staff.
    iv. The final report of PricewaterhouseCoopers on the recruitment of Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director and the Company Secretary dated 18 June 2014.
    v. A file containing all correspondences on the disposal of plot 434 Namirembe Road.
    vi. The International Social Security Association (ISSA) guidelines on investment in social security funds.
    vii. Written submissions by NSSF management to the select committee.
    viii. The written submission by the Electricity Regulatory Authority to the select committee.
    ix. The African Alliance and Equity Brokers submission to the NSSF committee. 
    x. The submission by NSSF Board members who are members of COFTU to the select committee. These are several members. These are three documents together.
    xi. A copy of the bank guarantee of Shs 51 billion that was issued to Standard Charted Bank, in favour of purchase of Umeme shares.
    xii. A copy of the supply and distribution license between Umeme Ltd and Electricity Regulatory Authority.
    xiii. The Capital Markets Authority Act and the Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Act.
    xiv. The Initial Public Offering of Umeme prospectus.

Madam Speaker, I once again would like to thank the members of this committee who did and were tirelessly always available to handle their assignment. 

I beg to lay this report to be adopted by this august House. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. We have noted the close collaboration that has enabled you to present the report in the absence of the chairperson. That means that you have been working very well together. We also acknowledge the sacrifices you made among conflicting interests of your standing and sessional committees. But majorly, thank you for carrying out the assignment given to you by this House. 

All the members signed the report; so, you are free to debate. - Not tomorrow, we have a lot of work. There is time. We are debating today.

5.11
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened in very carefully although I came in a bit late. If I heard right, the report mentioned that the stock exchange is owned by a certain individual.

THE SPEAKER: Uganda Securities Exchange.

MR LWANGA: The stock exchange.

THE SPEAKER: Stock exchange? Securities. The one owned by -

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, it is the Uganda Securities Exchange. However, it can also be short-termed as stock exchange.

MR LWANGA: Could you, please, clarify. We would like to know what evidence you have that it is owned by individuals.

THE SPEAKER: Are you contributing? Did you bring your iPad? I would like to show you where they wrote. (Laughter)

5.13
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I consider this report very important to all of us. We took time to debate Umeme as a company. We took a position on Umeme. Now, the issue of NSSF has come up and a thorough research has been presented to the House. I think this is one of the best well-researched reports we have received in the House. I must really congratulate the team. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am standing here because I am making a very humble request that you give us time to go through this report. We really would like to understand it so that we debate. Even if you want us to come back tomorrow, we will be ready. However, I think we would like to understand. I find it very important, very nationalistic, very focused and it will have a positive impact on whatever we are going to come up with.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am humbly begging you on behalf of my colleagues – who I understand are also interested – to allow us time to study the report. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

5.14
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. In the same vein, I would wish that – this report has a lot of revelations where even me as a head of one of the committees, where you tell me that Umeme Holding now is owning shares in Umeme Ltd – we need to do a lot of reading and give due treatment to this report. I would suggest, with your guidance, that we now receive another report from the Public Accounts Committee; we read and internalise them and give proper treatment to the reports. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, this report has been available on your iPads for some time. Therefore, I assume that you had read it. However, if it is the wish of Members that you would like to go and read again - Is that the position? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, debate is deferred. However, take into account that we are short of time. Soon, we shall be busy on the budget. I do not know how much time we have for this work and the Bills. Once we get into the budget, you know, we shall be stuck there for about two months. Debate is deferred to next week.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS ON THE UGANDA INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011/2012

5.15
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fulfilment of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to present to the House the Public Accounts Committee’s report on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ended 30 June 2011/2012 vol. 2 Central Government covering Uganda Industrial Research Institute. The committee interacted with the accounting officer of the institute and now begs to report as follows.

Scope

The report covers audit queries covered in paragraph 53, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, for the financial year 2011/2012. The committee was guided by specific audit queries contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ended 30 June 2011/2012.

Methodology
In disposing of the audit queries, the committee received and analysed responses and documents submitted by the accounting officer in regard to the queries under review.

We held meeting and received responses to the audit queries from the accounting officer of the institute.

Detailed findings, observations and recommendations on specific audit issues in financial year ending 30 June 2011

Budget performance

Revenue performance

During the year under review, audit noted that the institute budgeted to receive a total of Shs 14,063,000,000 out of which Shs 12.2 billion was received. This represents 86.7 per cent performance thereby, leading to a shortfall of Shs 1.8 billion.

Committee observations and recommendations

The committee observed that failure to release funds that had been appropriated impedes service delivery as it directly inhibits the institute’s ability to undertake planned activities as per the annual work plan and budget, hence jeopardising the realisation of its mandate.

Since the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sets MTEF ceilings, it is imperative that these ceilings are respected by releasing the appropriated amounts, lest parliamentary powers will be rendered inconsequential.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should adhere to the Appropriations Act and desist from the arbitrary budget cuts.

Expenditure and fiscal performance

Audit noted that while expenditure during the year under review was generally within the approved budget, some planned activities for the period were not fully implemented.

Committee observations and recommendations

The committee observed that whereas employees were entitled to other staff benefits, 11 employees were not paid. 

The committee noted that failure to implement all planned activities, which the accounting officer attributed to budgetary shortfall, impedes the attainment of the intended objectives of the institute. Research and innovation are costly undertakings and if tangible outcomes are to accrue to it, there is need to vote more resources. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should adhere to the Appropriations Act.

Recruitment of staff on non-competitive basis

Audit revealed that several employees were recruited without following the recruitment procedure as prescribed in the institute’s human resource policy of 2009. Out of a sample of 25 personal files verified by the Auditor-General, 20 of these were found to have been recruited without the jobs being advertised. 

The committee observations and recommendations

The committee noted with concern that while the growth of research institutes like Uganda Industrial Research Institute whose core focus is applied scientific research and development should be anchored on merit, the accounting officer was presiding over a nepotic and inherently unfair recruitment system; moreover, this was in violation of the institute’s own human resource manual.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer be investigated for nepotism and appropriate disciplinary action be taken. In addition, manpower audit should be undertaken so as to weed out all these whose recruitment was questionable with a view of terminating their employment and paving way for fresh competitive recruitment.

Vacant posts

Audit noted that out of the approved establishment structure of 366 posts, only 206 posts had been filled, leaving a total of 160 posts vacant.

The committee observation and recommendation

The committee noted that understaffing impedes the ability of the institute to execute its mandate. While the accounting officer attributed this to the stagnant wage budget and static and potentially un-attractive wage structure, the committee noted the absence of evidence of attempts by the accounting officer to engage the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have the institute’s wage allocation increased.

In addition, for an institute that has a capacity to generate non-tax revenue and establish synergies with other development partners, it is absurd for the accounting officer to lament and keep waiting for government subventions.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be more pro-active, innovative and strategic in his approach to management by exploring options on non-tax revenue and collaborative projects with credible development partners.

Irregular variations of contract price

Audit noted that the institute entered into contract worth Shs 34.3 million with a contractor to supply 220 pieces of metallic casting nets. This followed a procurement process where the same contractor was the only firm that submitted the bid. It was, however, noted that the institute subsequently varied the contract price to Shs 46.8 million, an increment of about 32 per cent on the original price. This was beyond the 15 per cent limit that is allowed under the PPDA regulations.

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted that this was a blatant irregularity and violation of the PPDA Act. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held liable for the breach of the procurement laws.

Use of wrong procurement method

Whereas Section 82(2) of the PPDA Act, 2003 states: “Restricted domestic bidding should only be used to obtain competition and value for money to the extent possible, where the value or circumstances do not justify or permit open bidding procedure....” The institute used this method of procurement while procuring services for completion of that floor at the TDC Block at the institute.

It was noted that the solicitation document was issued to four companies, but only one company returned the bid document. The institute went ahead to award the contract with Shs 121.3 million, VAT inclusive to the only applicants. There is no evidence that the circumstance pertaining at the time warranted the use of such a procurement method, which in turn eliminated competition in the procurement in question contrary to the requirements of the PPDA Act. 

The committee noted the blatant violation of the procurement regulations by the accounting officer undertaking this procurement. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held liable for using restricted domestic bidding instead of open domestic bidding, without any justification and appropriate disciplinary actions should be taken against him.

Detailed findings, observation and recommendation on the specified issue in the financial year started June 2012

Unimplemented activities

An analysis of the physical budget performance revealed that various planned activities during the year were not undertaken, for instance, out of the planned recruitment of 60 per cent staff, only 31 were recruited while research and development for different bamboo products was not undertaken. 

The committee observed that the non-implementation of the planned activities was due to the budgetary shortfall of Shs 3.3 billion. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should adhere to the Appropriations Act. 

Projects with missing memorandum of understanding

Audit revealed that 18 projects lacked memorandum of understanding/contracts. The committee noted that the lack of a memorandum of understanding jeopardises the review and verification of the terms and conditions under which these projects were created and operated. 

In addition, the obligation of the participating parties cannot be ascertained. The accounting officer’s explanation that this was due to the transitory nature of some projects that were transiting from pilot level to commercial scale while some partners exhibited lack of readiness to kick-start projects operations, was found inept especially considering that whether pilot or full scale, formally dictates a framework of engagement, the absence of which creates ambiguity. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for entering into projects without memorandum of understanding.

Active projects under visual incubation with expired contracts

It was noted that five projects, namely: Busia Meat Packers, Savoury Class Quality Meat Products, Mushroom Training Resource Centre, United Foundation of Entrepreneurs Skills for Development and Grace K Supermarket had expired contracts, which had not been renewed at the time of the audit. There was no evidence that management was in the process of renewing these contracts.

The committee’s observation and recommendations

The committee noted that operating projects/contracts that are expired is illegal. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for running projects on expired contracts. 
The committee further recommends for the establishment of proper monitoring and compliance structure to keep tabs on the status of contracts and explore modalities of periodic revision of terms and conditions.

Internal Audits

The role of internal audit is to provide independent assurance that an organisational risk management, governance and internal control processes are operating effectively.

However, the internal audit unit of Uganda Research Institute managed by one lady officer who mainly concentrates on pre-audit of payment vouchers and verifying supplies delivered to the institute. 

The committee noted that the lady officer at the internal audit unit did not have the capacity to solely carry out the internal audit function. The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that the internal audit unit is fully staffed.

Poor storage of undisposed asset

An analysis of the auctioneers’ report reveals that 26 assets failed to attract any buyer at the time of the disposal. Physical verification revealed that the assets were poorly stored, a case in point is where some items were kept on the veranda. The committee noted that such a poor storage exposes the assets to loss of value. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to provide proper storage facilities as required by the Treasurer Accounting Instructions. 

Failure to engrave assets

Physical verifications of the assets revealed that assets costing Shs 655 million was not marked with unique identification numbers. This can complicate the process of identification of such assets in case of loss. 

The committee noted that the failure to engrave the assets exposes them to theft and compromise tracking and monitoring. The committee therefore, recommends that the accounting officer should have all assets of Uganda National Research Institute engraved and their details, including engraved serial numbers entered into the fixed assets register.

Mango Fruit Juice Project in Arua

Audit noted that this project was built at a cost of Shs 435 million of which Shs 241 million was for civil works and Shs 194 million was for machinery, water and power. It is “a build, equip and handover project.”

Physical inspection of Nile Natural Fruit product Plan in Arua Municipality during the month of January 2013, revealed that construction of the building had been completed and some machinery equipment were offloaded on the site on 15 January 2013; the same date this inspection took place.

However, the following equipment was yet to be delivered to the site: Pulper, homogeniser, three work tablets, tables, grill cover and two trolleys. Production was expected to start in the month of May.

Observations
The committee observed that whereas this was a planned activity to be concluded in two years, at the time of inspection, works were still ongoing, for example, electricity and equipment had not been installed. The site had not yet been fenced and compound paving was not done.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that projects are completed within their lifespan.

Savoury Class Quality Meat Products

Audit noted that the project received machinery and equipment costing Shs 33.3 million. Physical inspection of this project located in Arua town during the month of January 2013, revealed that production had not commenced. 

It was noted that the project lacked a building to house the plant as some of the equipment was found at the site still packed in boxes. It was further noted that there was no electricity in the place to enable operation of the machines.

Observation and recommendations

Like the previous project, the committee noted an element of weak project planning and management. The committee recommends that Uganda National Research Institute should improve on its project planning and management.

Peanut Research and Processing Centre in Lira

Audit revealed that Uganda National Research Institute contributed a total Shs 853,763,231 million towards the constructions, installation of machinery and equipping of the project. This is also “a build, equip and handover project.”

Physical inspection of the project carried out on 5 January 2013, revealed that construction of the plant had been completed and all the required machinery and equipment had been installed and commissioned. However, it was noted that production was low yet the store was full with unprocessed groundnuts. 

The committee noted that this scenario is a testimony of poor project planning and management. The committee recommends that Uganda Industrial Research Institute improves on its feasibility studies and project management capabilities to ensure higher rates of project success.

Fruit Juice Processing Project, Nabusanke in Mpigi

Audit noted that Uganda National Research Institute contributed a total of Shs 853 million towards the construction, installation of machinery and equipping of the project. This is also “a build, equip and handover project.” The land was donated by the church and the project was implemented by Kasaka Mothers Union based on the presidential directive.

However, due to the lack of entrepreneurial skill, the association has failed to manage the project that has not achieved the full commercialisation. 

The committee observed that failure of the commercialisation is a symptom of failure to effectively engage and prop up the capabilities of the relevant stakeholders. This is likely to impede sustainability.

The committee recommends that URI improves its project management strategy, lest the sustainability of its project will remain at stake.

Madam Speaker, I request that the report be adopted as presented. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Public Accounts Committee. Honourable members, the report has been signed by 20 out of the 30 members, so you are free to debate or to adopt it as proposed by the chair. You will have three minutes each. 

5.31
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report as presented by the Chair is fairly straightforward. The issues highlighted are very similar. As noted by the committee there is need for these projects, which are being incubated for there to be a proper feasibility study before committing large sums of money to such projects. 

The other issue is the lack of entrepreneurial skills among the beneficiaries of these projects. If you simply start the project and leave it to them, they cannot manage it. A good example is the Kasaka Mothers Union which was given a processing plant, but lacked capacity to manage it; in some cases, there is also lack of capital to manage such projects. 

I have a good example in my constituency where the people in a union were given a maize mill, but they do not have the capital to run it; it required fuel for the generator, and money to pay workers and perhaps also money to purchase raw materials before you can kick-start the project. As a result, the project is just lying idle. 

I think if Government is going to help people, they should go a step further. It is just like if somebody’s car is stuck in the mud and you push it only part way and you ask the owner to move yet they still need help. If Government is going to help, there is a need for it to commit much more help, including managerial training; maybe hand holding in terms of embedding a manager in to the project in order for these projects to be viable and successful. 

Madam Speaker, there is also the revival of Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). I hope that with its revival UDC, some of these incubations can be handed over to it; it would be more qualified to do this. Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) can concentrate on the scientific part, in terms of making machines to do work, which is their core business; the core business of UIRI is not really business incubation; UDC can do that much better. 

I would like to request the government to speed up on the issue of reviving UDC so that it can help us to incubate companies and bring them up to a level where they are viable and -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know how UIRI identified the areas to go. I hope someone can answer that for me.

5.35
MS MARGARET BABADIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee on Public Accounts for this presenting this report.

I also would like to thank our Auditor-General for the diligent work that he has been doing. The only problem is that we are always doing a post-mortem. The work is done, money is misused, people have misbehaved but we deal with such mess later.  What is the use of this report?

It is very important that whatever we report here is implemented. Let me take this example. Research is very important and our development depends on the proper research. If the human resource manager or accountant decides to recruit their own relatives who may not have the expertise, then what kind of research findings are we going to get? 

It is a very common practise. In some institutions you will find people from the same tribe being employed. I do not know how we will get rid of nepotism. We must take serious actions against the accountants and all those personnel who recruited their own people. They are the ones letting us down in our development. 

I would also like to talk about the internal auditors. They are supposed to help the situation before the money is embezzled. They are supposed to follow up any money spent so that by the time the external auditor come, they have information for the Auditor-General to write the report properly but instead, they connive with the accountants and officers and end up not doing their work. 

We need to really revise the role of internal auditors. If they do not do their work properly, they should not hold those positions. They should not consume our money for nothing because they are supposed to help the Auditor-General do their work. 

Lastly, the projects like the one in Arua are very important. The people of Arua and the whole West Nile are trying to see how to get money out of it. People are producing fruits, but the money given is not used properly and up to now, the project has not taken off. I think there should be a lot to worry about. 

Besides that, there are people frustrating the development of Uganda. His Excellency, the President of Uganda tries his best to support research and new innovations, but we Ugandans are the ones frustrating it. People who are found irresponsible should be brought to justice for us to move forward with development. Thank you.

5.38
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to salute the Committee on Public Accounts  for coming up with this report. The Uganda Industrial Research Institute is one Government institution that we need, as a Government, to revive, rejuvenate, and revamp such that it performs to its fullest on its core mandate. This institute needs support in two areas and one is on human resource. When you look at the committee’s report, you realise it talks about how recruitment is done at this very important institute. Nepotism is at its peak; tribalism taking a centre stage. I think this Parliament needs to give some policy guidance in terms of how this institute should operate.  

The second challenge is on the question of the budget. Uganda is a member of African Union. In 2004, the African Union passed a resolution to the effect that all member states should commit 1 per cent of the total national budget to research. As a nation, we are signatory to this resolution, but we have not yet met our obligation. 

The hope to Ugandans may come from the contribution that this Parliament made. Madam Speaker, you are aware this Parliament made necessary noise on the integration of science and technology. We are now happy that the appointing authority, His Excellency, the President, has integrated science and technology into the Ministry of Education and Sports activities. Probably, an institute like UIRI will get policy guidelines, if a department of research is created under that ministry. As of now, it appears as if it is a motherless and fatherless institute of Government without any sense of belonging in terms of policy guidelines. 

On the project in Lira, we still want to plead with this institute that this project should take off because it has not yet taken off. Thank you.


5.41
MS REBECCA OTENGO (NRM, Woman Representative Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will allow me to begin from the point of institutional memory. As members of Committee on Public Accounts in the Eighth Parliament, we called the Executive Director of UIRI to appear before us.

We already had a very biased attitude about UIRI, but we managed to tolerate him and allowed him to give us information on what they do. After the presentation, we were convinced that they were doing a good job. 

Madam Speaker, however, I would like now to get to Lira. I do agree that a lot of money has been sunk into that project of Lira. However, I would like to find out from the committee the answers they got on the level of establishment, ownership and membership, and whether it is now being made for production or it is still at the level of incubation and research.

Sometimes when you try to find out from them - I would like to say that as a minister, I find them a little bit cagy. One does not know whether they will now let it go to the people of Lira or to keep it. They will keep it as a centre of research or will now move into full blast production because, as somebody who studied in Lira, when it comes to sim-sim and groundnuts, that is the area where we can have some niche. However, I find the machinery that has been taken to Lira - the ownership and management does not seem to be clear. The committee should have helped us to find out how this is being done. Thank you.


5.44
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. Well in the findings, the committee reports that out of 25 personal files verified, 20 personnel were found to have been recruited without the jobs being advertised. Out of the 25 personnel, 20 were irregularly recruited. That gives you the possibility of over 80 per cent irregularly recurited. This is something that we should be able to handle seriously.

My concern here is about the committee recommends that the accounting officer be investigated for nepotism and an appropriate disciplinary action be taken and in addition man power should be undertaken so as to weed out all those whose recruitment was questionable. Well, this is a good recommendation but, as time goes on, it will not become helpful. What we need to do here is to specifically identify the person to implement this recommendation and what is the timeframe? 

The recommendations we pass do not have timeframes and those without specific persons to implement will not help us. I was a member of PAC, there are many of these recommendations which have become stagnant and I am sure that up to now nothing has happened.

We should therefore be specific on who we should question after wards and indicate the timeframe. Those are my greatest concerns. Thank you.

5.46
MS JOVIAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good and concise report presented. It is shocking that we are always blaming Government and clamouring for infrastructure or adding value to farmers produce; so that we can encourage more of our people to engage in agriculture. We have the Uganda Industrial Research Institute purchasing equipment, giving it out to people, so much money wasted and the equipment just lies there. 

Therefore, I would like to agree with my colleagues that when a project is identified and equipment is purchased, it is very important that the human resource is identified to operate these machines and trained. It is painful to see this fruit processing project that should help the church to be self-sustaining; that should be a model project for all women/mothers groups in the whole country - if this project was successful, I am sure it would have been replicated elsewhere, but we have equipment just lying there unused. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only equipment to do with fruit processing; we know that there is so much equipment lying in hospitals not being used yet our people keep dying of diseases that would be preventable and curable, if there were qualified personnel to operate these machines. So, there should be a policy shift that when equipment is purchased, people must be identified and trained. 


 Madam Speaker, the issuer of accounting officers. I do not know where some of these accounting officers come from to join the service. How can you evade procurement procedures and then you engage in nepotism? This accounting officer referred to in this report, should be thoroughly investigated and brought to book such that whatever loses were incurred as a result of evading procurement procedures, become a pecuniary responsibility on his part and he should refund this amount of money. When we begin to have monies refunded, then it can serve as a deterrent to the would-be offenders. It is also very important that we start to hold accounting officers accountable indeed, to follow the financial accounting procedures that are laid down. Thank you

Before I conclude Madam Speaker, I would like to thank His Excellency, the President for the effort he has put in equipping this Uganda Industrial Research Institute. All the money that has been put in - if we really used it as hon. Margret Babadiri has said, this country would be very far. Thank you very much.

5.49
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in appreciating and congratulating the committee for presenting this timely work. I think this is one of the reports that have been processed very quickly.

In regard to the Mango Fruit Juice project in Arua, it is on the ground and I have personally been involved in monitoring the activities there. So, I can report that the committee report has not been thorough, particularly on this project.

This project, yes as noted delayed, but a lot deserves to be told about that delay, first of all, in implementing the construction work and secondly about equipping the factory. 

When some of the machines were delivered, we had to get involved in searching for them up to Kampala to find out where the machines had been hidden. Until the issue was put in the press, is when the Uganda Industrial Research Institute came out to tell us where the machine was being used, yet the place where the machine was supposed to be was Arua and the person who was holding these machines is in this august House. 

So, Madam Speaker, it is important that some of these recommendations or reports need to be thoroughly investigated because how could Uganda Industrial Research Institute allocate a machine distained for Arua to another place and later retrieved and taken to the other side? It gives a lot of suspicion that Uganda Industrial Research Institute is not doing things correctly.

Secondly, when it comes to the operationalisation of these projects – yes these are good initiatives. Government has put money and from the looks of the project designs, one can see that these are projects which will have an impact on the livelihood of the communities. 

As for the Mango Fruit Juice Project, when the machines were tested, the price of mangoes went up across the region because there was market. The machine was processing the fruits within one day; they could process tones of fruits. All the wastages that had been experienced within the region were no longer there. That is why I am saying these are projects that can turn the lives of people. 

So, it is important, as hon. Dennis Obua said, that we need to lay our eyes on Uganda Industrial Research Institute, as a Parliament and as Government to see that they do the right thing so that we can get the due benefits that were envisaged in funding these projects. I thank you.

5.53
MR KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for presenting a comprehensive report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to concentrate basically on the Fruit Processing Project in Nabusanke because this lies in my constituency and I have had the benefit of visiting this particular place. 

The Uganda Industrial Research Institute needs not only to provide the monies - for instance for this project, you are looking at a tune of Shs 853 million - and stop at that. I do not think that is enough. When one visits this project location, they will find both the structure and the equipment in place but cannot see any work being done. 

The day His Excellency, the President visited, I was amazed when I got inside and there were products, which I presume were for sell. But the President asked one pertinent question: “What processes are you going through to have this product? The person who was in charge informed us that they were using pulp oil concentrate. Well, the President had in mind that the farmers were providing the pineapples, mangoes and tomatoes to produce the juice for sell. But remember that having pulp oil concentrate rules out the agenda of involving the stakeholders in the community to participate in such a project. 

Therefore, I urge Uganda Industrial Research Institute to rethink and re-plan and have a stake in the projects. They are handing over this project to the Mothers Union, but what expertise does Mothers Union have to run the equipment that is there? If you notice carefully with even other projects, without having that in place, we are not achieving much.

Lastly, it is also very important to consider the value-for- money audit because more than Shs 800 million - when you see what is - there is something missing because the church donated the land. Yes there is the structure and the equipment, but there is a lot that needs to be considered at least for the good of people of Uganda and the monies that we do appropriate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.56
MRS IBI FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting the report. At least this time they were debating reports of 2011. There is some progress. I hope PAC covers the remaining reports too. Otherwise, some time back it was worse than this. By now we will be debating reports of 2005. I pray that they try to cover up.

I can summarize this report as lack of management. This accounting officer should be brought to book not tomorrow but today, if possible. We are getting into problems because of lack of management. People are put in offices but fail to perform what they are supposed to and I would like to give an example. 

According to the report there is poor storage of assets that are supposed to be disposed of. No storage facilities are in place. These properties are supposed to be disposed of but they are left to rot on the verandas. This is lack of management. The other one is about poor project planning and the best examples given are related –(Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, hon. Florence Ekwau, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that I have interacted with the managing director of this institution and every time I interact with him he laments about the appropriation we do for him. Of recent I found out that he is too much involved in the running of Kigumba Institute and forgotten about the affairs of running the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 
Therefore, I would wish to support the idea that his appointment letter is reviewed. Even then, this man has been there for ages at a managing director’s level. One has to be on contract basis. We need to look at his contract to determine whether it is still running or he is there forever. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Hon. Mbahimba for the constructive information. In fact this Institute is only suffering because of Poor management. The other is reason is non-payment of staff. I am only giving examples that will illustrate to you that this man completely lacked managerial skills. Nonpayment of staff - 11 Staffs are not paid. This compromises on the output of the research findings that we are supposed to receive as a country. 

But there is also the issue of vacant positions. Out of the 366, there are 160 vacant positions. If you sampled out only Members in this House seated, how many of us have people who want these jobs but they cannot get them yet we are seated with them in our  -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. There is the flaunting of the PPDA regulations. How do you increase by 32 per cent on the normal contract price? This manager should be arrested with immediate effect. He awarded contracts to single bidders, which meant they would automatically get the contracts. How do we have managers running the country like this? He would have planned activities and would not expect even one of them.

6.00
MS KEVINA TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to add my voice onto the voices of the Members who have thanked the committee for presenting this report. It has a report of 2012 yet we are already in the ninth Parliament. 

There is a very big gap in terms of recruitment at the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. That is gap very big for an institution to operate with about only 50 per cent of the required human resource. No wonder the audit department, which is supposed to have the internal controls of the institution, has only one person. 	

Madam Speaker, it violates the laws of international SAP; that is accounting standards. You cannot crosscheck your work, balance it and do everything. That is why the whole problem is about mismanagement.

They say the assets were poorly managed and not even engraved. It seems they do not have an assets register. I even wonder that some of the projects they are supposed to implement do not have a memorandum of understanding. Like the Busia Meat Packers, which I am not ashamed to report - I do not know whether the committee really went there to verify the situation. I come from Busia, but I have never seen it. May be that factory is existing in my colleague’s constituency. I have traversed the whole district; I really do not know about it. Even in the State-of-the-Nation Address, His Excellency, the President mentioned about Busia Meat Packers and I wondered where it was. Thank you.

6.03
MR JULIUS	MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. The Uganda Industrial Research Institute is an agency that is supposed to help Ugandan students so much, especially in the science-based aspects on research and innovation.

At least I got the chance to visit the institute; there are many good things. You find people with creativity coming up with projects that can be incubated.

However, when you share with management, you hear lamentations. But when you try to evaluate well the little money that they are given, you notice they are not putting it to proper use.

When you try to move out there and see how Government has engaged itself so much in sponsoring research and innovation- There are many simple things that we can use in the same institute to have them on our market here – these people are not trying to help the students who go there for innovation. 

Madam Speaker, I am a farmer and I have many mangoes. I got a contract to supply my mangoes to Coca Cola and Britannia. 

When I supplied the first batch of mangoes and I believed that I would make a lot of money through juice, they told me there was a lot of acidity. I carried the mangoes to that research institute to know which mangoes we would produce without acidity and which are different from the ones Coca Cola and Britannia are using, I discovered later that they only import powder; they mix it here in Uganda before labelling it as made in Uganda. We have many mangoes, which are very good and fresh. If the institute could only help us establish the acidities that are required or if they could tell us the type of mangoes that is good. These are things that would be done here but we are unable because the institute is completely not helpful. Our mangoes end up rotting - people are just eating the mangoes; Kenyans come around Busia to buy and take them across. A mango which I would have sold at Shs 3,000 is taken at only Shs 100. These are all loses to farmers. This is why we feel there should be some kind of investigation conducted at this institute.

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I would like to bring to the attention of this House is: I have heard on many occasions the pronouncements about Busia Meat Packers. I would like to confirm - I come from Busia - the so-called organisation is supposed to be in Busia Municipality where my sister hon. Kevina Taaka comes from. 

As Members of Parliament from Busia, especially I, hon. Taaka and hon. Mulimba set on a journey to establish where it was but we did not find it; it is not there. I wonder whether the committee made any attempt to visit it let alone establish whether it exists or not. But money is being sent to that particular organisation -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute, tell us about the non-existent factory. (Laughter)

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I would be very happy if the Ministry of Trade, where I believe this organisation falls, would probably through the Committee on Trade and Industry, travel to Busia and identify exactly where this particular institution is based. Otherwise, as people of Busia, we are very ready to begin processing meat. However, I believe that this is one way the management of the institution is using to eat this money -(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, hon. Maganda, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Busia Municipality is my constituency. I want to confirm that we do not have it. Now that my chairman of the committee – please, let us one day plan a journey to go and look for it. Thank you.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you, very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude. This is a good institution; we should all be embracing it.  Government is moving towards skilling Uganda, and many children who will come through skilling Uganda will definitely end up in this research institute; which will innovate and incubate all projects later –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee? Please sit down. (Laughter) You cannot debate your own report. It does not matter if he did not attend; you are recorded as being a member of that committee. You avoid attending and then you want to speak here? No.

6.08
MS FLAVIA	KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they did and I would like to thank the Auditor-General for bringing this out.

I just wonder when I see the level of complacence that Ugandans exhibit when they delay in institutions, and they regard them like their homes and personal businesses. One of them is UIRI; this Executive Director will never surface to the committees; he has abandoned the institute; he is in Kigumba with oil; and he is a professor. 

I do not know what his professorship is about because I know we have doctors in herbal medicine - I would like to know what exactly his professorship is about.  This financial year we were going to stand over his budget; we gave him a stern warning. I personally wrote to him saying whenever I invite him and he does not come, we are not going to pass his budgets any more. He has left the institution to girls and boys who are either his nieces or girlfriends. I just do not understand. However, this is a person who does not have regard for anyone.

If my minister was here, she would bear me witness that this is one of the agencies where she has headache; where someone has a lot of contempt, and I wonder why we continue to appropriate money to non-existent institutions and projects. This is a person who will convince His Excellency, the President, to put money aside. I am sure this UIRI is going to end up like the banana initiative that we have in Bushenyi.

That is another institution we may have to look at. I would love that we recommend for a human resource audit because most of the employees that are at UIRI, I do not know whether they qualify to be in those positions. Even when they come to present in the committee they are sub-standard. 

Madam Speaker, this is a person who could be even hand picking his board members; because he even fires them. At one point, he was involved in court case when he wanted a board member to leave before his term of office expired because he had participated in handpicking –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute, chairperson.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This time if we stand over the budget of Uganda Industrial Research Institute, this honourable House would not get surprised. However, what I would like to strongly recommend is for a human resource audit. We shall not revamp this institution unless we tackle the management.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.

6.12
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to join colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. Government is promoting science and technology but I just wonder how this can be achieved when the funding to these institutions is inadequate. There is need for us to inject enough funding and personnel so that these institutions can carry out scientific innovations and do quality work. In doing quality work, I believe our products will be able to compete with products from the rest of the country.

Leaving equipment on verandas is a very high level of irresponsibility and personally, the recommendation by the committee is good. This accounting officer is tired of his work; does not love his work and therefore, there is need to relieve him of his duties after all, Members are telling us that he is even working in another institution. Why should we keep maintaining him there when he is not performing? I thank you.

6.13
MRS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I really sympathise with this institution and the committee. In their report, they are stating that Ministry of Finance should release 100 per cent of the appropriated funds. In this particular case, at least 86 per cent was released but no work has been done.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that Busia, Arua and Lira are complaining. What is the essence of releasing 100 per cent of funds and no work is done? This is not realistic. I read in the report of a situation where some of the employees were recruited without undergoing interviews and it was informal. You hear the chairperson herself lamenting that she does not know whether these people are competent. How do you test the competence of a person who has been recruited without undergoing interviews?

It is incumbent upon this House to bring this officer to book because these are the people who are letting this Government and this country down. A case in point is the Peanut Research and Processing Industry in Lira. I am hearing this for the first time today. I know it is in Lira but I do not know whether it is for an individual or it was meant to help the population in the district and this country. Somebody has personalised it. I do not know how the committee will unveil this so that the population of Lira benefits from this.

We are also talking about value addition but this is not known to the district at all. I do not know where he is processing and taking the products and whether we are really getting value for money from whatever has been injected into this Peanut Processing Industry. 

Therefore, the committee has a lot to do. As a Member of Parliament for Lira district, please I need your attention for this so that my people benefit from it. It should not be personalised but the community should benefit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am wondering who can conduct a human resource audit because we need to take a decision. Secondly, I am directing the Minister of Trade and Industry to come here on Tuesday and explain to us where this person is. We also want to know how the government can appoint the same person in two places. He is earning from two sources of the Consolidated Fund as if there are no Ugandans to take up those responsibilities. 

Let the honourable minister come on Tuesday and explain to us where this person is and where he works. Does he work in Uganda Industrial Research Institute or in Kigumba? 

6.17
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. When the accounting officer appeared before the committee and we raised some of these issues, his statement was that lucky enough in this country, there are many people who are doing what they do not know and many others who know what they are not doing and that is the first problem in this country. 

On the other hand, when it comes to staffing, we should agree that Uganda has been ranked first in Africa regarding science and technology and being innovative before it became second. However when it comes to staffing, he told us that he is short of 160 staff. When we asked how he conducts a project without a feasibility study, we were told that research is not politics. As researchers, they knew what they wanted to do. They were stretched into conducting these projects and handing them over to the population. 

He added that as an institute, they had a programme on how they would carry out research in those products and that is why you see that in all these projects, once they establish what is supposed to be a research project, they are transformed into commercial projects, which are then abandoned wherever they are placed. When it comes –(Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable chairperson. Hon. Mwiru, from what you are saying, the institute does the scientific part of it but when it comes to the incubation, it is just doing half the job. However, I thought that Uganda Development Corporation is the one, which is best suited for that role. Why don’t we, as Parliament, recommend that Uganda Industrial Research Institute stops at the science part of it and then the incubation is taken over by the other arm of Government?

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I think what we need to appreciate is that science or Uganda Industrial Research Institute is very pertinent in this country. However, when it comes to the funding - This is the issue I was raising. The man says that he lacks 160 technical staff and that those he handpicked - Madam Speaker, when he appeared before the committee and hon. Musinguzi will bear me witness, he did not have any shame. 11 people came and 10 were from one side. Of course we were all shocked –(Interjection)- From which side; from the west. We were all shocked as to the man’s boldness but he lacked people to bring and only came with those particular people.

As the way forward, we need to agree that since it is very important, we could bring the Presidential Initiative on Banana into the institute and then reconstitute the management and the leadership so that we can provide funding to that institute.

The other issue was the funding aspect –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much for giving way. I am seeking clarification. You are constantly talking about under resourcing at the institute. But I am aware that this is one of the best resourced organisations within the industrial sector. They receive at least Shs 15 billion per annum and I want to compare this to the Uganda Export Promotion Board, which receives Shs 1 billion a year and the National Bureau of Standards that receives much less than this. I do not think that it is a problem of resources; it is a problem of management.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, what we need to appreciate is that Uganda Industrial Research Institute is concerned with causing Uganda to leap forward. What they are saying is that they have a strategic plan and they show what they want to do. When it comes to the ceiling - Take an example of the Wage Bill. You cannot have an institute that lacks 160 technical staff who are supposed to contribute to this institution. 

Therefore, what we need to agree upon, as Parliament, is that it is very important that we have the proper staff in an institution and that we change the management. In his own statement, he said that as long as he is understaffed and operating under capacity, there are no miracles that will happen in this institution. 

That is why the committee was concerned that the same person is in Kigumba. When you go there, the same management issues are arising and there is a fight between the Ministry of Education and the same person in as far as that is concerned.

Lastly, honourable members –(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. Members have raised the question of funding or appropriation by Parliament but I think that institution attracts donor funding. How do you factor in that part of the funding from donors where Parliament or Government cannot demand for accountability regarding donor funds in such an institution? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR MWIRU: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, if there is any funding, it is under Budget support. If it is project support then it will also be known. In as far as they are concerned, in their final accounts, they are only showing that all they received was revenue from this institution but they have the capacity to have -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very objective report and if you read the Auditor-General’s report, you get the sense that the committee tried to handle all the issues that had been raised. However listening to colleagues, we are degenerating into policy issues and yet there is a sectoral committee, which is mandated to handle most of these policy issues and problems.

In my view, Madam Speaker and you were even asking this very question, who does the human resource audit? We have a committee under which this institute falls and this is the time for them to examine, in detail, most of the policy issues that have arisen in this report. 

 We will be moving better in that way and some of the issues might need investigations. I heard my colleague talking about the minister and saying that even the Board is appointed by the Chief Executive and I am saying, how can that be? It is the Board that appoints the MD or the Chief Executive and most of the employees are also appointed by the Board and not necessarily the Chief Executive. 

Therefore, if we are here to crucify this Chief Executive for mistakes of the minister, what is the worth of this minister who cannot supervise his boss? He should not even be called a minister in my view. Therefore, much as these problems could exist, we need proper identification of where the problem is and then we can make appropriate recommendation.

The procedural point I was rising on, Madam Speaker, therefore is, don’t you think that this matter should be examined by our sectoral committee in detail so that we can have a better debate and better solutions or recommendations instead of looking at a Committee on Accounts, which has brought this out and now we are more concerned about the broader problems of the institute? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I want give information to the committee that they should not attempt to explain anything in defence of the companies or institutions they are auditing because they have no interest. As far as Parliament is concerned, we want an audit report; what has happened, where they have flaunted the law and failed to comply to the financial regulations or rules of the company. That is what we are interested in.

The moment we encroach into critics of other things; policy issues, we will be making the work of the PAC very difficult. PAC should just tell us where we have gone wrong in as far as implementation of the rules as laid down by the Auditor-General are concerned. That is what Parliament should be concerned with. We should not waste time debating policy issues in this forum. That is the information I want to give the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the policy issues have risen out of the report of the Committee on Public. They have identified them as gaps so we cannot just shy away from them. If someone is working in two places - They found that in the Auditor-General’s report they were responding to what the Auditor-General wrote.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, there is one thing that we need to understand. The Shs 15 billion, which was appropriated to them, could only be utilised and they could only perform to our expectations if they had the required staffing. However, they are telling us that whereas we gave them Shs 15 billion, it was less 160 staff and therefore, they could not perform. That is why this query is coming under budget performance. 

This does not only apply to Uganda Industrial Research Institute. They are telling you that less 160 staff, there are no miracles that they are going to perform as this is bound to happen. That is the summary, Madam Speaker and I would like to conclude by inviting Members to adopt the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when I asked who does the audit, I was thinking about who is the equivalent to the Auditor-General in as far as human resource is concerned. That is what I was looking for. The same Auditor-General can do a human resource audit? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General can carry out a human resource audit in that respect. In addition, regarding the one who selects the beneficiaries, I think that became a political issue. These projects were supposed to be research projects of the Uganda Industrial Research Institute but they were hijacked and started operating politically. That is why you would go and say that there is this women group with mangoes, hand over the project. An honourable colleague asked, who owns these projects? This becomes very pertinent; that a research project was handled over to the -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us agree to amend the report and request the Auditor-General to do a manpower audit of that institution. However, still the minister has to come here and tell us where this person works and then the sectoral committee can follow up on the other issues.

6.31
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do agree with the issue of the human resource audit but given the report, which points out problems in many areas, why not carry out what they call a forensic audit, which can also include the human resource audit? Why not have a wider audit so that the Auditor-General goes deep into how the whole company is operating? I don’t think the problems of the organisation are only about the human resource as we have heard in the reports. My proposal would be that we ask for a forensic audit into the organisation. 

6.32
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, forensic audit is very expensive and I think we are now confronted with a project, which is very disappointing. I don’t know whether this country is ready to pump in even more money to do a forensic audit.

What we need at the moment is for the sector minister to go in and really examine where the policy gaps are. That is really what we are looking at; the failure of management and everything that is going wrong there.

One of the contributors, the Minister for Northern Uganda, has talked about who owns these things. The problem of ownership is there so we really need the sector minister to go and do a thorough examination of what is happening and come to this House with a report. It is a very urgent matter. Every day that passes, whoever is running that institution continues misusing money and running projects without any contracts. The MOU expires but he continues to run the project. There is a problem there and I think we need the sector minister to come to us with an up-to-date report of what is going on and what we should do. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know whether we expect a treasury memorandum from the government because I was going to tell them to come to us with a memorandum.

6.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will realise that very soon, Parliament will be appropriating money and hon. Cecilia Ogwal has pointed out the issue of the cost that goes with the forensic audit. 

I also wish to point out the issue of time that if possible, this House could adopt what your guidance and that of hon. Abdu Katuntu that the sector minister and the sectoral committee take up the matter. This would help this Parliament to understand the details of what we want so that before we appropriate money to this particular body, we know whether we are giving them money or not, depending on the outcome of the report. 

Madam Speaker, I was of the view that you guide this House in setting the time for when this activity should be done and a report brought back to the House.

6.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, sitting here and listening to the report and the debate, it is clear that policy issues have arisen from this PAC report. The custodian of the policy is the minister. Maybe the minister could have an explanation on the policy issues. 

I am sympathetic to the proposal by hon. Katuntu that the person in charge of the policy should be asked to explain the policy gaps, if at all they are there. Then if this House is not satisfied, it can decide on what measures to take. You may find that actually what we regard as gaps have other causes. Therefore, why don’t we identify the policy aspects in the report, ask the minister to explain them and then we take a decision, after listening to the person in charge of the policy? I think it makes sense that way, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

6.37
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, these are audit queries, which were forwarded to Parliament. PAC has done its part and this is the report that we have on the Floor of the House. Government should either take it up and say, this is the part we can play in the treasury memoranda and have them but for the Auditor-General to come up with audit queries, which the sector ministry has not responded since 2011 – I believe that even in another report of the Auditor-General, it will be a reoccurring thing because those audit queries will remain on record.

These are controls within the institution, which they have not conformed to and they are still standing. If they are forwarded to Parliament, Parliament is the only institution, which can drop those queries after the controls have been rectified. If they are not rectified, they remain on record.

The only way out is for the sector ministry to answer those queries and tell Parliament how they were addressed. For those that have failed, they should be investigated so that the person in charge is brought to book otherwise, those queries will stand year in, year out.

Parliament is the only institution, which is allowed to drop queries from the Auditor-General so the only way out is for the minister or Government to take up the treasury memoranda and report to us about the queries that they are able to deal with. 

The other policy issues can be dealt with by the minister. As Parliament, we cannot do much after the Auditor-General has done his professional job and he has reported to PAC, which in turn has reported to Parliament. Either the queries are dropped or they stand on the records.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I want to direct the government that you come here with a treasury memorandum within one month. If you do not, we are not going to appropriate money for UIRI for this financial year. We are giving you one month to respond to the issues raised in this report.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, I think the way we were moving would have been better as proposed by both hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Rukutana. Much as we are waiting for the one month, because we are not just fault finding, I also know that we have a lot of backlog from PAC. I think an explanation -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, can you protect me from the Chairman of PAC?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS AMUGE: Within this short time, while we wait for the one month, an explanation from the Minister of Trade would be important because we are in the Budget period. What if she comes after one month and we are not satisfied? Don’t you think it will affect the budget of the sector?

THE SPEAKER: The government will decide on how to handle this matter. For us we want a memorandum within one month. Whether the minister or the Prime Minister comes, what we want is an explanation. If it does not come, there will be no money. 

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your guidance.

6.41
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the argument and I feel that there are two problems. There are two reports of the Auditor-General and PAC was studying these reports. The Auditor-General and PAC studied these reports. The Auditor-General discovered some shortfalls or issues to be answered and normally, they should have called either the Permanent Secretary or whoever. I do not know whether, in this report, the Auditor-General has asked people to explain –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this institution is a very serious institution and I do believe that even the people who sit here are also serious or should be serious. The procedure followed to come up with this particular report is laid down. I would like to be as polite as possible. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct, if any of our colleagues is making a big mistake that does not make him or her look good, for the Speaker to instantly intervene so that we do not look very bad for the people watching out there?  

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, the reports presented to this House were presented before the stakeholders and those to whom queries had been raised, had been invited. There are no gaps except for the person who did not come.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: If I overstepped or if I did not follow, that is not committing a crime. I am not committing murder here. It is not a murder to the extent that even my colleague, hon. Katuntu could appear as if he is breaking down. There is no mistake. I am just saying that we want the minister to come and answer in one month, according to your directive, which I am complying with.

What I am wondering is, for all this time, the minister did not come because what I heard is that the executive director of that institute never appeared despite calling him. (Interjection) Excuse me, let me make a mistake so that you can correct it the way you want. This is the way that I understand – (Interjection)- No, please sit down. (Laughter)

I am sorry, Madam Speaker. Let me oblige with your directive. Since my colleague thinks I am going away, let me stop here and I will comply with your directive. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the information that I want to give to the House is that under normal circumstances, once an audit report is issued, accounting officers are supposed to take action on the issues raised in the report so that by the time they come to PAC, they just show us the action they have taken on the issues raised.

The audit process also starts with the issuance of a management letter where they write to the accounting officer to inform them of the issues that need to be explained. They respond and there is an exit meeting where they meet to resolve the issues as raised in the management letter. If the Auditor-General is not satisfied, this is when he issues an audit report and after the report, the accounting officer and minister ought to have taken action. 

Madam Speaker, I presented two reports but some things are just repeated. The Prime Minister will get in touch with his minister and sort it out at that level.

THE SPEAKER: General, you know that these people really like you. Honourable members, I had put two questions on the Order Paper in the hope that the Minister for East African Community Affairs and the Minister for ICT would come. They will be reflected again on the Order Paper. They are old questions and I would like to ask the Prime Minister to ensure that those two ministers come here on Tuesday to answer those questions. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)


