


Wednesday, 14 March 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to inform you that you are all required to present details of your National Identification Numbers to the office of the Director of Finance, Parliament of Uganda, before end of April 2018. It is a requirement to all individuals paid by government for validation. Therefore, make sure that you submit this information to avoid occurrences when certain things that are supposed to happen may not happen. This applies to all the public servants and anybody paid by Government is required to give details of their National Identification Number. 

Honourable members, there were statements that we deferred yesterday and I had informed the Minister of Internal Affairs that we will only put it on the Order Paper if we see the statement. Unfortunately, the statement came when the Order Paper was already published. I will, therefore, alter the Order Paper to allow the minister make this statement at the right time after the Clerk has altered the Order Paper. This will allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond to the issues that were reported in Agago, Kotido and Abim districts. That will be the amendment to the Order Paper and all the other business will be as scheduled. Thank you.

2.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of urgent public importance. Since the end of last year and beginning of this year, the media have been awash with the issues relating to how some officials from the Central Bank have amassed wealth inexplicably. It has also come to our attention that one who was relieved of her duties, a woman who was a director for supervision, Bank of Uganda, Ms Justine Bagyenda, has huge amounts of money in her account in Diamond Trust Bank. This information was purportedly leaked to the media. The Diamond Trust Bank leadership has confirmed that it is true some of their officers misbehaved and did not act professionally by leaking information to the public regarding their client. 

Mr Speaker, I am raising the matter regarding the staff because they have been threatened with a termination of work at Diamond Trust Bank. To most Ugandans, this staff would have been rewarded for reporting fraud because this is money laundering. I have an assessment from Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) because when they read that information, they followed to find out whether the said person was remitting taxes but it was found that she was not remitting taxes. 

They have made an assessment and they will collect taxes worth Shs 7,123,496,383.42. This was revealed to the public as a result of those staff working in the bank through leaking this information and URA got involved and Government of Uganda is going to benefit.

However, the action the bank is taking against the staff is wanting. I do not know how the House feels about this but I think this staff should not be terminated but instead rewarded. We would also like to see the offices of Inspector General of Government, Criminal Investigation and Intelligence Directorate and Financial Intelligence Authority take action like URA has done. We cannot allow this type of thing where someone amasses wealth – because it is reported that she has over Shs 20 billion having worked with the Central Bank for only six years.

The issue of urgent importance is that the management of Diamond Trust Bank should be urged not to terminate the staff. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the concern is okay. However, do we regulate the operations of the staff regulations of private entities? We do not know whether that amounts to a breach or some kind of breach but we avoid making it our concern. As to whether we can make a directive as to what they should do, I think that would not be within our mandate because they could be having staff regulations that govern how staff work in those institutions. Therefore, we should leave it to the management of the bank to do what they think is fit but the sentiment has been expressed by a Member of this House.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter. With the support of this House several years ago, we were able to put together a whistle-blower law. What the bank is doing is fundamentally undermining the principle and spirit of that law. If we are saying that anyone who reveals vital information must be punished, that runs counter to efforts that have been made to ensure that we fight corruption.

The issue of corruption is complex and is not well understood. We are talking about networks across institutions. One of the vital ways we can fight back is to encourage Ugandans who have information to come forward and speak about what they know. Therefore, this House must strongly send a message, that any institution that punishes any of their staff on account that the staff have revealed information of a vital nature, he or she must be warned that they are undermining efforts that the country has put in place to fight corruption. 

I strongly oppose what the bank is doing and I oppose any other institution that will seek to frustrate, dismiss or punish in anyway those who provide such information. I think it is essential that this House – of course we recognise that the bank has its rights over its staff – but we need to remind them that the spirit is absolutely critical to give information by whoever has it. I think the bank should restrain from punishing anyone who is helping Government to fight corruption. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Only if you had finished, I would have allowed members to – 

MR OKUPA: I can come later – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no “coming later” again hon. Okupa. This is an urgent matter. Please finish and then they can make short contributions.

MR OKUPA: I would like to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo for the information. You know we have the protection of the rights of workers and we also have the Members of Parliament here who represent workers. I believe this is a part of their constituency. 

If a staff member, a worker, is going to be dismissed in this way, I think it calls for the protection of their rights by Government and also the Central Bank which regulates – I do not know whether their authority goes beyond that because they should be able to call them to order. 

It is from that angle that we are bringing these matters here. Of course that is why I added that there are issues that border on tax evasion which URA is taking up. The issues of declaration of assets, the IGG should look at whether these were assets belonging to this person registered under the tax number 100589799 and whether they were duly paying taxes and complying with the laws of declaring the assets to the IGG. The committees of finance and accountability can take up this matter. COSASE can call the central bank – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable, you have raised the urgent matter; let us stick to that one.

2.20
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter. We as a country have been encouraging our citizens to join in the fight against corruption. This action of the person being threatened with dismissal from the bank is in line with the required actions of citizens of Uganda in the fight against corruption. 

Even if it is true that we do not regulate the management of banks and other private enterprises, we should reward that person because they have done a good thing. If the bank dismisses the person, Government should reward that person as a whistle blower. This is to help more people with information like this to come out. 

Remember we lost pensioners’ money through banks. The money was siphoned out yet many people handled the money and they were aware of it. Suppose they were encouraged to come out, they would have given information to Government which would have stopped that kind of leakage.

I therefore appeal to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Prime Minister and the President, if they really want to fight against corruption, they should reward this person. 

However, if they want to fight against the fighters of corruption, then let them join the bank in dismissing that person because there are people who fight defenders of human rights; who fight fighters of corruption. Why are we here in Parliament? Are we fighting the fighters of corruption or are we fighting against corruption? If we are fighting against corruption, we should be on the side of the member of staff who is being threatened with dismissal. Thank you. (Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it still on the same issue? I think our sentiments are clear. We have received the information. It was made available by a member who works in a particular institution and that person is now under threat of dismissal. I think we leave it at that. We have other urgent matters to deal with.

2.23
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I received information that two young persons, Ms Oliver Okello, 24 years old and Mr Joseph Otir, both residents of my constituency, were killed in a robbery that took place in the outskirts of Lira town. 

This robbery is coming against the backdrop of serious security issues that have arisen in and out of Lira District. There are a number of boda boda cyclists that have been waylaid and their motorcycles stolen. There are so many break-ins into houses and now we are seeing murders. As a matter of fact, more than 13 vehicles were stolen from Lira and of these, only one has been recovered.

What happened yesterday is a cause of alarm because members of my constituency from Erute South that borders the municipality come in the morning to work and then they go back in the evening. This murder took place at 8.00 p.m. and up to now police has not apprehended any suspect. I have raised this matter with the following prayers:

That the Ministry of Internal Affairs and police carry out an audit of the security situation in Lira District so that calm can be restored. I also urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs, especially the leadership of police, to pay particular attention to Lira District. Being a central business area for Lango and the North, the traders are alarmed. I urge them to look into the administration of the police so that in the event that there is any ‘baby weevil’ or ‘grand weevil’ still remaining, it can be weeded out. I thank you.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The incident described by the honourable member for Erute indeed happened yesterday at around 9.20 p.m. in a village called Ayago. It is true two people were killed. I cannot confirm their names as he has done. This involved a robbery on mobile money agents. As of this morning, five suspects were arrested and they are in police custody. They are being managed for further action. That is what I can say at this moment. Thank you. 

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister on some issues. Last week, on Saturday, a head teacher from Amuria District was waylaid on the way to his home and killed. That same Saturday, there was a young man in Morungatuny Trading Centre in Orungo County who was also going home and he was waylaid and strangled. 

Similar incidents of killings are not only in Lira; they are throughout the country. That is why it is quite important that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security should assure this country through Parliament, on the cause of these unnecessary killings of innocent citizens in the country. What is behind these killings? This is what I seek the minister to explain to the satisfaction of citizens of this country. I thank you.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Between September and now, nine people have died in Teso –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the meaning of “clarification”?

MR ABALA: On the same –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought “clarification” arises from what somebody has said.

MR ABALA: Yes, it is about the killings –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not talked about Teso. How can you seek clarification?

MR ABALA: Mr Speaker, it is about the killings –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to give information? (Laughter)

MR ABALA: It may be “information” or “clarification”. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, between September and now, nine people have died in Teso because of these killings and lootings. Over 11 cars have been stolen. In fact, some of the mobile money agents have been killed and their money looted. I want the minister here to clarify why all these things are happening. Are the ministers and police not there? 

Secondly, about 13 cows were recovered by the police in Soroti but six of them disappeared from police custody. That is why I want the minister to help us understand because the police stations are supposed to be places where security is guaranteed. I want the minister to tell us because killings are taking place, robberies are taking place, stuff is being looted; can you tell us why?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, it is true that over a period of time the level of crime, specifically killings, appears to have risen. It is true that – correctly – our citizens are concerned. There are those criminal elements but also the general trend of the crime escalating is of concern to Government. 

I would like to request Parliament to give us time – apart from the individual cases which have been raised here – so that we make a comprehensive statement over a long period of time on the trend of crime and the different categories of crime in this country so that as leaders, we debate jointly and understand the nature while the security agencies continue their operations.

What I am asking, Mr Speaker, is that we go back as the security agencies, sit down and make a comprehensive statement to this Parliament and cause a comprehensive debate on the matter. This is because for some of these isolated cases like the case which happened in that village in Erute yesterday, for legal reasons, I cannot give more details because these are matters which are under investigations. Thank you.

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, I think the minister is not in order to begin to sing all the time because whenever issues of death come, he requests for time –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already ruled on your order. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, but is it in order when Ugandans are dying like the seven boda boda riders who were killed in Busia Municipality when they crossed to Kenya? Is he in order to begin telling the country that they need more time to begin investigations on such types of death? Thank you.

MR OBIGA: I am not asking for time for investigations, Mr Speaker. I am asking for time to compile a report and bring a statement to this House, which causes a comprehensive debate from the point of Parliament so that as a country we come to a consensus as to what should be done and whether what is being done is adequate or not. That is all I am asking for. Thank you.

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his indulgence and the plea he is making before the House to have more time to bring a comprehensive report. However, the issue we are talking about has been perturbing the whole country. When the House was on recess, the issue of security was high on the agenda and it was the discussion by all Ugandans. At that time the House was not sitting, unfortunately. Now, we want to thank the honourable member for having raised that matter on issues of security. Generally, even in my constituency there are two incidences, which I wanted to give him information on. 

However, Mr Speaker, I raise this procedural matter given the trend of reporting from that ministry. A few months ago, we had the request from the ministry to give us a comprehensive report on the deaths and murders of women which up to now this very ministry has not given to this House. We had a painful report of those murders across the country and many others followed. In Teso, we have a record of about nine deaths from different districts. 

Is it, therefore, in order that the minister keeps coming back requesting for more time? We expected that he should be able – by now – to make a comprehensive report given the gravity and urgency of this matter to the majority of Ugandans. Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide on how we can proceed on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that on the killings of the women that was happening around Entebbe and Wakiso, actually I had to adjourn the House because Members did not want to go on with business, when things were happening and they were not being explained. I heeded and adjourned the House. The House was adjourned until the minister came with a statement and that statement was presented by hon. Jeje Odongo. I was in the Chair. Therefore, we do not have any outstanding comprehensive statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

The minister is saying he is not talking about investigation but that we let them make compilations and come and give a brief to this House so that we can have a comprehensive debate. This is because there are aspects of these new trends that now we need to discuss again. Are the laws we have in place sufficient to deal with the new trends in crime or should we be thinking of changing some aspects of our laws? I think these are the discussions that the minister is talking about. I think we are proceeding properly, honourable members. Let us just give the minister time. I wish he had given a timeframe within which he could come and we see if it is reasonable to the House.

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, I wish we are given three weeks. The reason is that I am sure in your constituencies in one way or another there have been incidences of that nature. In addition, we have got to get this from all over the country. We have got to go through the reports. We want to lay the facts bare to you so that we are in a better position – as I have said – as a country. (Interjection) The period of three weeks is not excessive. Actually, it is a period within which we have to work day and night to make sure that we bring a report which befits your status and, therefore, the level of debate that you would be expecting. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree that the minister needs more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, hon. Okupa?

MR OKUPA: On the security issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not signalled me what you are rising on? Are you rising on points of information or procedure?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter as well as point of information – (Laughter) – which could be useful to the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it procedural information?

MR OKUPA: I rise on points of procedure and information. I would like to agree with the minister that he needs more time. 

We know very well that every district has a District Police Commander (DPC) and weekly, reports from all those districts are sent to the district police headquarters. Otherwise, if it is the contrary, the minister should tell us. What I know is that every other day, analysed data is sent to the district and a way forward is given.

Most of these events are not new. The matter the minister was referring to was limited to Entebbe and Masaka, where killings of women have been taking place. Honourable minister, this matter affects the entire country. You have heard what Members have been talking about. The Uganda Police Force must be having this information; unless you want us to believe what the President mentioned about the Uganda Police Force, which actually some of us do not believe.

Three weeks would be quite a long time and therefore, I would like to suggest that we give the minister two weeks, within which to make a statement on the Floor of the House regarding the security situation, what the ministry is doing and why all these are happening like colleagues have stated here. I lost a Catholic brother in Soroti Town who was murdered. I also lost my neighbour, a young man, called Tom who was a mobile money dealer. He left his shop with Shs 25 million, the money was grabbed from him and he was murdered.

Mr Speaker, in Soroti town, buses no longer move in the night because the boda bodas cannot move beyond 8:00 p.m. Therefore, we need a comprehensive report such that we are able to address these matters. These issues pain us because it so happens that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes from Teso sub-region. You heard hon. Othieno. We would like to request the minister to address these security issues so that people can do their business freely.

Many of us heard of the recent killing of Suzan Magara; this House needs a report because we are only getting information from the newspapers and whistleblowers and some of the information is contradicting. We would like to know what happened since we are getting contradictory information from the different security agencies.

This is the reason I am suggesting that we give the minister two weeks to report back to the House since these matters have been going on for long. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not want the minister to come back here and say the time was not enough. He has asked for three weeks; is there something wrong with three weeks? Let us give the minister three weeks to come back to the House so that he does not argue that the time was insufficient. Thank you.

2.42
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This morning, I received a call informing me about an accident on Cheptui Bridge, along Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road. 

Yesterday, businessmen from Amudat District, Loro sub-county were travelling back on their business trip from Mbale; they were involved in a terrible accident on Cheptui Bridge. Four people have been confirmed dead, one person fell into the river and by the time I received the information, the body had not been recovered. The businessmen lost their merchandise and a number of bags of sugar were also lost.

This bridge has become a death trap. On 19 March 2015, I raised an issue of national concern about the same bridge and sometime last year, the Member of Parliament for Bulambuli also raised concern about the same bridge.

A few years ago –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is Wednesday and Parliament is sitting and there are very important issues being raised. The reason I have said today is Wednesday is because it is not a Cabinet meeting day. The reason the Cabinet meeting was pushed to Monday was to allow Cabinet members to attend plenary on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, so that they can listen to the Members of Parliament and respond to issues that come up.

In the Front Bench, I can only see hon. Obiga Kania, hon. Sarah Opendi and hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, who are all ministers of state. Mr Speaker, there is no Leader of Government of Business in the House, no Government Chief Whip and no Cabinet ministers. What is happening? Are we proceeding well? Do we really have the Government or are they declaring that we should takeover? That is the procedural matter I wanted to raise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker has been notified by the Leader of Government Business that there is a special cabinet sitting today, to deal with the budget. That information was given to the Speaker and that explains why we only have ministers who have issues to respond to today at the moment. I think they are about to finish and come. Let us proceed with what we have.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Franca Akello, for that concern. A few years ago, the main Cheptui Bridge collapsed and a temporary narrow bridge was constructed and people were using the narrow bridge. In 2015, I raised the issue that the temporary bridge had broken down and people started using the old Cheptui Bridge until the temporary bridge was worked upon. As I speak now, the temporary bridge is down again. People have been blocked from using it and they have resorted to the old bridge which is completely down and it is claiming people’s lives.

Similarly, on 7 May 2015, I raised a concern about Cholo Bridge, about 10 kilometres from Amudat District headquarters. To date, no attempt has been made to work on the bridge and people are using the Irish Bridge which is very dangerous especially during the rainy season.

It is unfortunate that even after Members raise issues on the Floor of Parliament, no serious action is taken and yet people are dying on this bridge. I would like to ask: How many times should issues be raised before action is taken? How many lives do we want to lose on this bridge before it is worked on?

With this, therefore, I would like to call upon Government to take action on this bridge in the shortest time possible in order to save lives and ensure business is not paralysed. Otherwise, not everyone from Bulambuli, Nakapiripirit and Amudat is able to use the longer route that passes via Soroti District.

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee on National Economy and we have been processing loans and supplementary budgets. Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to provide a supplementary budget as a matter of urgency so that we work on this bridge and lives are saved. (A Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please let the Member raise the issue, then you can supplement. Please finish.

MS NAUWAT: Mr Speaker, yesterday, it is the people of Amudat who lost their people. I do not know who will lose their people next time. I call upon Government to help the people of eastern Uganda to work on this road. Provide a supplementary budget and I call upon this House to support us when that supplementary budget is brought here so that that road can be worked on as a matter of urgency.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Cheptui Bridge is found in Bwikhonje sub county, Bulambuli County in Bulambuli district. I think all the Members in this House know very well that on many occasions, I have stood here on several occasions to talk and cry about Cheptui Bridge as a Member of Parliament for that constituency.

Mr Speaker, at one time while seated in that Chair, you directed the Minister to expeditiously go and handle the issue of Cheptui Bridge. It did not stop there. The Speaker of Parliament at one time also directed – (Interjections) – I know what I am talking about. The Speaker of Parliament also directed that Cheptui Bridge is handled expeditiously.

I sit on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I convinced the leadership; the chairperson and other Members to visit Cheptui Bridge. It was in a very sorry state. We came here and talked about the same. That was not enough. Again, hon. Denis Sabiiti was removed and replaced with hon. Lillian Nakate as chairperson but Cheptui Bridge was not worked on. We had to revisit Cheptui Bridge.

This is very unfortunate because when we have our concerns as Members of Parliament, we always come to you. When you make a directive, we also tell our voters. The voters are informed these days. They see us speaking here. 

As I wind up, it is very unfortunate that even where there was a diversion, those people whose land was used have not been paid. In fact, the temporary bridge is far off, but because members of the community are very annoyed, they decided to block the other bridge.

As I speak now, like the Member has just put it, four people are still lying in Muyembe Health Centre IV. My voters are very bitter and are calling me a liar. They look at me as a person who does not speak the truth and that I just took some vendors to go and look at the bridge. 

Sincerely, what should we do? Even the minister has never visited that place to see the outcry of our people. If we continue to sit here – as I conclude, the ministers - whatever issue is raised here as a matter of national importance –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let me guide. When we raise these matters of urgent public importance, it is not for debate. It is for information so that appropriate action can be taken.

If we are going to discuss 2012, how will it help the bridge that collapsed yesterday? We want a solution now. That is what we should be giving information about.

MR BURUNDO: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. You know, when you lose your dear ones in a traditional way, you cry anyhow. That is why the cries are too much –(Laughter)– and they do not blame you for crying anyhow. You can even say he is the one who bewitched my daughter.

It is my humble request that Cheptui Bridge is fixed immediately and that my people, whose land was affected when they were constructing the other temporary bridge, are compensated. They are Ugandans. Thank you very much - with a lot of tears rolling in my heart and you can see even in my eyes.

2.53
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are talking about Cheptui Bridge which is almost the lifeline, not only for the eight districts of Karamoja, but the bridge along the road that comes to Karamoja, parts of Bugisu and parts of Sebei.

We are talking about activities such as trade between Karamoja, Sebei and Bugisu. To date, you cannot see any vehicle plying that route because there is no bridge from which the vehicles can cross. Service delivery has been paralysed. You cannot talk about supplying drugs to the health centres in Karamoja and parts of Sebei. 

Year in, year out when the President and the Minister of Finance are giving the Budget Speech, the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road is mentioned but nothing is done. Who is lying to these people of this region? Who is telling a lie? A few weeks ago, the President asked one of the MPs from Karamoja if work on the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road had started. You can imagine even the President is not aware that this road has no money for construction so that the road is connected to the tarmac road of Nakapiripirit.

Even the loans that were approved by this Parliament have been shelved because government cannot co-fund the 30 per cent to enable the construction of this road. This is a very important matter; otherwise the people of Karamoja, parts of Bugisu and Sebei will not get services. We are really urging Government to come and clear the issue of this bridge if the people of Karamoja are to get services. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there anything from the Government or should we wait for the responsible minister?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (MR OBIGA KANIA): Mr Speaker, we have taken note of the issues raised on this matter and we will brief the relevant minister, who will give an appropriate response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will come back to this matter when the responsible minister comes. I will raise it from the Chair myself.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it here now?

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (MR OBIGA KANIA): Mr Speaker, as I indicated to you in a note and as you have correctly announced, Cabinet right now is concluding discussions on the budget in Entebbe. I am expecting that the Minister of Finance will be here to lay that paper later. Could you kindly defer this item?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us stand over that issue.

MINSTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NODDING HEAD SYNDROME

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter was raised yesterday by hon. Franca Akello and you directed that I bring a statement. It has been uploaded on the intranet and I hope Members can access it.

Yesterday, Mr Speaker, as the discussion was on, you directed that I should not include certain information, but from the members’ submission, I realised that the information may be lacking, and they may need to know more about the Nodding Syndrome and its symptoms. So, we included this in the statement just to inform those Members who may want to know.

Mr Speaker, allow me to proceed by indicating that the Nodding Syndrome is a severe neurological disorder that manifests as seizure, head nodding, cognitive impairment; that is mental impairment, multiple disabilities, and it affects children below the age of 18; normally, between the ages 3 to 18 years. 

A child is said to have Nodding Syndrome: if the child develops involuntary dropping of the head to the chest at a frequency of five to twenty times per minute on two or more occasions; neurological problems occur; there may be stunting if the children do not get adequate care and the brain imaging shows various degrees of brain damage ranging from mild, moderate to severe.

Mr Speaker, many a time, we have had cases of epilepsy and other conditions that affect the Nervous System like febrile illnesses, inborn abnormalities and autism. These have, sometimes, been wrongly labelled as Nodding Syndrome.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, differentiate the two: epilepsy and Nodding Syndrome. Epilepsy affects all ages and patients do not have head nodding. They exhibit moderate to severe disability, and brain damage is not usually common and sometimes, may be inherited, whereas Nodding Syndrome affects only children and it is characterised by head nodding.

Following research, Mr Speaker, the Nodding Syndrome has been characterised in five stages, depending on the severity of the problem:

The first stage presents with no significant disability while stage two is characterised by slight disability, but patients are able to look after themselves without assistance. This forms about 21 per cent of the cases in Northern Uganda. Stage three and four are characterised by moderate to severe disability, varied cognitive function and children may require help with walking. This forms the majority at 74 per cent of the cases in Northern Uganda. In stage five, which is the most severe, and those are some of the images you have been seeing on the TV colleagues, the child presents with severe disability. These are mostly bedridden children, and they form 5 per cent of the cases in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, allow me to say that in all stages, there is some degree of brain damage and this increases in magnitude depending on the stage. All cases in stage five and a few in stage four require rehabilitation. 

Mr Speaker, according to our statistics, as of December 2017, patients who fall in stage five are currently as follows: we have eight in Kitgum, twenty in Pader, five in Amuru, one in Lamwo and 20 in Omoro; giving a total of 59 cases. Trained specialists from Gulu regional referral hospital have been following these cases in addition to regular visits by health workers from the affected districts. Our technical team led by Dr Opar, who is in the gallery, and Dr Richard Idro, with the support from the district teams, have continued to carry out surveillance in these areas.

The burden of the Nodding Syndrome by districts currently stands as follows: We have 806 in Pader, 544 in Kitgum, 339 in Lamwo, 60 in Gulu, 323 in Omoro, 58 in Amuru; and 13 in Lira, making a total of 2,143 cases to date. 

Unfortunately, we have lost some of the children from the time the Nodding Syndrome was mentioned. To date, we have a total of 137 who have passed on.

Since 2012, the Government of Uganda established an inter-ministerial committee coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister under the Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to coordinate the efforts in dealing with this challenge. We have various ministries: the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Education and Sports; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Information, ICT and Communication and Ministry of Health that have been handling the interventions in these areas.  

The Ministry of Health specifically, as I indicated yesterday, was assigned to handle clinical management of the cases, provision of therapeutic feeding of severely ill and malnourished children. We have continued to do these in our health facilities where these children are admitted. Of course, we continue to strengthen surveillance at community and health facility levels. 

We have continued to conduct research into Nodding Syndrome to ascertain the cause, the mode of transmission, treatment, and vector control and the research is still ongoing.

Mr Speaker, we have also continued to conduct outreaches to take services closer to those affected. To date, we have 20 health facilities where the children in the affected districts receive their medication from. 

We have continued with biannual ground river dosing in the affected district and also the biannual distribution of the Ivemectin to kill the worms that cause River Blindness because there is a close association between the worms that cause River Blindness and the Nodding Syndrome.

Mr Speaker, to date, Government has sent to these districts a total of Shs 1.8 billion and this money excludes the medication that the Ministry of Health, through National Medical Stores, has been sending to these districts. The money is purely to facilitate the teams to be able to move down to the ground to follow up these cases, to provide food in Kitgum Hospital and to search for those lost cases for follow up.

Unfortunately, we have had challenges with accountability. To date, Shs 1.6 billion has been utilised out of the Shs 1.8 billion, and only shs 237 million has been accounted for. This poses a challenge in these districts. 

As of this financial year, Mr Speaker, we had a total of Shs 133 million that was approved in our budget for the Nodding Syndrome and Shs 73 million has been dispatched to the districts. 

As a way forward, the Ministry of Health continues with comprehensive case management and increase in the number of health facilities receiving the medicines in the affected districts in order to take services closer to the people. 

We will continue with the vector control activities and distribution of the drug that kills the worms. I would like to appeal to the leaders that we all get involved to ensure that coverage and uptake of the medicines is at 100 per cent. As we speak now, it is reported that uptake of these medicines stands at about 80 per cent, leaving a gap of 20 per cent. We need to encourage the people to accept and take these drugs when our teams give them out to the people.

The Ministry plans to integrate Nodding Syndrome activities into other health service interventions like immunization and other outreaches. 
We are also exploring mechanisms of social integration through networking and collaboration with other sectors – the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the Office of the Prime Minister which is mandated to do the coordination.

The Ministry of Health has initiated the process of taking over the rehabilitation centres left by Hope for Humans and we have already written letters to the district leaders to receive the facilities so that the Ministry of Health working with the other sectors can utilise these facilities specifically in Omoro and Kitgum districts.

The Minister of Health shall complete the Doxycycline nodding syndrome research which is ongoing at Makerere University; a centre has been established in Kitgum and we shall implement the findings once that research is completed.

The Ministry of Health would like to reiterate its firm commitment in managing the medical component of Nodding Syndrome as well as conclude on the much desired research. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this statement. That is not different from the statements that have been spreading in the public; this is modification of that statement. We would have hoped to have shared in that statement as well including this one but we know where we stand in this matter.

Honourable members, when this matter came up a bit vigorously two to three weeks ago, statements have been made, some defensive and some I do not know how to call them but attributed to acts of politicking that most of the people who were speaking on this matter were simply engaging in politicking.

I would like to use this time to allow a fairly professional intervention on this matter. And I have used the provision of our rules of procedure to bring somebody who has been involved in this process to come and address this House on the specifics. 

Somebody who is not a politician, trained and skilled at a highest level and has done research to come and address us so that we all understand where we are on this issue then we can engage in our politics. Sergeant-at-Arms, I would like Dr Prof. Lagoro to address us from the bar. I would like you to first state your name and what you do before you start presenting on the issue that is before us. I asked you to watch the statement of the minister televised edition and then you come and give us some aspect of what you know about this matter.

Honourable members who are on that side please cross to this side.

3.12
DR DAVID KITARA LAGORO (MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC): Good afternoon. Mr Speaker and all Members of Parliament, I am Prof. David Kitara Lagoro, I work for Gulu University and three other universities in the United States particularly Oklahoma University, Oregon Health and Sciences University and recently the University of California, Los Angeles.

I have been working on nodding syndrome from nearly since the year 2006. I was initially in South Sudan before I came to Uganda. And in Uganda, I have been working on nodding syndrome since 2012. I have been working with a lady called Dr Suzanne Gazda who opened a very comprehensive rehabilitation centre called “Hope for Humans” and it is based in Odek in Omoro Sub County, Omoro District in northern Uganda.

I would like to make a few comments especially on the issue of nodding syndrome. A lot has already been said; it is a neurological disorder and not epilepsy. The other things that have not been said are that the origin is clustered in time and space. What that means is that the time when it starts, it has some specific individuals with a certain period and also affecting a certain specific geographical location which we have; basically, the three areas in the whole world. 

All these are in Eastern Africa, one in southern Tanzania called Mehenge region, the second is northern Uganda and the third one is South Sudan. All these places have been confirmed by Word Health Organisation as centers where they have identified nodding syndrome. 

The symptoms are as they have been said but the point that I want to come to present to Parliament today is the fact that it is a treatable neurological disorder. Why? We have been working on this for the last five years with my colleagues, neurologists, with whom we have gone through processes of research and many other things and we have been able to rehabilitate these children to near complete and normal life.


I got a recent report that one of the children returned to school in Primary school and passed with a first grade. That is the most important thing that I wanted to share with you today. (Applause) However, most important, is about this centre; the nodding syndrome rehabilitation centre which has been organised and facilitated by a single lady called Dr. Suzanne Gazda from Texas San Antonio, USA.

This centre by and large- I had a presentation which should be coming up right now. This centre is organised and I hope you can have the chance of visiting it. It starts in a daily feeding process programme, giving medications for the seizures and so forth.
(A video presentation was projected.)

Over the years, you have been able to see these kinds of pictures as projected. You can go to the next slide please. For reasons that I was given only a short period of time, I am not going to mention more than what I should be but I am emphasizing rehabilitation.

I would like to show the pictures. That is a family where all the children from that woman have nodding syndrome. It is a unique thing. We have seen many where you only have relatives having this nodding syndrome. Even across the rivers where they are clustered, they are also relatives. The people are mainly relatives.


These are the kinds of pictures that you normally see and those are the deformities you see in them. I would like you to see that, it is one before and the other one after. Grace was in that kind of situation but after rehabilitation by the “Hope for Human” - you can see the kind of transformation that has taken place. 

That is the kind of person we found and brought to the rehabilitation centre and after the rehabilitation of about six months, she was able to dance and play. The next is the other child whom we have been working with; he had dropped out of school. With the help of “Hope for Humans” he was able to read, write and explain so many matters.

That is Suzanne Gazda who apparently closed shop last year because of lack of funding as she was doing everything with her own funds. She used about USD 2.5million to set up the centre for rehabilitation for five years without any support. From that time we have lost so many children as a result of nodding syndrome. 

People are chained and it was as a result of the rehabilitation. If you see that picture on the left, it shows a victim before treatment. Look at the kind of state that child was, and then just six months after treatment. 

When you look at the same girl after rehabilitation-she is seated right there in the community; just like the boy in that situation. We picked him up and rehabilitated him and a few months later, he was able to read, write, and attend classes.

These are the children that we have rehabilitated; they are playing football; others are doing the traditional dances. And there is a young man there called Balaam who has grown up much as they say that they do not grow. 

In my view, the causes are multi-factorial; we will be able to get into that in a scientific discussion and not in this kind of forum. My issue is to present to you what has been accomplished; unfortunately this person who was responsible could no longer continue but these children need support.

In summary, there are challenges which are national, regional and communal which have been so magnified and need the attention of Parliament so that we can be able to have them done. 

The caregivers are fatigued and feel the sense of hopelessness; they are in fear that their children are going to die and we have inadequate support. Many of them have lost the economic and social status. The good news is that nodding syndrome is not contagious; it can be controlled with minimal residual disabilities. When got early, children could undergo rehabilitation to return to near normal life. 

The only thing which has not been used in the other health centres has been a substance with a vitamin called biotin. Just five milligrams a day for three months will transform a person who is unable to get up, to sit, walk, run and dance. The other appears to be a self-limiting condition and many big organisations have said that nodding syndrome was invariably fatal. 

Mr Speaker, nodding syndrome is not invariably fatal, it is a treatable neurological disorder. The pictures you see are a sign of great improvement. Most of these children had improved but because the centre closed we were monitoring using lay people; we found that a number of them are now dying. Many of them deteriorated back to the same condition because of many other factors.

This is one of the first ladies to be identified with nodding syndrome since 1997. She is alive, has a baby who is absolutely healthy and there is no evidence that he has features of nodding syndrome.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all those who are involved in this process. The Ministry of Health has worked but neurological disorders are difficult to investigate. It takes time.

Recently, I told people about the Guam disorder which is called the ALS PDC; it is an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis dementia complex which was a disease found in that country, the territory of the Americas.

The Americans took almost 40 years to be able to find out the cause of that disorder which was affecting people in Guam. It is only recently when they discovered what was causing it and was related to the food they eat.

“Hope for Humans” is the organisation which has brought life to that community; it has brought blessing to individuals and has helped people to live fairly well. 

We all need to know that nodding syndrome is a problem of humanity; it is not only found in Uganda - it may present to us an opportunity to do more research, but it could go anywhere else.
The cause is still unknown but “Hope for Humans” has demonstrated that it can be done; we can be able to make the children live a better life. We can make the community more productive. Therefore, we have also estimated that about Shs 50 million can run a centre for one month. 

A budget of Shs 1.2 billion can run those two centres for a year. And we can be able to reach out to the very sick, and do many other things. Let us give life back to these children and the community. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to express these findings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prof. Kitara Lagoro. This gives us some hope above all that if we work and do what we must, life can be better not only for those children but their families and the communities that are affected by this particular problem.

Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement; it attracts a debate starting with the honourable member for Kitgum Municipality. 

3.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I thank Dr Lagoro for his presentation as well as the minister. Mr Speaker, I come from the area of the affected children and indeed, I am here to do three things.

First, I thank you all for the efforts that have come all the way to making the nodding disease become a global concern. I thank all the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) that have supported us, all efforts by Government and particularly from Dr Suzan who has given hope to these children. Today, it is a moment of truth for us as a country to be united by this matter, if nothing did before. 

Secondly, I would like to give some information to bridge the gap so that as a country we can do something meaningful to save life. 

Thirdly, I request that we walk the talk. Basically, I have been in this House and members who have been with us know that the nodding syndrome started from Tumango in Kitgum District way back in 1998. The voice came from just a simple man, on a Village Health Team (VHT) called Mr Otto Job.  There were three cases which were identified then. 

Out of the three children who were identified, one still exists as Dr Kitara has just shown us. Kibwora Sunday and Lakot Sophie Scovia passed on while Abalo Monica survived and now has two children.

Mr Speaker, many efforts have been made including on this Floor of Parliament. When we first attempted to bring the nodding syndrome to the limelight, there was a lot of politicking, as you rightly said. It was a great pain to most families. It took a lot of courage and a bit of radical action. We had to carry these children to Mulago Hospital. 

Right now, even if I appreciate others, I am very disappointed with my honourable Minister of Health, Dr Ruth Achieng whom I encountered when she was still the Director-General of medical services in Mulago. When I brought these children in a bus, she was in charge. Literary, she almost refused the children to be admitted until I took a bigger step and rang the President for her to intervene - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I am saying this because we need to come out of the negativity to give hope to these children. This was not called for and it has left the victims thinking that, may be, the Government does not care. However, the efforts which have been made show that we are now above that. 

We would like to appeal to you the Speaker, honourable members of Parliament and the country at large, to put the recommendation of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which we presented here and the resolutions passed, in practice. 

Can we also take on the recommendation of Prof. Dr Lagoro and more urgently, for Dr Suzan, who gave hope and understands how to deal with children with the nodding syndrome and has left the country, to come back and handle this case? I talked to her yesterday and she is willing to come back and give hope to this country. Her only condition is that this country should ensure that it has committed money to make these two centres of Odek and Tumango running and she will come. We are making effort, with God’s grace, that by end of this month, she should be in the country. She would even meet members of Parliament, the Cabinet and the President. 

Today, can we walk the talk, act and pass the supplementary budget when it comes so that we reopen these two centres? It is something that should passionately unite us. With humility, let us put our differences aside. Today, let us be united over the nodding disease. Thank you.

3.33
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is so perturbing and disheartening that such a disease that affects a generation, beginning at the age of three to eighteen, is a great killer to our new generation.

Mr Speaker, I have listened to the minister’s report and that of the professor. However, my prayer is that our Government must take the lead in treating our people and not anything else. This is a very big problem. It is an embarrassment to both the Government and all of us for a problem of such magnitude to be left to the management of a Non-Governmental Organisation. To me, it is an embarrassment. 
Mr Speaker, the minister talked about unaccounted for funds of over Shs 200 million. Can we get to know the action that has been taken against those who spent this money? If you looked at the situation of these people, a good Ugandan would not even decide to touch any coin from such money. The minister said that they are comprehensively managing these cases. I need proper clarification because it is the same minister who said the research is on-going. On the treatment, can we get to know the comprehensive management causes over these patients? If we do not know the causes, how are you managing it? 

The minister said that Shs 133 million was approved for the financial year 2017/2018 and Shs 73 million has been processed for transfer. I thought I would hear that the money has been transferred but not being processed for transfer. What is delaying? If that money has not reached the health centres that are supposed to use it to manage these cases, can the  minister tell us what is currently happening in these health centres and whether they have money for operations? (Member timed out.)

3.36
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I read about and watch the situation concerning the victims, I get disturbed. Even when you pray, you assume God will not hear. For example, you look at grown up children dying and the ministry seems to be playing around –(Interjections)- I call it playing around - when some people are somewhere suffering. The ministry of finance is holding money here in Kampala yet this is March and the financial year ends in June. The money has not gone the other side; it appears there are some people who are happy and celebrating the suffering of other people in this country. 

Secondly, we were told that money was unaccounted for. If we are talking about fighting against corruption and some people here have not accounted for this money, I would like the minister to name these people. Such people should be named so that we get to know who exactly has done that and who is killing the children in northern Uganda, because this is actually killing them.  

Like my sister said, since this is the budgeting period, as a Parliament we must allocate money without discussion, negotiation and wasting time. We must allocate money which will go a long way in supporting these centres in northern Uganda. That is one way of saving the lives of these children. 

Honourable members, assuming any of us here had nodding disease, if we ignored it, what do you think would happen? Mr Speaker, assuming you had nodding disease - and I am just giving an example - it would be bad – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have been told the age group. 

MR ABALA: I am talking about that time and not now. (Laughter) They are talking about 3 to 18 years. Assuming you were 10 years and you got it, by now you would not be a Member of Parliament and a Speaker of this House.

3.40
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement and also the professor, who has given us all the details and experiences. 

Mr Speaker, if this disease is curable or treatable, I think it is the role of this House to appropriate monies towards that. As it has been clearly stated, Shs 1,000,000,000 is enough; therefore, we do not need to keep on debating here and there. Today it is in northern Uganda but we cannot know where it will be tomorrow. We need to save the children of Uganda and it can only be done if this House appropriates money –(Interruption) 

MS AVUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I belong to the Budget Committee where the same minister presented this report yesterday. The minister told us that every year, funds have been appropriated towards the same, so it is not that Parliament has not been appropriating funds. 

We asked the minister to categorically state the funds that they have been allocated every year and if there are any funding gaps. Unfortunately, she failed to do so. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. 

Mr Speaker, it is quite sad that Shs 50 million is for one rehabilitation centre for one month and the ministry has only appropriated Shs 133 million in the financial year. We have a big problem. It means we have sentenced these children to death. If we can only have Shs 133 million out of the Shs 1 billion and yet only Shs 50 million is for one centre, this means the Shs 133 million is only for about one month and one week for the two centres. However, the onus is on this House to make sure that we do not play about with this issue because it is all about life. 

I was pleased to hear that there is life after treatment. We have seen the children singing, playing football and doing other things. Therefore, we need to give them hope. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to move that this House appropriates money. We must have a slot in the budget where Shs 1 billion is appropriated for northern Uganda and the nodding disease. I would like to move.

3.43
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister and the professor for their statements. The issue of nodding disease is not one sided; it can affect any district in any part of the country. 

I have two questions for the minister. She mentioned two districts where Shs 346.7 million was swindled. I request her to tell us who those people are that swindled the money so that we recover it. Two, what are the steps being taken by the Ministry of Health to recover the money? 

Probably, if this Parliament is to work together for the betterment of this country, we must appropriate enough money for this disease because it can affect any child in the whole country and from any region. Therefore, we should not take it as a northern Uganda problem. It can spread to the east, west or even central part of the country. Hence, we should work collectively for the betterment of this country. 

Finally, I thank the professor. He mentioned that Hope for Humans has done a great job. They wanted a budget of Shs 1.2 billion, which is not small money, but it is also not too big to save the lives of Ugandans. Therefore, it is up to this Parliament to appropriate enough money for the centres in northern Uganda and also to equip all health facilities with medicines to be able to fight the nodding disease and save the lives of Ugandans. Thank you very much. 

3.45
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her superior presentation and the professor for that evidence. 

Mr Speaker, I specifically would like to also thank you for bringing in the professor. I think this is an issue that is confronting the nation that needs the support of everybody. I am happy that even the academia or the scientists are coming on board. 

As a scientist, I am particularly interested in the research that has already been undertaken. I saw a high effect journal on the screen; I will try to look it up. This is because as much as I am a law maker, as a scientist I will be interested in knowing what is so far known about the disease or the disease burden and what still remains unknown. 

Mr Speaker, the nodding disease or burden in our country requires collective thought and action. I do not want to really limit the burden on the Ministry of Health. However, I think it needs a multi-sectoral approach in intervention. I was happy, Mr Speaker, when you said that we might have to tone down on the politics because we have to mind about the burden and the people in the communities that are affected by this particular disease. 

Mr Speaker, I will probably be interested in what specifically I saw from the minister’s presentation. As a country, we need to cluster the intervention in terms of short-term, medium-term and then the long-term interventions. I also encourage the Ministry of Health to specifically work together with the scientists that are already providing leadership, especially providing evidence in empirical scientific leadership in as far as the burden is concerned because I would be interested in what has been discovered so far. 

In addition, for those that have made the discoveries, what are they recommending to relevant scientists for further investigation? I would encourage the Ministry of Health in probably one of those Cabinet meetings, to look at those scientific discoveries or findings and then recommend support to the NGO. However, I think the NGO is there to reinforce Government’s work, as has been said. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I have a request that before the close of this debate, this House should pronounce itself and state that the money required and the support that the Ministry of Health needs has to be provided without fail. I think with this, we would be doing good for the affected community. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to be educated through the professor, who has enabled us to get insight on the nodding disease. However, I also commend your position; I watched you last week on television after a story came out regarding this and I would like to commend you for the stance that you took. 

We would like to thank the professor who has given us information and thank the ministry for whatever they have tried to do. However, I want to say to the honourable minister that I think you have been very bad PR for that ministry on this disease. I must be honest with you. Some of us are restraining ourselves from the words we would have used because of the comments that have been coming from your ministry and from you personally.

Mr Speaker, we have just been told that a centre has been built but we only need Shs 1.2 billion to run the centre. Why was the ministry asking us for Shs 11 and then Shs 9 billion? This is corruption. I think there are people who want to use people’s problems to benefit and enrich themselves. No wonder the minister here is saying people have stolen the money but she is not telling us who stole the money or what action they have taken on those who have “eaten” on behalf of those children.

What have they done? They are just telling us that people have stolen money but they are not telling us what they have done and who those people are, yet there are laws in this country.

Mr Speaker, it is very disappointing and embarrassing, after watching all this that has been happening, to realise that we had been told lies that this is a disease which cannot be treated. We have been told that people can be treated and rehabilitated. It is very disappointing.

We have somebody who left our country and came back to help us set up the centre, but we cannot provide Shs 1.2 billion. We do not even need a supplementary for this; it can come after. The finance minister has always spent money and then they bring the supplementary later for us to approve; why can’t the Minister of Finance provide now and today? (Applause) They have always done this for all other things, what about for the lives of the people of Uganda, the lives of the children who are suffering? 

Mr Speaker, we have done that same thing before. They have come before and asked that we spend this money beyond three per cent and yet they have already spent it, and they ask for approval. This is the type of thing they do; even if they asked that we spend money beyond three per cent, we would approve it.

We can ask the Minister of Finance because this is sickness; it is a disease and the people who were helping have left and there is no money. We cannot say that we are waiting for the supplementary budget to come; we cannot do that. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we must direct that this money be transmitted to this facility so that our people get hope. If it is also possible, Dr Susan can be called back and contracted. She already has the structures and staffing, what she only needs is money. These are the only things needed to move forward. During the budget time, we shall budget for the rest and on annual basis. However, for now we need money to be provided so that our children benefit and recover from this disease and survive and be better citizens for this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I get perturbed by the lack of seriousness of the ministry because this syndrome did not just come today. I sit on the Budget Committee but I have never seen any supplementary request to handle this syndrome yet I have seen requests to supply thermal power, which we do not need in this country, and which we have rejected by the way.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, NGOs work where there is absence of government. Therefore, why should we press to have this NGO come back? Does it mean that we are surrendering our sovereignty to this NGO? Why? This Government has resources and these children are national resources, so we must give resources to these children. Therefore, I do not accept this illusive performance of the minister. 

By the way, Mr Speaker, I want to say here that one day I told the minister here that hepatitis B was killing the people of Kiruhura. She said Kiruhura people have money, they can go and treat themselves. Therefore, I really do not have sympathy for what she is saying –(Interjection)- She said it and I can never withdraw on that one – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, my brother, hon. Mwesigye, knows that we discussed the issue of hepatitis B in this House. He got the details of the disease burden of hepatitis B in this House. Our challenge was resources; we could not provide the vaccine to the entire population at a go. 

In addition, we clearly indicated that we are doing it in a phased manner. In the meantime, we are starting with the most affected areas. We have covered northern Uganda, eastern Uganda and we are now in Busoga. We shall then move to other parts of the country as funds become available.

In addition, I told the honourable member, just as I have been telling other Members of Parliament whose areas we have not reached, to encourage those patients to get the vaccines in private health facilities. However, it is not because the people of Kiruhura have money but because of the disease burden in this country. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to state that I did indicate that the people of Kiruhura have money when the challenge is resources that we do not have as a ministry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did you actually say? (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, what I told the honourable member is that we were constrained by resources. We are beginning with the high burdened districts of northern Uganda, West Nile, eastern Uganda, and then we shall move to the other areas based on the disease burden. However, in the meantime, those who can afford, please encourage them. That is what I said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that really what she said?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, it was at that corner there; we were standing up and I told her that the people of Kiruhura are getting finished by hepatitis B. She said, “You people of Kiruhura have money, you can treat yourselves.” She never said all those things she has said - in God’s Name. (Laughter) She simply gave one statement - Kiruhura people have money, they can treat themselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have money? (Laughter)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: She knows. Mr Speaker, what has given me hope is that this syndrome is treatable and rehabilitation is possible. I have also found out that this syndrome requires proper nutrition. It does not require complicated medicines. Therefore, what is so difficult for Government, through the Ministry of Health, to find proper nutrition for these people? It is embarrassing for our Government. We do not have to wait for a supplementary budget from the Ministry of Health. Let us act today and save this situation. Thank you.

3.58
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues and say that this situation should be treated like they have been treating security. When they hear that there are rebels in Kumi District, for example, they immediately order for the release of money and Parliament approves later. We should treat this matter in the same way.

Prof. Kitara said that this disease is found in specific areas like Tanzania, northern Uganda and South Sudan. I would like us to look at the possibility of relocating the affected people so that they do not suffer. If we discover that there is a disease in that location, for avoidance of future problems, we find resettlement areas within the northern region and settle these people. 

These unique diseases have often caused us big problems. Previously, this country suffered from Ebola and Marburg, among many, but quick interventions were made and we are now out of danger. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.00
MS ADONG LILLY (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement and Prof. David Kitara for making us understand the burden of this disease. What attracts me most is that we can manage this like HIV/AIDS and other diseases that people are suffering from. Therefore, if Government and the House get serious, we may be able to save our people.  

I would like the minister to tell us about the Shs 1.2 billion. This is because we did not approve Shs 1.2 billion as Parliament but Shs 6 billion, and it was only Shs 1.8 billion which was released to the district. What happened to the Shs 4.2 billion?

Mr Speaker, it was very clear from the minister’s presentation that the stakeholders that are involved from different ministries were given their responsibilities. However, the Ministry of Health was supposed to handle the clinical management of the cases. I would, therefore, like to find out from the minister, apart from the drugs that are being issued, what else has been done? 

From the presentation by Prof. Kitara, the centres that have been able to rehabilitate these children were only getting drugs from the ministry. It was Dr Suzanne Gazda who used her money, sold her own home in the United States and by the time she was closing, she made a statement that still makes me shiver. She said, “I have never seen a country that does not care for its own people like this one.” She would always shed tears and beg people to contribute so as to save Ugandans. Dr Gazda could not do anything but close the health centre. She singlehandedly managed the health centre for five years and this was not easy. 

Mr Speaker, from the minister’s statement, the ministry is supposed to provide therapeutic feeding for severely ill and malnourished children but they never did it. It was only being provided by the Hope for Humanity Centre. The information we got from the ground is that some of the money which they sent to the health centres was supposed to be used for giving food to these children. They have told us it is a neurological disorder that –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking those who have contributed enormously to help these children. I would also like to thank you for raising this issue and allowing us to debate today. It is my humble submission that today we will conclude the issue of nodding syndrome holistically. If need be, we may even resolve that we need to kick nodding disease out of Uganda. 

There are three significant issues here: One, there are several families that are affected and infected; two, our children are sick; and three, the centres that were supporting these children have been closed. These are the significant issues that I have managed to identify as far as our debate is concerned. 

I would like to react briefly to the report given by the minister. Madam Minister, the issue of accountability should not have stopped you from addressing an emergency. This is because when you go to the ground, you cannot even stand to see these people suffering. For Kitgum District, where I come from, the minister stated that about Shs 400 million has been released. Recently, I was on the ground and the District Health Officer (DHO) and the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) said only Shs 200 million was received in Kitgum and not Shs 400 million as stated by the minister. 

Secondly, concerning the issue of feeding and the money that was sent for feeding children, I would like to be on record that Kitgum District never received any food. I only remember when we had a challenge of famine in the country that is when the Office of the Prime Minister released some food items for Kitgum District. We managed to convince the Office of the Prime Minister to give some food to the children suffering from nodding syndrome –(Member timed out.)

4.06
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first thank you for inviting Prof. Kitara to give us a brief introduction about that disease. I had never heard about that disease apart from here in Parliament. I would also like to thank Prof. Kitara for the presentation.

I do not know who bewitched Africans because we always like to expect from others since colonial time. Imagine how Dr Gazda sacrificed everything she had to come to Uganda to help our children. If we cannot care for our own children, why should we continue to produce? 

This is the same thing happening in Amudat District. We have a disease called kala-azar and it is only found in Amudat. However, the Government does not give us money. We get money from NGOs of Kenya; what is the work of Government? 

I, therefore, call upon the Government to act immediately to release money so that we can take care of our own children. I think that is very important. The Bible says, “Blessed is the hand that giveth than the one that taketh”. Will we be blessed when we are always begging for aid from other people? Since these children are the resource and the future of this country, if we lose them we are losing doctors and maybe presidents. The Government should take urgent action to allocate money for these children. Thank you.

4.08
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, District Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I thank the minister for her statement. In a very special way, I would like to thank Prof. Kitara David Lagoro for the spot-on presentation. 

From the minister’s statement and the presentation of the professor, we can clearly see the gaps. The minister left out key information in her statement that would have been necessary for this House. She did not bring out the gaps, apart from talking about lack of accountability. She never indicated the funds sent to districts. In addition, the specific amount of funds that was used at the ministry level was not indicated.

There is some big contradiction as far as the funds that have been allocated for the management of this syndrome is concerned. In her statement, the minister is talking about Shs 1.6 billion and yet just yesterday, the same minister presented to the Budget Committee an allocation of about Shs 3.8 billion. We are saying that we must appropriate money but the issue is not just appropriating the money; how is the money going to be managed?

A lot of money has already been allocated to help manage the condition of these children but it has been abused. When you look at the details in this paper that was presented to the Budget Committee yesterday, how the Shs 3.8 billion was allocated and also connect it to the statistics the minister gave in her statement, you can see the level of abuse. There are 13 children in Lira but look at the amount of money that was taken there - Shs 50 million; whereas in Gulu, the regional referral hospital, the centre for managing this problem, only Shs 10 million was sent. Again, Shs 49 million we sent to Lira to help 13 children while the other side we have thousands and thousands of children suffering. 

How can people be so inhumane like this? Now we have received a statement from the Ministry of Health. Where is Ministry of Agriculture? Where is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development? All these ministries were allocated money to get down to the ground, carry out assessments and design interventions –(Member timed out)

MS LOWILA: Mr Speaker, can I conclude just on this statement, please. It is very important for the record. The information I have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next time, please start with the important information (Laughter). Please, wind up.

MS LOWILA: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was given Shs 100 million. They went, held a meeting for about 30 minutes in Gulu and came back and kept quiet up to now. The Ministry of Agriculture was given Shs 100 million; they too went, held a meeting for about 30 minutes in Gulu and came back and kept quiet. So, what is the minister talking about? She is talking about only Shs 1.6 billion? It was in fact Shs 7.1 billion that was allocated to help manage this syndrome. 

4.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I brought up this issue yesterday as a procedural point under rule 217, which requires a minister to come up with actions taken. 

There was a previous proclamation on this very matter by this Parliament last year in July. Among the eight resolutions that were passed by this House, there was one key resolution that I would like to mention here. Resolution No.8 was that Government, through the Ministry of Health, should construct a rehabilitation centre in Pader District since it has the highest number of victims. 

Therefore, since the minister has indicated that a lot of money has been sent, I would like to ask whether there was any construction of a centre like that in Pader. I ask this because this was among the resolutions that were lined up in this House and you actually committed yourselves to fulfilling some of them.

The current presentation that the minister is making before this House clearly indicates that Pader District has the highest number of victims. A volunteer or someone from a charity organisation came up and sacrificed over US$ 2 million to construct some centres. What has the Government of Uganda done to construct a centre that would help to coordinate and rehabilitate these children? There is already a centre in Omoro, one in Tumangu, and it would be really good to have one in Pader, which would handle the cases in the other districts around Pader District.

Lastly, I would like the minister to quantify her statement. She was talking of research still ongoing; I would like to know when you are going to conclude this research. When will the results be produced in this House? The Speaker brought us a technical person who gave us some information. We now want authentic results from research by Government. We also want a breakdown of all the disbursement of Government funds like hon. Lowila has said. Where has the money gone? For what purpose was it?

4.16
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, District Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to say that our children are our future. All children are equal and unless we give them a chance to grow, our country’s future is threatened. I therefore recommend that efforts be made to ensure that those children’s lives are saved.

I, therefore, would like to propose that we resolve here that we give the Shs 1.2 billion that they said is needed per year to re-open the two centres, so that this money has a direct route. I heard that the Ministry of Agriculture took some money, and also the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Prime Minister’s office and the Ministry of Health took some money too each. If these centres are re-opened, money will have a direct route to the people who really need it. I therefore recommend that we pass a resolution that Shs 1.2 billion be saved for those children. 

Lastly, I request that a letter of appreciation be given to Dr Gazda for work well done to save the lives of children.  This is because she may not be one of those awarded medals by the President because sometimes medals go to people who do not deserve them. Being non-political, she may not get one, so let us write a letter of appreciation to the lady to encourage her. In that letter, we should also show the country’s commitment to support her.

MS ACHIRO: The information I wanted to give the honourable member – unfortunately she has already sat down – is that we are giving Shs 1.2 billion to Odek Centre and Tumangu Centre and yet both centres take care of about 30 patients each. Therefore, where does this leave those other children from Pader District, because we have the most cases? 

In fact, the minister said we have 863 cases but I want to correct that; we have 2,247 cases and Pader has the most cases. Therefore, before we allocate this money, we should remember that Pader has the most cases of nodding syndrome in Uganda. Thank you.

4.19
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to convey my sympathies to the affected people. This is an alarm that has gone off to show that Uganda will be threatened in future because these young ones will be the Ugandans tomorrow when my life is gone. 

My problem here is that Ugandans are good at mismanaging. I sit on the Committee on Public Accounts where we have found large sums of money channelled to other sectors. However, here there is an alarming situation where Ugandans have failed to act. Why can’t we now channel the money you have on the budget to save these lives? 

Mr Speaker, we have allowed investors to come to Uganda and we appreciate what they have done. However, why can’t we also allow researchers? If we have failed to identify this disease and our own researchers do not know it, why can’t we get researchers from outside Uganda to come and curb this situation?

Mr Speaker, my concern here is that we need to act as soon as possible to ensure that this disease is known in Uganda. It has happened in northern Uganda but you never know today or tomorrow it will be in Kabale. Let us unite our efforts to see that this problem goes without affecting anybody. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a ministerial statement would attract one hour. We have exceeded one hour because of the significance of this matter. I would like to call up the Member for Kilak South County to say something and we see how to proceed.

4.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate Dr Lagoro and the minister for their information. 

I would like to correct the minister briefly, on what she presented on the Floor of Parliament. Last week, as Members of Parliament from Acholi, we went to the ground for a fact-finding mission to ascertain exactly what is happening with our children affected by nodding syndrome.

Mr Speaker, the minister gave statistics about the number of children affected. However, I would like to say that when we went to the ground, we found that Pader District has got 2,244 children that are affected by the nodding syndrome and the number of those who died are 863 children. In Kitgum District, the affected children are 583 and those who died are 235. In Omoro District, we have 254 affected children and those who died are 18. In Amuru District, we have 64 children who are affected and those who died are four. The total number of children affected by nodding syndrome at the moment is 3,145, contrary to the 2,143 that minister talked of. The total number of children who died are 1,120, contrary to the 137 that the minister said –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been following the minister’s statements carefully and the one which is being presented. When we say, “northern Uganda”, I think this time Lango subregion is not included. For that matter, in my constituency, Erute County North, we have 18 patients of this case but monitoring, treatment and feeding them stopped because of lack of funds. 

Therefore, is it in order for the minister not to think about Lira where we have these cases and for my brother here to read a list of “northern Uganda” and exclude Lira, or has he no information at all about the cases in Lira? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very good information. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, we moved as Acholi Parliamentary Group and we came up with some recommendations. We really feel that when Government acts on these recommendations, it will save the lives of our innocent children:

1. 	We said that let Government train all staff on nodding syndrome in all the affected districts, to reduce the workload in the health centres and hospitals.

2. 	All the affected districts should include nodding syndrome in their district development plan –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me hurry. All the affected districts should include nodding syndrome in their district development plans to allow districts full participation and ownership –(Interjection)- Let me summarise. 

3. 	There is urgent need to ascertain the number of children that have recovered fairly well in the schools, those at home and those that have challenges in their daily lives.

4. 	There is need to conduct needs assessments in the affected households, to allow development of targeted programmes for the affected children and households.

5. 	There is need to develop holistic care for the worst affected children, to rehabilitate them in an effort to improve their condition. In this regard, we need the rehabilitation centres constructed in the affected districts of Omoro and Kitgum to be re-opened immediately.

6. 	The Ministry of Health should disburse funds regularly and promptly to support outreaches and other operational costs of the nodding syndrome programme in the affected areas.

7. 	There is need to improve sensitisation of the affected communities by health workers and Village Health Teams (VHTs) on the management of the affected children and legal implications on the perpetrators found sexually abusing these affected children. The nasty information that we got on the ground is that some of these affected girls - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I need you to wind up.

MR OLANYA: There is urgent need for the mobilisation of funds to respond to the needs of the affected children and households from Government, donors, UN agencies, international organisations, friends and well-wishers. That has never been developed.

Finally, the Office of the Prime Minister must deliver assorted food items to the affected households on a constant basis. As noted from our field visits, adequate food supplements play a great role in the recovery of nodding syndrome victims.

Mr Speaker, the good news I got from professor’s presentation is that these children can still get better and go back to school. I pray that the good Lord helps our innocent children. Thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Olanya for his vivid point of clarification. 

He has told us that a team of Members of Parliament travelled to northern Uganda and collected statistics, which are different from what the Minister of Health has given us. To the best of my knowledge, the Ministry of Health has a surveillance system where health officers in the district regularly submit all the cases they get using the case definition of nodding syndrome - (Interjections) - Could you protect me, Mr Speaker?

The clarification I would like to seek is on the source of information from the Members of Parliament. Is the source of their information from the district health office? This would help us to understand whether they hide some of the information from the Ministry of Health. Kindly clarify on the source of your information.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for seeking clarification. 

When we went to the field, we invited the district chairpersons, CAOs, DHOs, and nodding syndrome focal point persons. This information was given by those four categories of people we invited, and we moved district by district. Thank you. 

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. 

When I took over the office of the Minister of State for Northern Uganda, I did not understand the nodding disease immediately, until I went to the field to distribute some items to support the communities. These included ox-ploughs, sewing machines, iron sheets and a number of other things. When I went to Pader and Omoro, I found that the districts had categorically identified families affected by the nodding disease that would benefit from the items I have just mentioned.

Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that it is true that the nodding syndrome can be treated because when I reached Omoro District, I found six girls who had been treated at Odek Centre. They could sew and weave, so I gave them some sewing machines. (Applause)

When I visited Pader District, I specifically asked who the beneficiaries were. I found that all the families that had been invited were actually victims of the nodding disease syndrome. I was happy that we were reaching them. However, eventually, when I got to know the number of victims and households, we sat with Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) and most of us from northern Uganda know how NUSAF operates. It operates through identified specific areas and not in the whole subcounty as it was during the previous NUSAF I and NUSAF II phases. The current NUSAF III limits its operation to a small specific area in order to get better impact.

When we asked whether the nodding disease victims’ parents were targeted, they could not be readily identified because sometimes they were outside the watershed areas. What we are going to do with NUSAF, starting from this month, is to specifically target the households of the victims. 

In Kitgum, we are targeting 435 households and we shall group them into 54 groups; in Pader, 645 households in 81 groups; in Omoro District, 205 households in 26 groups; in Gulu District, 55 households in 7 groups; and in Lamwo District, we are targeting 271 households in 34 groups. Further, in Lira District, we plan to target 10 households in one group; and in Amuru, 46 households in six groups. This means they will be facilitated to identify their specific needs and the activities that they can do in order to improve their livelihoods.

We have also allocated monies according to the criteria of NUSAF. Starting this month, we shall facilitate them from the areas they would like to benefit from, and we shall spend Shs 3.7 billion in support of those families. We are intervening from the household point of view but I think the Ministry of Health will continue treating the victims.

I also would like to also inform the House that when this issue was discussed in Cabinet, it was thought that these centres should be categorised as special centres and should be handled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This is because if you go to the centre in Omoro District, one side is a school, another side is a health facility, and another side is for social development. It is multi-sectoral and complex. Therefore, we think it should be categorised under the institutions that are best taken care of under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. So, if colleagues here – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I seek clarification from the minster. You have talked about NUSAF and we are here on the Floor discussing the nodding syndrome. Is it targeting the nodding syndrome affected families or it goes beyond? It is important for us to know because to me, it is as if you have just given general information. Maybe you need to clarify whether NUSAF is targeting those families affected by the nodding syndrome. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable minister. Yesterday, the minister told us that in the financial year 2012/2013, they allocated Shs 600 million to the Office of the Prime Minister to provide those households with food items and other materials. This is Shs 600 million, which was provided, but on the ground we have not seen any impact right from 2013. You have now said you are going to implement some programmes; how different are they going to be?

The other financial year, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fishers was provided with Shs 100 million to open gardens for the affected families but nothing was done on the ground. Do you think what you are saying is going to be practical? Thank you.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Let me focus on what I am talking about now. I would not like to go back to what took place; I will not be in a position to explain that. What I am saying now is that we are targeting the households I have just mentioned. In the last one month, we have carried out a census and come up with a number of households per district that have victims of nodding disease. These are parents of those children you have seen whom we are going to target. 

The Northern Uganda Social Action Fund has its own area of coverage. In some of the cases where the NUSAF coverage is, you may not even find families affected by the nodding disease. We are taking deliberate action here so that we group them as a critical target in northern Uganda and treat them as vulnerable people who need support to get out of poverty. This is because with the nodding victims in their houses, they are not able to participate effectively in economic activities around them. Therefore, the said Shs 3.7 billion will go to those families affected by the nodding disease but the normal NUSAF programme of targeting watershed areas will continue as it has been planned. 

The Office of the Prime Minister also provides food but the type of food that that office gives is posho, beans and sometimes rice. These types of food do not include the nutritional element that the victims of nodding disease require. Therefore, the real food should be managed by the – (Interruption.)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the minister is proceeding well. I say this because usually, the Office of the Prime Minister should be supervising the handling of nodding disease but not getting involved in supplying hoes and sewing machines. I do not know whether it is really in order. It should be done by other ministries and then the Office of the Prime Minister should be monitoring whether something is being done to solve the problem. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this issue came up, the Government had to take up a multi-sectoral approach to this problem. You will find that the Ministry of Health does not have stores or means of transporting food, but the Office of the Prime Minister does under refugees, NUSAF and other interventions. That is why it was divided that way.

The question on the issue of food should be whether the budget can only go towards buying beans and posho and not fortified foods or vitamins. Can it buy fortified foods or it says the budget can only buy beans and posho? Is that what the instruction from Parliament says?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to ask for clarification from the Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office, following what my brother has just stated.  

The role of the Prime Minister’s office is to coordinate all the other Government departments. She is responsible for northern Uganda. She is not touching that element of coordination but she is only saying, “We are doing this; Ministry of Health will do theirs.” What then is the coordinating role of the Prime Minister’s office in all this? It is to coordinate all the other ministries to make sure they deliver. That is important for the people to know. 

You seem to be washing your hands. You are supposed to coordinate but you are turning around to do other duties. That is where the Prime Minister’s office goes wrong because they tend to forget the coordinating role and take on secondary roles, which actually should not be the case. Therefore, what is the primary role that you are entrusted to do in this entire saga to coordinate all the other government departments?

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, I agree; it is true that the role of the Prime Minister’s office is to coordinate. However, I would like to separate the role of coordination because that one is being done effectively. I have just told you that through the coordination efforts, the nodding disease centres are going to now be managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It was a Cabinet decision and the Leader of Government Business is the Prime Minister. That decision has been taken and so it will be implemented that way.

As Minister of State for Northern Uganda, my role is pacification and rehabilitation; it is targeting poverty so that the people of northern Uganda can come out of poverty. That is why my intervention is for the families, which are not able to provide all that they need to implement economic activities, to relieve them out of the situation they are in. That is why under NUSAF, we have planned to put aside Shs 3.7 billion for these families, just like the families that are being supported through NUSAF in northern Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We would like to draw this to a close. I would like to call the Minister of Health to make some comments.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for their contributions regarding this very important matter. 

The report presented by Prof. Kitara does not dispute what I presented; we just did not go into details. However, I would like to inform colleagues that during last year’s Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), we actually had three of these children who initially had nodding disease syndrome sit for the exams and pass very well; they have already joined senior one.

We do appreciate some of the comments made, including one by hon. Jessica Ababiku regarding the issue of Government taking over these health facilities, rather than leaving them to NGOs. This is what I mentioned in my report that we have written to the districts. If these facilities can be handed over to Government, I think Government should take up the responsibility of looking after these children.

Mr Speaker, allow me to start with the issue regarding funding. Yesterday, I gave a detailed but not complete report about the funds that have been sent to the Ministry of Health, and of course to various Government ministries and districts. 

We received a letter last week and as you know, the Committee on Budget asked us to provide details from 2012 to date. It is not true that we failed to avail the necessary information. What we requested for was more time. We only managed to inform the committee about the Shs 3.8 billion that has been distributed to various ministries, departments and agencies and some of these have been mentioned by hon. Olanya. 

Under the Shs 3.8 billion, there was some money that went to some districts but the bulk of that money, about Shs 600 million, went to the Office of the Prime Minister. There was also another Shs 682 million that was used for aerial spraying, which has helped us in partially reducing the impact of this disease because the black fly, as you all know, is highly associated with the nodding syndrome.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, if this House so wishes, at an opportune time, we can present details of how much has been disbursed so far and how much has been utilised. However, from what I did at the Ministry of Health and other ministries - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Office of the Prime Minister are all involved. Ministry of Education and Sports also received some money; I think it was about Shs 150 million. So, at an opportune time, we can present details on that. 

Mr Speaker, I do not recall the ministry asking for Shs 9 billion to handle the nodding syndrome. I will, however, follow up and find out. What I know from the technical team is that we asked for Shs 3.8 billion and this was released in the financial year 2012/2013. That is the money which I talked about in the Budget Committee meeting. 

From 2014 to date, the money has been coming in the basket for public health emergencies; it has not been specific for nodding syndrome. That is why we need a bit of time to dig up what has been disbursed to the districts. 

Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Mbale talked about - (Interjections) – Yes, I did mention this in my report; the disease is treatable if presented early to the health facilities. That is why I even went a step further to indicate the various stages - (Interruption)

MR JULIUS OCHEN: Honourable minister, I am the Shadow Minister of Health. When Dr Lagoro made his presentation, he brought to this Parliament the worst situation the children in the north are facing, and we all saw it. He convinced this Parliament that such a situation can be reversed and he showed us the figures of those children. However, the way you are presenting your statement contradicts his presentation. I think, honourable minister, we need to put our facts together. 

Mr Speaker, we further need to know from the minister which constituencies in the north are in danger from this disease. Kapelebyong County, which I represent, has similar cases. Up to yesterday, we have been urging the Ministry of Health to come and verify the situation on the ground but there has been no response. On that one, we continue seeking clarification from you, the professionals, Ministry of Health. 

In northern Uganda, right from West Nile, Koboko, up to where the greater north ends, which areas are affected? Secondly, what is the Government doing to curb the situation, to mobilise the masses and sensitise the families on what to do avoid? That is very important in addressing such a problem.

On the remittances that have been made by the centre to respond to the nodding syndrome in the north, I call for a forensic audit by the Auditor-General so that he brings a report to Parliament, detailing how the resources that were appropriated for this problem were utilised in the north. This is so that we get to know the plight of our people.

Honourable minister, I would like to conclude by saying that this Parliament should not stop talking about appropriation of resources. We must attack the pipe that delivers resources to the people. When money is appropriated by Parliament, the Executive takes the role of implementation. However, remember the time of the Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) cases in the north, where money was lost in the Office of the Prime Minister in a similar manner that the money for nodding syndrome is disappearing from the people who are assigned to deliver services to the people. 

What is happening to you, the Executive? Are these people not part of the taxpayers in this country? What has gone loose with the apparatus used for service delivery in the north for us to have this problem? I thank you. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even the other week when we went to the field, we found out that some children are still falling sick, for example in Tumangu. However, you are trying to give us an impression that when treated properly, the nodding syndrome can get better or cured. What have you been doing all this time, from 2011 to date, to allow this syndrome continue attacking the children the way we have seen? 

Moreover, I must tell you, honourable minister, that the people were not happy to see us there. They thought that we had gone for allowances as other people usually do, yet we had gone as the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Why is it that the condition is still bad? According to them, since the disease is not contagious, as the children die – and Government takes comfort in that - no new cases are coming up. Therefore, the faster they die, the better it is for Government. What have you been doing from 2011 to date? Can you clarify if there can be improvement? Thank you.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As the honourable member has just said, funds were released right from 2012, 2013 and ongoing, and you said they were in a basket in 2014, 2015 and 2016 and in 2017, some releases were also made. 

Mr Speaker, it is disappointing in the sense that Government decides to purchase vehicles to the tune of Shs 581 million when children affected by the nodding syndrome are dying. The Government gave facilitation to the Office of the Prime Minister to the tune of Shs 81 million yet children are dying because there is no food. The Government is giving allowances for outreaches to the people handling the situation. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has just said some of the patients are taken to the health centres when they are severely sick, what is the use of these vehicles and motorcycles that you handed over? What is the use of these allowances you are giving to the officers in the districts? What are they doing yet children are taken to the health centres when they are severely sick? It is so disappointing.

MR OKIN: We have seen these figures that have been distributed to the ministries. I would like to ask you what percentage of the total figure went directly to support these children. It is important to know that because what you have given us here are only operational expenses. So, which percentage exactly went to support the welfare of the children suffering from the nodding syndrome?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue emerged way back in 2004 or 2005 when the ministry started getting some information; it was completely a new thing. Of course, the intervention that the Government made was to support these people to be able to monitor because the numbers were big. 

Remember that now we are speaking of districts after the split. However, Gulu District then comprised of the present Amuru, Nwoya and Omoro districts. These were big districts and the teams on the ground needed to move. It was for that reason that the four vans and a Land Cruiser were purchased. We did not keep them at the Ministry of Health; these vehicles were sent to Kitgum, Pader and Lamwo and the Land Cruiser was used for central coordination.

Mr Speaker, we need to appreciate the teams and partners that have been on the ground. The Ministry of Health has not been handling this alone. You are aware that we have been working closely with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). A lot of research has taken place and actually, our own Dr Phillip Idro was recognized and received an award for the African Research Leadership –(Interruption.)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. When we went down on the ground to do fact finding, all the District Health Officers told us that research was being done by the ministry but until now the report has not been released. There is only the one by Prof. Lagoro, which was even at one point denied; they tried to block him from making public pronouncements on his findings.

Is the honourable minister in order to stand before this august House and praise a person who has been awarded for research, whose research findings have not been accessed by us? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what achievement was this award given for?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, we have had a turnover. We have new Members of Parliament, and we appreciate that, but we did come - I was personally in Pader where we released this report. All the district leaders in the affected districts, including Chief Administrative Officers, were all invited and we released –(Interjections)– We invited Members of Parliament; some turned up and some did not come. Therefore, this report was released and the findings were availed.

Mr Speaker – (Interruption.)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to give information that nodding disease is a new disease, which has been described as occurring in Tanzania, South Sudan and northern Uganda. From the scientific community, little was known until it attacked Uganda. Actually, most of the pioneer research has been done in Uganda and hence, the definition of the nodding disease was agreed upon in 2012 at a conference here in Uganda and the cause was not known. 

I would like to confirm what the honourable health minister is saying, that Dr Richard Idro, who is a paediatrician, has been doing a lot of research together with CDC and other researchers. It has now been established that the nodding disease is an autoimmune disease where the antibodies that are produced by the body to attack the Onchocerca volvulus also attack the normal body cells; now it is known. That is why Dr Richard Idro –(Interruption.)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi was the Minister of State for Health during the time this study was conducted. The current Minister of State for Health in charge of primary healthcare, hon. Sarah Opendi, told us this afternoon that research is still ongoing and she did not conclusively say that the results of the research were presented.

Is it in order for the honourable minister in charge of housing now to come and start declaring haphazard findings that were not authenticated? Is he still trying to imagine that he is still a researcher at the Ministry of Health? Moreover, a statement was made by the senior Minister of Health, hon. Dr Ruth Aceng, for which we still require her to make an apology to this country, stating that there are no more new nodding syndrome cases among children in northern Uganda.

Therefore, is the minister in order to come and mix up these issues and try to start explaining a report, which would have been given officially?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Nwoya raised a point of order in relation to this award that has been given to the doctor. I then asked a specific question regarding the achievement for which this award was given. I wanted to rule on the point of order but for some reason, it looks like I cannot get this information because I have not ruled on that point of order. Honourable minister, please help me.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I specifically addressed this issue and I said that on 21 December 2015, the Ministry of Health, where I was then, went to Pader and informed the public -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That Dr Idro had been given an award? I want to rule on that matter, honourable minister.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Dr Idro has been our main scientist in Uganda, doing a lot of pioneer research on the causation of nodding disease. He has been able to elucidate that nodding disease is associated with Onchoceriasis and also established that it is an autoimmune disease. That is why he was awarded. It was because for the first time, we were able to understand the causative agent of the nodding disease. That research was pioneered by Dr Idro, who is now based in Kitgum Hospital continuing to do more research on that disease. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information that is coming from the point of order raised by the Member of Parliament for Nwoya about the matter for which this award was being celebrated, I think is now clear information, that he has done some research. 

As to whether it has been helpful in dealing with the issue, that remains another matter. However, now they know what it is but we do not know why we are not dealing with and solving the problem. As for knowing what the disease is, the research has revealed this and the doctor has been awarded.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe to clarify, it was through Dr Idro’s research that we have heard even the professor saying that this nodding syndrome is an autoimmune disease. It was as a result of that research.

Allow me to complete – (Ms Kamateeka rose_) – No, please, can I make my statement. Information is not granted. 

MS KAMATEEKA: The people of Uganda demand an explanation and not only from northern Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, because of his commitment and in-depth studies - allow me to correct, I have been quoting Phillip, he is Dr Richard Idro - was awarded the Africa Research Leadership Award and it is through this research that we are now completing another research on whether the antibiotic Doxycycline can be used in the treatment of the nodding syndrome. This research is on-going and it is based at Kitgum Hospital where a centre has been setup and a number of children who are under this research have recovered.

We shall release the results - hon. Judith Akello was asking when should we expect the research results – I would like to say that before close of 2019 these results will be released. 

Mr Speaker, the hon. Atkins Katusabe asked about the interventions that we are coming up with. Of course the long-term one, which I can mention is that of completing the research but we have various interventions that we are continuing to do which includes but not limited to the biannual spraying of the river banks, giving out the medicines to the various individuals in these areas and continuing with the clinical management of these children. 

Mr Speaker, there was an honourable member of Parliament who asked why the children have continued to be in the state that they are in despite us knowing the conditions now. I would like to say that the Ministry of Health does give therapeutic foods to the children who are at the referral centre that was established. Those children in Kitgum Hospital, which is our referral facility are the ones given therapeutic food but otherwise, the other - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we constrain ourselves to respond to some of these things especially when we are chairing. The nodding syndrome centre that was established at Kitgum Hospital was closed. So, which centre are you talking about? That centre was the only Government therapeutic centre; it was closed.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, we rely on the technical information.  Allow me to verify if that is correct because the information I have from the technical team is that this facility is up and running. 

MR OKIN: Honourable minister, we have just been saying that the only two centres, one at Kitgum Hospital and the other at Tumango are not operational; they were closed.

We also said that no food had been delivered to these two centres since 2012. I do not know where you are getting this technical information from saying that these centres are open and therapeutic food is being supplied; those centres were closed.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I mentioned that sometimes the statements made by our ministers are quite annoying and we hold back. I am so disappointed that she keeps insisting about the technical people - I thought that she had verified this information. To me this is so annoying. She even wrote to me a note asking why I am lying and denying that she has not been in media on this. I never talked about the media; I still have the note here. These are some of things we have been talking about that you are a bad PR for the ministry and Government and the honourable colonel here also made such a comment, which I don’t want to repeat. 

Anyhow, Mr Speaker, given that background, we may be forced to ask the minister not to be heard again if this is the type of information we are receiving from the ministry no matter whether she says that it is being relayed to her from the technical people. I expected the minister to come here and agree with Parliament that there must be a forensic audit to the money that has been disbursed and that she agrees with what the professor said. However, I would like to move that Parliament directs the finance ministry to immediately release Shs 1.2 billion to enable the centres open and run the rest can be explained later because this is an urgent matter. That is what I had expected from the minister to enable us move forward rather than her opening areas where she is going to cause more problems. 

I would have loved to hear the minister talk about how money is going to be found. We met the finance minister outside and told him that we need money to help the victims, and later conduct a forensic audit to establish how that money was used because we have learnt that it was scattered to different administrators.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me give some advice to help. We are all part of this Government. If there is a problem let us deal with it because we are all interested in solving this problem. (Applause) Please do not paint a picture that is incorrect. You mislead people who should be taking decisions. Just said from the report that drugs are expiring from Lamwo Centre but you did not state the reasons the drugs are expiring. It is because the outreach programmes have failed completely. The health centre is too far away from the affected people they cannot come and so the drugs are expiring while the children are suffering from the other side. 

Honourable minister, when I asked Dr Opar about the last time they went to the health centre in Aramwanglobo, you were told in my presence that it was before the centre closed in December.

I was at Opit and Aramwanglobo centres on Sunday - you had been there last Tuesday after we had made noise here but you had not been there for more than two months and you come and say that the outreach centres are functional yet not. Let us do something to help these people. (Applause)

MR FUNGAROO: As the Leader of Opposition –(Laughter) – yes, I am now taking charge of this office because my boss is committed somewhere since yesterday. 

Mr Speaker, we have listened to the minister, Government officials including our brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. We have also listened to the leaders from the affected areas and to all citizens of Uganda present in this House.

From all this, we should conclude that attempts were made but Government has failed to solve the problem. Secondly, we should ask ourselves, now that Government has failed to solve the problem, what is the alternative? What do we do?

I listened carefully here and got disappointed when I did not hear any acceptance from the side of the minister acknowledging failure on their side.

In solving problems you can succeed but you can also fail sometimes. Honestly speaking, if I were the minister, I would apologise for failures and ask for reinforcement and for help from the opposition side; we are here to give you help. The shadow minister is here.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I request that we should save the lives of people who are dying there - the longer we debate the more the deaths. We should rule that the Government has failed in this matter and get a way forward on what to do. Let us do first things first. 

The centres that have been closed should be reopened. Money should be given immediately to have these centres opened and the statistics are collected afresh because there is a difference between the one given by the minister, and that one given by the leaders. Therefore, we need action since you have all the powers. We are behind you, giving the support you need to pass a ruling on this matter so that we save lives there. As leader of the opposition, we recognise the strengths and weaknesses of the Government and we are willing to help you. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the comments from colleagues and let us not mistake the NGO, the Hope for Humans and the centre, which the Government established in Kitgum Hospital.

In Kitgum Hospital, this is the one I was referring to. It is true that the other two, the one in Omoro and Kitgum, which were being operated by the NGO are closed –(Interruption)

MR OKIN: Mr Speaker, I am the Member of Parliament of Chua West in Kitgum District.  I have just returned from Kitgum. Two days ago, I informed the minister that these two centres are not operational. The one in Kitgum Hospital is not functional; the one for Hope for Humans in Tumango is also not functional. Is the minister in order to insist on telling the House that Kitgum Hospital centre is operational?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the centre that was set up by Government in Kitgum Hospital, not in Tumango, is closed. If there is another research centre elsewhere – (Dr Baryomunsi rose_) no, hon. Baryomunsi, you have not been there. This centre is closed. These are the problems we are talking about. 

On the 28 February 2018, we had a meeting with the Minister of Health, hon. Aceng, the senior minister.  There was Dr Opar and Dr Idro and we asked this question. I said there was a suspected new case of nodding syndrome from a mother whose two children were already affected. Dr Opar said he had already called the mother and they were reviewing the case. I went back on Sunday, met the same mother and asked her, “Have any doctors come to you?” They said, “No, ever since you left, nobody has come to see us.” This is the information we are relying on, honourable minister, which Dr Opar said in my presence. I went on Sunday when the mother and her child were there. The pictures were taken. Therefore, you might do yourself some good if you went there and saw for yourself.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information that I was giving is from the technical people. I do appreciate the information that you have given and I am going to make an effort. We have already planned together with the Director General to move there personally and see what is happening.

Regarding the issue from the honourable member who was saying that Pader needs a rehabilitation centre because it has a majority of the children, we do appreciate this information. We shall be able to look into the matter and put it into consideration. It is true Pader has the largest number of the affected children. 

Therefore, I would like to end by indicating that when we met you, we said clearly that in order for us to comprehensively address this matter, we are going to have a meeting with the Prime Minister and all the other line ministries. We hope that we shall have this meeting next week to be able to resolve this matter and agree on the way forward including establishing the rehabilitation centre in Pader.

However, as I did indicate in the earlier report, we have already written to the district and it is going to take over –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has insisted on her information yet you have clearly said to her that three days ago, you were there. She has come only to say, “I will go and cross-check.” Isn’t it procedurally right for her to withdraw that information? We trust your word, which the minister finds difficult to trust, knowing very well that you are the area Member of Parliament. 

Therefore, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for the minister not to trust the word of the area Member of Parliament and still needs time to go and cross-check? If she did not do so at first, let her withdraw.

Secondly, this is a matter of urgency. Is it procedurally right for the minister to say that they are planning to meet next week yet you met them last week regarding this matter? Do they really take it seriously? We have seen the pictures of what these children have gone through. Is it right for the minister to take this lightly at the expense of their life?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not my place to speak in this House. However, sometimes we find some difficulties, especially because of what we are with constituencies, when facts do not come out properly. 

We met on 28th February in the Office of the Speaker who chaired the meeting and she wrote to the Prime Minister the next day. The minister’s meeting is expected to take place next week, which will be about three weeks after that meeting. That is the speed when the minister is saying she would go there, may be next month or something like that. 

However, let us leave people to say what they want to say because apparently there is freedom of speech, which we abuse rather than respect it. Let us honour everybody’s freedom of speech. I will not ask the minister to withdraw what she has said.

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for inviting the professor who gave us the presentation because most of us were green about the matter. 

The honourable minister has made a presentation and a number of colleagues have punctured holes in that presentation, right from the financial figures to the facts on the ground. Going by what she has just said that she would go there next week, it means she is acknowledging that the statement is not satisfactory. On that premise, are we proceeding rightly? Why don’t we allow her to act within a timeframe so that she comes and presents a fresh, well researched statement with a clear way forward?

Mr Speaker, it seems my colleagues have misunderstood me. What I am saying is that she withdraws this statement and comes up with something better than this. It can be tomorrow or any other day but that is what I am trying to say –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us deal with the real thing because the issue could not have been better summarised by the Member from Chua. 

One, there are children who are sick; some are dying probably as we talk. Two, the centres that used to offer the rehabilitation services are closed. Three, the families that are supposed to provide nutritious foods cannot afford them. 

The doctor explained in detail and said that it is affecting the poorest families in the community. The fairly well-to-do families are not actually affected by nodding syndrome but it is the poor of the poor that are affected by this disease. That is what has been revealed. Those are the set of facts. 

Therefore, if these issues are going to be solved by withdrawing the reports and supplementing with others, then let this House take that decision but I do not think so. The proper way for us is let us be given proper guidance on what interventions are going to take place, as we leave here today, so that we go and cross-check and see if these interventions are taking place. 

If there are no interventions, we also know that as of now, like the caption on NTV says, “Let these people nod to death.” The hash tag on social media is “nodding to death.” Let these people nod to death because it is desired by everybody. Nevertheless, at least tell us that the only option that is available to these people is nodding to death.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, I stand here again to request you and the House to just accept the situation as it is. We are asking and demanding from a system that has failed to satisfy our expectations. 

Honourable members, do not seek for further clarifications from the same system that has failed to clarify to you earlier on. What is required now – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will not get any better clarification from you. 

FUNGAROO: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I would like to request you that the Shadow Minister of Health in conjunction with the entire Office of the Leader of the Opposition come here to this House with an alternative action plan  to solve this problem. I believe it will work. Give us next week. As we come here, the Shadow Minister of Health will be able to come here with a plan on how to raise the money needed to solve that problem urgently. 

Information on the number of centres opened by Government and NGOs, those that are working and those that are closed is supposed to be given to stakeholders like you. You are supposed to know the frequency of reporting during times of disaster; in a disaster situation, for example, information is required three times a day during emergencies. You then reduce it to twice or once and then conclude with an annual report. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the request is that you give us the room to bring an alternative and we solve this problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I do not need to give you any authority to do anything. You are at liberty. 

MR FUNGAROO: We have requested for next week to come with an alternative. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like a statement from the Government and we close this matter because we have another statement. 

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise if there was any misunderstanding. We all feel for these children. I am a mother myself and I know what it means to have a child in that state, especially when you do not see the child recovering. 

I indicated that we needed to take over this rehabilitation centre and of course, also consider the one of Pader. I was also trying to indicate there is one in Kitgum, where we seem to have contradicting information. 

Allow me to state on behalf of Government that we are going to find the money needed to have these therapeutic foods procured and provided to the children. We are also going to sit with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how to operationalise this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.34
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, this is an emergency and we cannot sit by. If our additional resources can save some lives, then we are going to sit tomorrow and ensure that we organise these resources. (Applause) Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. We will wait for this. Parliament sits at 2.00 p.m. So, tomorrow, we need to receive a report on what you have been able to put together. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a Supplementary Schedule Number 2 for the financial year 2017/2018. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the Committee of Budget to look at and advise the House on what is involved. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

5.36
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, pursuant to Rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure, I make this statement regarding my comments, which have since caused public unease and anger to many. 

For the avoidance of doubt, may I at the onset affirm my highest respect for the dignity of women and my unwavering faith in the inviolability of women. I actually detest all forms of violence against women. Kindly, accept my sincere and unreserved apologies, honourable members, the public and more particularly the women. This apology is unconditional.

On the particular video in question, while I never meant to condone violence against women, it is still not my intention to further strain the matter by making unnecessary justifications. 

The beating I meant was not the normal beating but another type. (Laughter) I celebrate women who are the pillars of our society and the custodians of our national cohesion and togetherness.

Mr Speaker, I seek the Members’ understanding and I earnestly pray that they and all members of the public accept my sincere apology. I retrace my unshakable faith in the dignity of women. I am totally against gender-based violence especially against women and this is to tell the world and my colleagues that any form of violence against women should be strongly resisted.

Mr Speaker, with the greatest humility, I take this opportunity to withdrawal altogether the unfortunate statement. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a statement made under the provision of those rules do not attract a debate so we will leave it at that. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Masindi, on what matter do you rise?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do apologies for taking the House back to the motion regarding the nodding syndrome. However, the procedural matter I was raising is in regard to the submission that the minister made stating that as a ministry, they are constituting a team to go on the ground. I thought that was a good commitment. 

However, owing to the fact that we have had this matter debated here and little action taken in the right direction, I was of the view that we constitute a team as Parliament involving area Members of Parliament to move together with the ministry team because we need an update on any development moving forward. Leaving the ministry alone has tended to create a gap of information, which has resulted into this situation to deteriorate to where it is.

Therefore, I think it is important that we have a team that will work with the ministry for the purposes of sharing information so that from now on, we do not again back-track. Mr Speaker, that is the proposal that I was seeking to present to you and the honourable minister so that from now, we move together as a team.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave people to do their jobs. Let the Ministry of Health go because it is saying that it is going there soon. Honourable members, you can go on your own. You do not need the guide of a ruling from the Speaker to send you there but you can go and just see what is happening but let the ministry do its job because that is what it is supposed to do. Let us not interfere- they are in the field, let them have the field, it is supposed to be theirs; it is a health related matter, it is their matter. Let them deal with it and then, we will proceed. Please, let us leave it like this.

However, the other aspect of the money, we want the statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tomorrow in the afternoon that the money has been found and the interventions are going to be financed. That is what we want to hear tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION, MISMANAGEMENT AND ABUSE OF REFUGEE PROGRAMMES AND FUNDS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I am rising on the matter that was presented by hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko- the statement he made. Indeed, you ruled rightly and wisely according to our rules.

However, Mr Speaker, I request that we suspend rule 54 and move under rule 16 because the statement he made here has a big lacuna. (Laughter) Therefore, I move that we suspend Rule 54 and we give some few minutes for Members to seek clarification on the statement made by hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko. The statement he made here left a big lacuna, which needs some clarification. 

We did not understand especially the other beating, which he means, Mr Speaker. This matter is serious and has attracted international attention- it is a big one; we cannot just sweep it under the carpet like that. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the House is constituted now, probably, I will have to nominate you to represent him in taking the clarification because I do not see the Member in the House.

However, honourable members, the statement that was made by the honourable member carried an element that did not quite deal with the matter substantially. The issue that caused problems is the issue of the use of the word “beating” and we did not see any sufficient withdrawal of that particular word. Therefore, I will ask the honourable member to come and deal with that at another time.

Honourable members, it is important that we carry the dignity of this House wherever we go. It must guide what we think, say and what we do because whatever you do affects the image of the entire House. Therefore, you owe it to this House to behave in a certain manner that is honourable. Therefore, we will be dealing with this appropriately. Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we not dealing with the statement from the minister of - no, we had amended the Order Paper to accommodate the statement that was asked for yesterday. Will we be able to complete this motion because it is coming to 6 p.m.? What about the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to issues of Agago, Kotido and Abim districts? Which one should we handle? Should we handle the statement and deal with the motion tomorrow and private members time also? What do you suggest; this would help us to have sufficient time to deal with it properly. I think let us deal with the statement and tomorrow, we deal with the motion substantially. We should have done it today but let us do it tomorrow. We amended the Order Paper to accommodate the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the 29th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the second session of the 10th Parliament, on 6th Thursday, February 2018, hon. Franca Akello, the Woman Member of Parliament for Agago District raised a concern over the loss of lives and destruction of property of some communities in Agago District by the Karimojong warriors. The ministries of Karamoja and Internal Affairs were directed to make a statement in Parliament and this is the statement. 

On 30 January, 2018 two young boys who were looking after cattle were apprehended by three male hunters who were speaking Luo. Others came from Agago side and these were apprehended near Longo dam in Kotido District. The hunters also had hunting nets, three dogs, spears and knives. The area around the dam is used by communities from Kotido, Kaabong, Agago and Kitgum and various districts in the area for fishing, grazing and hunting. 

The people who apprehended the two boys; one called Apei, 21 years old and 17 year-old Irar, son of Lokritak who was killed by the hunters. The hunters did not explain to the people who were abducted the reason they were being held. The hunters instead attacked and knifed Irar next to his heart. The elder Apei managed to disentangle himself but before he was hit by a knife on the head and another on his left side. Apei managed to run to his parents and narrated what had happened to them. He was later hospitalised in a health centre in Kacheri sub-county, Kotido District –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Parliament is an interested person in this statement. However, the minister is reading but the statement is not uploaded on iPads. I do not know how Members can follow this. Is it procedurally right for the minister to read what he owns and we do not have it? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you submit a copy to the Clerk’s Office?

MR OBIGA: Yes, Mr Speaker, we submitted this statement this morning at 11.30 a.m. to the Clerk and I got a stamped copy. I regret – I seek your direction whether I can read through or you would wish the Members to have a copy. I will go either way.     
       
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we listen to the statement? Please, proceed.  
   
MR OBIGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saying that Apei was hospitalised in Kacheri sub-county, Kotido District and was eventually discharged. It is stated that the hunters had laid a trap for animals and it had indeed caught an animal. When the hunters came to collect their prey, they found some people had taken both the trap and prey; the animal which had been caught hence the anger and attack. This case was reported to the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kotido by the LC III chairperson of Kacheri sub-county but the RDC did not take any action. This incident created tension on the border between the two sub counties of Kacheri in Kotido and Paimo in Agago District.  However, people continued with their businesses normally, especially from 31 January to 4 February 2018.

On 5 February, 2018 the relatives of the slain boy went to recover the remains of their late boy. On their way, they found four hunters from Acholi in Agago and they captured them. They demanded to know from the hunters who had killed Irar. The captured people were Ochaya, Walter Ochan, Bosco Otto and David Oyo. 

The captives said that they did not know who had killed Irar and in the process, one of the people from Kacheri tried to plead for those who were captured but he was instead beaten.

The captors tied up the captives and beat them up. Two of the captives; Ochaya and Ochan were killed on the site using pangas and axes. While the captors started beating the third captive, Oyo and the fourth one Otto tried to escape. They chased and threw spears at Otto and he was not caught. Oyo on the other hand, took an advantage of the situation and escaped but suffered serious injuries. He was able to hide from the people who were tracking him and managed to get home thus narrating what happened to his colleagues and him.

He was also admitted in Kalongo Hospital in Agago District because he comes from that area. He also further reported that on 7 February, 2018, again a group of people from Agago attacked six hunters in the same area of Kacheri in retaliation to the killing of Ochaya and Ochan. Five of these six people escaped and the sixth one was again killed on 7 February 2018. 

It is important to know that all these activities and killings took place in Kacheri sub-county in Kotido District, not in Agago. The activities are not in any way connected to the regular movement of the Karimojong herdsmen in search of water and pasture. They are related to the hunting incident, which occurred. Therefore, there are acts of lawlessness and criminality which are being investigated by the security agencies.

The scene of crime is a very large area with hardly any roads and this has made investigations a little slow, taking longer than is necessary.

The clan leaders and kraal leaders from both sides have taken lead in cooperating with security people and are working with the agencies to identify the perpetrators of the crimes. The perpetrators are very well known to the community because they live there and have been hunting together. Arrests are being effected and those who will be arrested will be prosecuted.

Separate meetings for these incidents were also held with leaders of the districts and a joint meeting in Abim, attended by some Members of Parliament from both districts. I must commend Members of Parliament who attended these meeting, they showed great leadership. 

The district leaders, elders, kraal leaders, LC III chairpersons of the border sub-counties, the UPDF division commanders, Uganda Police Force, Internal Security Organisation and all these efforts of the security agency leaders are aimed at apprehending the perpetrators and prosecuting them in the courts of law.

Like the practice has been, this is about the alleged destruction of property by the Karimajong warriors. It is true that Karimojong herdsmen, not warriors this time, have been moving to neighbouring districts of Agago, Pader, Kitgum, Otuke, Alebtong, Amuria, Katakwi and others. Most of these cattle keepers, except a few who have kept illegal guns, are not armed and Government is always on the look-out to make sure that those illegal guns are removed.

The prolonged drought in western Kenya piled pressure on the resources available in Karamoja forcing the herdsmen to move to the west. These movements are mainly by people from Kotido district where Government is yet to construct a water reservoir like it has done in the other districts of Moroto, Napak and Kaabong. These movements are attributed to looking for water, especially during the dry season.

Prior to these movements, Government, particularly the Ministry of Karamoja, has always encouraged district leaders, together with the security people to engage the host districts and agree on some basic principles of these movements. These principles include advising the security agencies to be involved before movement of cattle and people is made so that a census of the people who move and the animals that are moved can be taken before and when they are coming back. 

Government has also encouraged veterinary departments in the movements in order to control diseases. Government has also been demanding that kraal leaders should always deal directly with the LC III chairpersons of the areas where they are going to go, the host sub counties to be able to sort out issues of food destruction and stealing, local fights and livestock thefts.

The reality on the ground, in spite of this, is that a number of times some herdsmen – not all- move before district leaders know and they do not follow these instructions. 

The new tendency is also that kraal leaders stay back home and only leave the kraals and the herds of cattle to be moved by young men aged between 12 and 16 years to manage and control the kraals and especially using mobile phones. These groups – virtually all of them – are equipped with mobile phones. These young men cannot restrict animals from entering people’s gardens and they tend to be more reckless and at times they take some people’s food. The herdsmen also move without any food stocks and so depend on what they pick from people’s gardens on the way.

The people need intensive mobilisation in Government’s view. This level of insecurity needs mobilisation by all categories of leaders in order for the people to settle down and to appreciate any movement if necessary.

The criminal acts have been investigated and prosecuted as I have already said. Meanwhile, plans are underway to have massive mobilisation and sensitisation of the population under the Ministry of Karamoja, the police and other security agencies and the local leaders. We call upon all leaders to rise up to this occasion for peace building and harmonious living in the area. Government alone cannot do it and cannot change people’s minds.

As we talk now, the situation is calm and this should be exploited to eliminate criminality and create friendship while efforts to improve Government services are stepped up. Thank you very much for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are guided that this is not a typical ministerial statement so the one hour rule does not apply. This is a response to an urgent matter and what we will be doing is seeking clarification of the facts as stated. I also recognise the presence of Gen. Elly Tumwiine who is sitting there for the first time, welcome. (Applause)

6.06
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for attempting to respond to the matter that was raised.

To start with, the last statement of the minister is not correct because yesterday, I was on this same Floor of Parliament trying to register new cases of attacks and theft of animals from Agago District especially in the sub-counties that I mentioned yesterday. 

Therefore, when the minister concludes that, “as we talk now, the situation is calm”, I do not think this is in good faith. Just yesterday, I reported new cases including cases of these warriors – I do not know how you want to call them – herdsmen or whoever, cited with guns. They fired gunshots to threaten people from homesteads so that they can run away and the warriors steal the animals. It is not really something that is as simple as you may think. The problem of cattle rustling and cattle theft is still a real one that is happening and unless the ministry devises some other methods of dealing with these cattle thieves – if you want to call them so – it will not be a good thing, especially for the districts that border Karamoja. There are certain fundamental questions I want to put across following your response. 

You said most of the movements are due to looking for pastures and water. There are dams with a lot of water in Napak and Moroto districts and you would ask yourself why these herdsmen move from Kotido all the way to Agago. Instead of moving eastwards, why do they move northwards looking for water and pastures? Secondly, why do they skip districts such as Abim and come to steal cows from Agago? Thirdly, when they come to Agago, why do they steal our animals, run away with them and nobody apprehends them?

At the moment, we have about 300 animals unaccounted for. From the time I reported the incident here on the 6th of February, up to today, we have fresh cases of animal thefts. 

This matter must be handled expeditiously and carefully. You have to attach some in-depth understanding of the problem which is not just mere looking for water and pastures. If you are looking for water and pastures, you do not carry the whole of your family, go empty-handed, pitch camp in some village with 1,000 herds of animals and you stay there without even asking for permission from the owners of the land? 

That is why some of the leadership of the border districts that the minister mentioned, especially LCV chairpersons were almost making a resolution that these herdsmen should not be allowed to cross the borders of the districts. In addition, I do not think some districts agree with that option of first talking to the district leadership. My district does not agree with the option of allowing talks to first take place before the entry of these people because they have – year in year out – caused thefts of animals and several other cases, including killing and raping women. These are the issues I want addressed as we debate this. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no debate but clarifications.

6.11
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. This is a longstanding issue – the issue of cattle rustling, fights, killings, robberies and thefts of livestock by the nomads from Karamoja. However, from the minister’s statement I wanted to hear a pattern of updates. For example, you have talked about the issue of disarmament – that arms were one of the factors promoting this violence. You said some guns have been removed and a few are still there. That is the kind of the updates I wanted to hear.

However, on the issues of promoting a mutual relationship between the nomads from Karamoja and the farmers in the neighbouring areas, what is Government doing to promote that kind of relationship? Remember that there were people who talked here that something should be done in Karamoja to change the mindset of the nomads so that when they move, they do not do bad things which hurt their neighbours. Is there something, which Government is doing in that direction?

Finally, is the issue of moving away from this nomadic pastoralism entirely to settled agriculture in Karamoja. What is the progress so far made in that direction so that the Karimojong can be shifted away from nomadism just like in West Nile where, hundreds of years ago, we used to have some practices of people moving with some cattle but these days it is not there and every community is settled with cattle and mixed farming. Is there something Government is doing in that direction other than this fire-brigading where if they are killing here you run, send police and army? Thank you.

6.14
MS GRACE OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his statement. When the minister talks about the neighbouring districts of Amuria, Agago, Otuke and the others, I want to find out whether Abim is not part of this group. I know that these warriors or herdsmen do not fly from Kotido to Agago. They pass through Abim and before they reach Agago, Amuria or Otuke, they would have already caused havoc. 

It is really a big challenge. My sister there was saying, “Why do they jump Abim and come and steal cows from Agago”? Up to this morning, cows were picked from Abim. The situation is calm but not very calm. The situation becomes worse during the rainy seasons when the herdsmen are going back and they do not go back with theirs only; they must pick something. 

They are also very clever, especially when they are not moving with the animals. They are very tricky especially when they are not moving with animals because they use these “tyre shoes”, which the Baganda call ”Lugabire”. We call it “Olal” in Abim. When they put it on, they can even turn it the other way round. Your policemen will be chasing them on the north but the things would have gone south. (Laughter) They are very clever and we should not relax. 

This is a matter we have talked about year in year out. One time I represented the Jie, the people of Abim and the people of Kaabong – that was the greater Kotido, which is now Abim District, Kotido District and Kaabong District. These were the same things we were talking about. The only solution that we need is that when you give Abim, Agago, Amuria and Otuke one valley dam, give Kotido five so that they settle down. 

Honourable minister, we still have many issues. I know you have a problem because already in Abim – I have told you and we have shared  – the police are incapacitated. The only police vehicle, which has been in Abim has been parked and not repaired in Kampala for the last six months. How will the police work? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can we make it brief?

6.17
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Honourable minister, I was at the centre of this problem when I was chairman LC V and I led the country in addressing this matter. I was able to attract over 30,000 Karimojong at the border of Moroto before Napak and Amuria were created and they are living peacefully. The problem Members are talking about is between the Jie community and the neighbouring district not Bukora. I must be very sincere on this.

Mr Speaker, my analysis of the situation on the ground is that the weakness is from the security agencies because they are supposed to oversee the implementation of the decisions we take. Last week, when we met with the Minister of State for Karamoja, I proposed that the current situation warrants from Lamwo up to Bukwo is for the ministers of state for northern Uganda, Teso, and Karamoja, to come to together with Members of Parliament and security agencies to agree especially when the dry season comes on the modalities of how to handle the Karimojong cattle rustlers that cross to the neighbouring districts. 

My suggestion was that if they are crossing to Pader District, the security agencies in Pader should come together with the leadership of Kotido and Pader district should agree that such a number of kraals are going to a particular sub-county. 

Secondly, the leadership of the kraals must also be identified together with the people they are walking with including their cows, and they should be handed over to the authorities once they have crossed the border. Then the security should supervise the movement of these people from one place to another. If anything goes wrong in Pader sub-county, the five kraal leaders that have been assigned in that sub-county should be held accountable for the atrocities and damage caused across.

Mr Speaker, if that is done, all this mess will come to a halt.  This is what I proposed to the Minister of State for Karamoja.

On the issue of Karamoja, dams cannot rejuvenate grass like in other areas. It only provides water for animals but it does not provide pasture. Unless the minister is saying there is going to be a special programme to plant grass, which can match the situation in Karamoja so that they do not come.

Therefore, I would like to suggest that while we are calling for dams in Karamoja, we must also call for dams in the neighbouring districts so that when Karimojong come, they find water in that area. This attitude that my honourable colleague was talking about - I changed my mind and I succeeded in Amuria. Even right now, we have intermarried.

When I left Amuria to come to Parliament, we were in peace with the Bukora people. The only problem is the Jie community because we did not have a policy of peaceful co-existence with them since they were a distance away. Abim and Napak are in the middle and that is where the problem is. Therefore, I would like to implore the Minister of Internal Affairs and those ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister to come together and take on this matter.

I would like to conclude that we have lost a number of animals, which were stolen. Mr Speaker, they are not stolen by guns. Karimojong come in the night and they have kraals in their swamps. If they find you grazing animals and maybe you have left the animals alone to go and to look for water or cassava to eat, they steal the animals in your absence. Sometimes, they come and cut the rope when you are sleeping and these days stealing is connected to commercialisation. When Karimojong steal bigger bulls, they rush to Kotido and the following day, they take them to the market for sale.  

Further, when there was a problem between the Turkana and Jie in the eastern part of the country, the animals that were stolen were rushed to market and sold and some taken to their kraals. I am sorry to bring this on the Floor of the House but since it was reality, I had to mention it. This is a problem we need to tackle.

Honourable minister, we also need to sensitise our people   especially those from Lamwo and Bukwo. A few of them who take animals to swamp tend to abandon them there and then when you return to check on them, you find that they are missing and you start looking for them. We must speak reality if we want to address these problems. We should put our hands together.

As I conclude, I was very disappointed when I supported the Minister of State for Karamoja with ideas. The other day, the minister came to my constituency with a helicopter in Okumuru sub-county. Do you know what the minister was saying that I could not afford a buffalo! I do not know anything about military. “He is in Kampala and he is not coming here. I think we should start a process of recalling him“, he told the people. The minister did not even send me an invitation letter for the meeting in my constituency. That is what the Minister of State for Karamoja was saying after I supported the senior minister. 

Mr Speaker, the minister landed in my constituency inciting people against me and yet, I have been in that sub-county for more than three times in two weeks, to meet the community. Can such a minister process what we are discussing to bring people in harmony in order to address a problem of this nature? This will not help.

Honourable minister, when you started reading your statement, it was good except Government should pick interest in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The police that operate in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts have no fuel. They find difficulties in chasing for the criminals. Facilitation is almost zero because each time there is a problem, they cry for fuel.

We cannot fight this problem if we cannot support our police force to meet the challenge on the ground. Therefore, I would like to call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security to ensure that the police force in that region is facilitated. If you looked at the problem that happened in Agago –(Member timed out.)

6.24
MR ALBERT	LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I apologise for whatever happened again in the northern part of Karamoja especially between the Jie community and the neighbours. I would like to request us to mind the language we use here. In Karamoja, cattle raiding ended a long time ago. What is taking place is cattle theft and sometimes what we discuss here is not what happens on the ground.

As a result of the incidences between the Jie and the Turkana and incidents the honourable minister has just read, UPDF was deployed in Karamoja and the commander there has been working to ensure that these issues are resolved. At the moment, the disarmament process is still going on. When you say a gun was sighted somewhere, UPDF is deployed and if it is reported to the UPDF, they should be able to track and discover these guns because they are illegal.

The issue of water in Karamoja has been discussed. The only problem is that Government takes time to effect some of these things. Kotido District deserves a dam and this will help us see how they will disturb their neighbours. 

Mr Speaker, the Jie and the neighbours have co-existed for years. When you go to the ground, you find them speaking the same language. I do not know how these incidences occur. Maybe we need to investigate further through the respective ministries especially the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to find out the exact cause of this. 

Of course, the Jie are being pronounced as a notorious group in the region. However, Government is trying hard to make sure they are disciplined. Honourable colleagues, I would like to request that we use fair language which is applicable in this era. When you say “cattle raiding” in Karamoja, we no longer talk about cattle raiding. In most parts of the region, guns were removed; the Karimojong were disarmed. When the public hears that there is cattle raiding in Karamoja, this is misinforming the public.

Mr Speaker, we need to use appropriate language. Hon. Ochen has put it right that they no longer raid cattle but steal cows. When I visited some Government ranches, the report I got was stealing of cows. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.28
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister, in his submission, was trying to say the basic reason for which the Jie go to the neighbouring districts is in search of water. However, like the honourable member from Tepeth, has put it, they move basically in search of grass. That is why it is during the dry season that they move.

Hon. Franca Akello talked about raping of women, which is very unfortunate. Members have just talked about changing the mindset of these people. I wonder whether the Jie who are committing these crimes are above the law. Honourable minister, aren’t there reports, for example, about the alleged rapists whose cases are in the police in those districts? They surely cannot be above the law. If we have those records, then we can confirm they are raping women in their neighbourhood.

In Karamoja, we no longer have cattle raids but cattle theft. The elders of Amudat and Nakapiripirit districts sat down one time and thanked the Government for the disarmament programme. However, there were still isolated incidences of cattle theft. These elders sat down and asked themselves what they should do to these cattle thieves. They made their own resolution in the presence of UPDF also, where they agreed that for every cow stolen, when UPDF tracks and gets the thieves, that cow has to produce two more cows. One of the cows is then killed for the elders.

Honourable minister, I do not know whether you have tried to share that with the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs because he is aware of that resolution called the Nabilatuk resolution. Right now, those thieves fear to steal because if you steal only one cow and the UPDF gets you, you will end up losing three cows. You may need to look into that. Perhaps, it will help us in the affected areas of Agago and Amuria where the Jie are disturbing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have the minister briefly respond to all these issues.

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (MR Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me thank all the colleagues who have made very useful comments. Most of them are really constructive suggestions in which we can all engage with Government and leaders, beginning from here, to make sure that we change the physical and mental situation in the area. This is one of the issues, which I emphasised here.

Generally, all I would like to say is there is a great improvement in the situation in Karamoja and in those areas. Although this has been a long-term problem like my colleague from Kapelebyong has said, we really must appreciate that there is room for improvement and people have changed their attitude. 

I am happy that Members, particularly from that region, have now distinguished between cattle theft and cattle rustling, which generally, even in the view of Government, is no longer there. What we are left with is cattle theft, which like any other crime is not above the law. Whether it is cattle theft, raid, murder, nobody is above the law. If there are weaknesses in implementing by the implementing agencies like the police and UPDF, those will be studied and addressed.

There is a specific issue which hon. Franca Akello raised that as of yesterday, we had these problems occurring in that area. It is only possible that the police commanders particularly of Kotido and Agago were not aware of this. I do not know why.

Before I came here yesterday, when I came to make a commitment that I was going to make a statement today, I told them to give me the most recent position as up to this morning. Indeed, that last sentence where we said the current “situation is calm” is a statement. However, I am going to investigate it further and I promise I will come back with the facts, if not in the Plenary, but at least to you hon. Akello so that we move together.

There are issues about the style of stealing. There was an issue on why they move westwards and not eastwards. I think that is also about to end because they used to move west-east and west-north. However, because Napak and all those other districts in the eastern area of Karamoja have realised the need for change, you will find that that is the actual reason why they are not moving that way. They think when moving westwards in some areas is a soft spot, that is again an area, which we must address as Government and leaders. I entirely agree that we must do it.

Finally, as security organs, particularly the police in operating that area, we do have weaknesses, particularly in mobility. Even where we have vehicles, sometimes we do not have the fuel to move. Sometimes, they break down and we have to grapple with maintenance. We also have problems in the numbers, but as I said, these are challenges. They should not be an excuse and we shall try to make sure how best we can address them. 

This is no longer an insurmountable problem, in my view and the view of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The problem in Karamoja and that region is no longer insurmountable because the majority of the community from Karamoja, Teso, Lango and from Acholi is willing to expedite this issue to be resolved. Thank you very much.

MR OCHEN: I had wanted the honourable minister to also explain to the House, because he talked about the numbers. In Karamoja alone, over 400 Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) officers were withdrawn from Karamoja and deployed within UPDF in Democratic Republic of Congo, creating a vacuum of 400 ASTU’s who were supposed to have helped the police to check the security of the people. 

In such a situation, the police are very thin on the ground and some of these people take advantage of the vacuum.  As security agencies, we know problems sometimes come which warrant the movement of these officers to other areas. However, what alternative are you putting in place as a remedy? That is why yesterday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have asked the question. You have already asked the questions.

MR OBIGA: The honourable member has really answered one part of the question. Situations may arise where once in a while, you need to deploy elsewhere other than where people are. Secondly, that situation has created the problem that we have raised and we properly addressed it. 

Can we address it by increasing the mobility? Partly, yes. Can we address it by mobilising more people? Partly, yes. It is a multi-faceted approach. We cannot say at the moment that we only got to do one and the situation will be addressed. However, I would like to assure you that we have noticed that situation and I have acknowledged it here that it is one of our weaknesses of the thinness of our forces on the ground and we must address it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It is way beyond the usual time we close especially when we start at 2 o’clock.

Honourable members, let me give you a head start of tomorrow’s business and I need the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to be here. Tomorrow, this motion, item 6, will be debated first. Also, tomorrow is Private Member’s time, which we also frame as Prime Minister’s Question Time but there will be two motions from private Members seeking leave to present Private Member’s Bills. The first one will be from hon. Mpaka, who intends to propose a motion seeking leave of the House to amend the UDB Act to allow lending to young people. The second one is from hon. Edward Otto of Agago and he wants to propose a motion that you give him leave to present the Trustees Bill. 

I am giving you notice that they are coming tomorrow. So, please, come prepared for these particular debates and of course, the other debates will also continue. 

Also, tomorrow, we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time. So, prepare your policy questions that you would like to ask the Prime Minister so that we deal with that matter tomorrow. We also now have the other matter that has been added on the issue of the money for the nodding syndrome, which we expect a statement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explaining what they have been able to find. 

House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 March 2018, at 2.00 p.m.)
