Tuesday, 23 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to warmly welcome you to this sitting. I trust that you have received communication from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament about tomorrow’s meetings – we shall meet both in the morning and afternoon starting at 9.30 a.m. We hope that through this process, we may be able to cover a lot of business that has been pending on the Order Paper, and which has not been disposed of. So, in order to move systematically, I suggest that honourable members make brief contributions and where necessary, avoid repeating issues that have already been raised.

Related to that is the fact that Cabinet sits on Wednesdays, but I am also aware that every ministry has more than one minister. In that regard, I would like to call upon the Government Chief Whip to ensure that colleagues whose matters are reflected on the order paper are represented in Parliament tomorrow morning and in the afternoon. There should be no excuses because the order of business is already on the order paper.

Secondly, I would like to inform you that His Excellency Dr Jacob Zuma, the President of the Republic of South Africa, is visiting Uganda and would like to address Parliament. He will address this House on Thursday at 11.30 a.m. for about one hour. He will be accompanied by President Yoweri Museveni, the host. 

You may know that in the closing years of the Apartheid Regime in South Africa, Uganda hosted the liberation movement of the country – the President of South Africa is coming to give thanks to us. But you must also be aware that there are important trade and investment opportunities existing between the two countries. I am sure that is another area in which he would like to speak to us. 

I, therefore, would like to request that we turn up in big numbers to receive him. It would really look awkward for the two presidents to come and there are several gaps on both sides of the House. I appeal to you to be present on Thursday at 11.30 a.m. Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 80 (US $120 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT 3 - THE UPGRADING OF NYAKAHITA-IBANDA-KAMWENGE ROAD

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, this loan was debated last Thursday and certain issues were raised by Members. We now expect the Minister of Works and Transport, and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to offer responses. I must, however, emphasise that much of the explanation is to be given by the Minister of Works and Transport, who is now ready to do so. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I invite the Minister of Works and Transport, I would like to welcome His Excellency, the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany to Uganda. (Applause) Thank you for the support to our country. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As my colleague the Minister of State for Finance has said, honourable members raised issues when we discussed this loan. 

I would like to thank all the Members who supported this loan. Let me now respond to issues that were raised, hoping that when I complete these clarifications, even those who originally did not support this loan will now do so.

Hon. Kibanzanga was of the view that there are too many tarmacked roads in western Uganda where he also comes from. I would like to say that there are not enough tarmac roads in any part of Uganda. All roads that are not tarmacked need to be tarmacked, whether they are found in western, central, eastern or Northern Uganda. I would not have expected hon. Christopher Kibanzanga to say that there are enough roads in western Uganda – maybe, I think, it is because we have done very well in Kasese District which is covered with tarmac roads.

Hon. Oduman raised a number of issues, but his first concern was about how this road came on board when it had not been mentioned in the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the concerns of hon. Christopher Kibanzanga. I would like to say that what the honourable minister is saying is a misrepresentation of what hon. Kibanzanga said, because he did not say that there were too many tarmac roads in western Uganda. His concern was about the few roads tarmacked in the west and the few or non-tarmacked in Karamoja, which was his emphasis. So, maybe the answer you need to give here should be the correct response to the question that was raised. That is the information – no tarmac roads – not even a kilometre in Karamoja.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I think we shall check with the Hansard and to know what was said. Hon. Minister, please continue.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance – the Hansard is there.

Hon. Oduman, although this road was not mentioned in the Budget Statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when you look at the ministry’s policy statement, it is said that Government was going to upgrade 1,061 kilometres, which would include – what he listed were a few and since I know that you are extremely very good at figures, if you added the length of the roads mentioned, you cannot get 1,061 kilometres.

But I also would like to refer you to the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered by the President before the Budget Speech. The Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road is mentioned on pages 20 and 21.

This road is also mentioned on page 44 of our own manifesto. The manifesto says that if our party got elected into power, we would link every district to the other with tarmac roads. If you look at what we have here, we are linking the district headquarters of Kiruhura to Kamwenge District headquarters. In the North, we are linking districts up to Koboko with tarmac roads. We are working in consistence with our manifesto and with what was mentioned in the State of the Nation Address. It is also in line with our own policy statement of the ministry. 

I would not like us to leave here with an impression that this road has just sprung up and overtaken others – it has followed the correct queue of tarmacking.

Hon. Oduman was wondering why we are getting loans. He wondered why we get a loan that we will pay back in 40 years when the design of the road is to last 15 to 29 years. I will leave this for my colleagues in the Ministry of Finance to respond to, but I would like to say that the longer you take to pay the loan, the softer it becomes. And what you borrow and the terms of the loan should not be related to the life of what you buy –(Interjections)– yes, because you could pay off your mortgage in the shortest time you can. 

If we are taking expensive loans, we would be required to pay them off in eight years. But we opted to take softer loans, which are almost 80 percent grant, to our advantage. In any case, that road you borrow for – let me take for example, a fresh road. What you will reconstruct after 15 years is just the last layer of that road. The rest of it – if it is constructed through a mountain, that mountain does not come back after 15 years. If you build a bridge, it will last for 100 years. That is why I am saying we should only look at the percentage of what we will reconstruct after 15 years, which is just about 15 percent of starting to construct the road. So, you cannot say that we should not have borrowed Shs 40 million for the road whose life of the layer or pavement will take 14 years, because 80 percent of the road that you have constructed using the loan stays forever –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! Hon. Minister, please continue.

MR NASASIRA: Hon. Tumwebaze supported the project. There was an issue concerning other parts of the country and we have decided to bring you a list showing 54 road projects that Government has undertaken either for reconstruction, for design or even for new construction in the whole of Uganda. I would like to request that the copies of the list be distributed to honourable members. 

On that point, I would like to emphasise that if you are raising an issue about roads not being done in your district, it is easy to understand. But when you begin talking about trunk roads or corridors that are both national and international, because they link us to our neighbours, you cannot relate it to regions of Uganda. For example, is the road from Malaba to Jinja an Eastern Region Road or a road for the whole of Uganda?

Another example is the road from Malaba-Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara-Katuna or a road from Tororo all the way to Nimule through Gulu. Let us talk about road corridors as national roads, more than as local roads, because much as they serve the respective regions, they also serve the country at large. They serve the economy that benefits all of us.

I don’t know whether there are any issues to be clarified by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, but I appeal to honourable members to support this loan so that we proceed with the work of tarmacking the road. I would also like to ask them to support the coming loan for tarmacking Gulu-Atiak and Vura-Arua-Oraba roads that will be coming to the House soon. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members of the House raised the issue of borrowing and Uganda’s external debt sustainability – they sought clarification on why we should be borrowing this money and the justification for what has already been borrowed.

I would like to inform this House that the present share of the current external borrowing portfolio is as follows: Ministry of Agriculture is 16.5 percent; the energy sector shares 16 percent; roads account for 13.3 percent; the socio-economic policy, including OPRDP, shares 9.5 percent; the health sector, which is the concern of this House shares 6.9 percent.

Of the budget support, health and education sectors are the biggest beneficiaries of the external grants.  By way of examples of the grants received between 2005 and 2006 up to March 2009, of the US $905.2 million, the health sector took 33.2 percent an equivalent of US$ 300.5 million, while the education sector took a share of 11.8 percent, which amounts to US $107.1 million.

I would like to further inform the House that borrowing is done to increase productivity and production in the economy, hence increasing the economy’s capacity to service debt obligations. It is, therefore, not true that we have been borrowing for pleasure, nor is it true that the loans we have borrowed have not been useful to this country.

Other issues were raised in regard to this loan, as to why we have money budgeted for public awareness campaigns and media broadcasting. If you look at the share that is given to public awareness, it is only US$ 80,000 of the US$ 120 million. 

Members raised issues of awareness saying that we do not have enough road signs and that we do not have enough information as to what this loan is supposed to do. 

Another issue that was raised was road safety and audit, which accounted for only UA 0.10 million. During the course of implementation of this loan, there are financial audits that are carried out to assess value-for-money - to assess whether the money that has been budgeted is being spent well - and that is why we have these internal audits within the loan itself. The Ministry of Works, for example, has to supervise contractors and audit them from time to time. And of the US$ 120 million, it is only US $100,000 that has been budgeted for financial audits, which are always necessary in the course of implementation of the loans.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, the issue we were raising was the issue of principal; and the principal is, why should you populate this request to borrow with matters that can be handled under other institutions? You said we borrow for infrastructure; we should borrow for what is directly related to a unit of a kilometre constructed. But now you are talking about the amount; that is not what we are talking about. 

We are talking about the principal. You have HIV/AIDS mitigation; you have public awareness campaigns. Are those signposts, hon. minister? You have media broadcasting; what is that? You have issues of financial audit. From what we know, we are the ones who pass laws here; the audit is a responsibility of the Auditor-General. You have populated this request with matters that can be handled elsewhere and we are borrowing and paying interest against that. This is what we are saying; why shouldn’t you trim this loan to the basic infrastructural component? That is the question we are raising hon. Minister, but you are diverting to signposts. Really, we cannot be discussing signposts. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of the shadow minister, but it is the practice that when we get these loans, all those conditions are attached to them. The loan should have its own audit systems; first of all by the ministries, but the bank also carries out regular audits to ensure that the loan is on course, and it is doing what it was meant to cover. So, it is a term of the loan and, therefore, you cannot use some other money to audit that money which has been budgeted as a component of the loan. 

What I was saying is that if you look at the amount, it is really very little; US $120 million and we are talking of US$ 0.1 million for these financial audits which are always necessary for every project - it is a condition. 

As for HIV/AIDS awareness, this is a conditionality to deal with issues of corporate responsibility. These roads are going to be constructed by a number of people coming from different areas. It is actually a road gang. It is, therefore, necessary that information about AIDS awareness and prevention is included. It is a condition and it is very little money compared to the amount that is loaned or the amount that is going to implement the project. 

Those are the main issues that were raised, especially with regard to financing.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to join me in welcoming the LC V Chairperson of Kiruhura District, Mr Phillip Kamugungunu. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, I think we already had a debate over this matter. Okay, just take two minutes.

3.20
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are a number of issues, which have not been touched, but in the interest of time, I will restrict myself to only one issue, that is, the viability of this loan. The minister is insisting that the money aspect is not an issue, and yet he is giving us figures here and there and justifying those figures. The question I raised the other time, and which remains unanswered is, the minister in this very statement, and even the committee observed, that the required standard of a road is seven metres wide, but the money we are getting - and it is quite a lot of money - is going to construct six metres. And within a short time, we shall be required to widen this road, and that is the trend now. If you look at Masaka-Mbarara Road, we are widening it; Kampala-Masaka Road among other roads. We should widen the roads to ease traffic flow and to ensure that there are no accidents on the roads. So, why should we borrow this money to construct a road which is not up to standard? Can’t this money be enough for the seven metre wide road? I thank you. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I am not happy with the way the answers are being given to us, because they are skirting over the issues we raised. 

I want to put this to the hon. Minister of Works: how much is it going to cost per kilometre of this road? There has been a debate over the unit cost of roads in this country, and there has been a problem in determining the standardised rate. What we have here is a research by the World Bank that indicates on average what it costs for Sub-Saharan Africa. We also have a copy of the debate in the press indicating how the unit cost of road work is going up everyday. 

From my quick calculation, I am seeing that from the brief the minister gave to Parliament, for each kilometre of the 143 kilometres that are indicated in the brief, this country is going to spend US$ 1,063,000 per kilometre. Here it is indicating, 101.4 million euros for the 143 kilometres. Using the exchange rate here, it means that one kilometre is going for US$ 1,053,000. Really, the average standard for Sub-Saharan Africa, the top range, is here. It is US $613,000 -(Interjections)- this is as per June, 2008. It is up to the minister to say, you upgrade this by so much. But we are saying US $1,000,000 per kilometre is so much. 

This loan is populated with issues that we do not understand. They are not on the surface. The onus is on the minister to put them here; but we have reservations. 

Whereas you have talked about HIV/AIDS awareness and all these audits, you are trying to justify your case. But our point is: why can’t we leave those under institutions that have the mandate to handle them? We give that to the Ministry of Health; we give audits to the Auditor-General. You are saying the money that is there is little. It is little, but what do you want to use it for? Let it be used by the rightful entities that are mandated to do that. Why should we build a borrowing component in this loan? We are populating it with issues that are non-infrastructural. That is our concern, Madam Speaker.  

3.25
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were discussing this issue last week, many concerns were raised, which I have heard the minister respond to, but he has left out some of them. 

Members had argued that if this road is supposed to serve its full purpose of linking all parts of the country to development, it should extend up to Fort Portal, so that it also serves the people in that area, rather than having it stop on the way. I have not heard the minister respond to that. 

Secondly, I have heard the minister justify this loan funding HIV/AIDS awareness. I do agree that as a country, we are concerned and are spearheading all efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, but we have a number of issues that are pending, which Ugandans want prioritised. Is the minister saying that the issue of maternal health, which is of great concern to mothers of this country, is going to be bundled up in this programme as a priority to justify the loan? 

As my colleague already said, we have sectors handling different issues in this country; why should this loan be a clearing house for this money for other purposes? We want the minister to make this very clear so as to leave no suspicion in our minds that the money is going to be bundled for other purposes.

Lastly, if the minister, in his submission, is saying that we have national roads which link Uganda to even our neighbours, that is the justification for our concern about the many roads in the West at the expense of other parts of the country, because they are –(Member timed out_)

3.27
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much. Mine is just a clarification. I thank my sister, Anywar, for her concerns for Fort Portal. I also know that this road was supposed to go up to Fort Portal, and when this loan request was brought, I noticed that it stops in Kamwenge. So, I consulted the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Works. They assured me that the road from Kamwenge to Fort Portal was going to be worked on from World Bank, IDA 15, where some US$ 70 million had been put aside. 

What surprises me is the communication which I got from the Ministry of Finance; they said that the design of the road was finished and that they are now working on the Environmental Impact Assessment. When I look at the Uganda National Roads Authority document, showing the major national roads development programme, I do not see Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road. I need some clarification from the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Finance if really –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is No. 44

MR KALIBA: Okay. If it was amended, I am satisfied and I thank the honourable minister. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you. Let me first of all deal with the issue of standards. There are different classifications of roads depending on traffic and extent of service. For example, the whole corridor from Malaba to Kampala is seven meters wide with two meters on both shoulders, which means that the tarmac road is about 11 meters wide. But there is another classification; there is class A, which are the main corridors; then you go to class B, then class C and of course you know that the road in your driveway maybe three meters wide, but it is a road because it serves that purpose. 

So, it does not mean that every road we tarmac in this country will be seven meters wide. It will depend on its function. What you do is to plan that by the time – because it is tarmacked in a certain class, and as the economy grows, by the time you want to reconstruct it, then it will deserve to either be widened or when there is a lot of traffic that is when you can have four lanes. 

That is why on Kampala-Jinja Road, we are now designing four lanes. Very soon, we shall continue until we get to Malaba and thereafter, to Bombo and other areas as traffic demands. But as of now, the six metre width with one and a half metres on both shoulders of tarmac is adequate, and we do not want to spend more money when it is not necessary to do it now.

A lot of people have expressed their concern about audits, which my colleague clarified, but they also have concerns about the component of HIV/AIDS. For us who have worked on road projects in the past, these projects need special consideration with regard to HIV/AIDS. This is a group of thousands or hundreds of people working together every day and night. So, you need, as part of the project [MS ANYWAR: “Order”.] Now, which rule –

MS ANYWAR: The honourable minister is repeatedly raising the issue of HIV/AIDS, which we do appreciate as a country, but we have said before that there are other issues like maternal health which should also take precedence in this country for the sake of the mothers. He continues to sideline other important issues just in order to justify the loan without being sensitive to other issues in this country like mothers having to be rushed for medical examination. Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to sideline other important issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thought the minister is facilitating the transportation of people, including to the hospitals, and that is why he wants the money for the roads. (Applause) I think that is what he is doing.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before this loan is sought, you have to do an Environmental Impact Assessment for that corridor. There is a Ministry of Environment assessing environment in the whole country, but there must be a specific Environmental Impact Assessment report for that corridor. How does this project relate to the environment? Does it pass? Does it not?

Similarly, because of the period that you are there, and having these people working on the roads as I said, away from their homes, it is important that people are sensitised about the dangers of HIV/AIDS as part of the routine work. Of course, this road project has got salaries; people are paid salaries and allowances for the project, but this does not stop the Ministry of Health from going on with its HIV/AIDS programmes and that specific project has to be catered for. It is part of the conditionalities of getting the loan. I think it would be bad business to fail to get a loan of US $100 million because you do not want to include a component of US $100,000. And there is nothing wrong with educating people on your project -(Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give to my honourable colleague across is that there are three issues that have been accepted now world over: HIV/AIDS, the environment and gender. These are issues that must be mainstreamed - if you did not know the word - in all development projects as part of the effort to emancipate our people. I thank you very much.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, with that information from hon. Alex Byarugaba, I have nothing useful to add to HIV/AIDS and gender.  

Finally, there was an issue about media campaigns. We need to sensitise the people along the project route on the benefits of the project and how it will run. So, you need a component to sensitise the people throughout the project and part of it is road safety itself. What is wrong with educating people on road safety on every project you have along the corridors? What is wrong with it? Well, life is not cheap. 

With those few remarks, I appeal to all honourable colleagues to support this loan -(Interjections)- the cost? The cost will finally be determined by the tender because after this one, we are going to tender. This is an estimate just to get the loan. 

Let me also remind you that the cost of US $1 million per kilometre for a new road is a normal cost and the sooner we understand this - because when you say US$ 1 million is expensive, what should be the cost? How much do the roads you are talking about of international standards cost in those developed countries? I want you to go to Europe and tell me how much each kilometre of road costs - over US $2 million. Anyway, we have all the costs in our region and the world and the final cost will be determined by the tender. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the request by Government to borrow Units of Account 8 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Road Sector Project 3 - the upgrading of Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY THE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 190 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE PROPOSED TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

3.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present a report on the request by Government of Uganda to borrow US$ 190 million from the IDA of the World Bank for financing the proposed transport sector development project. 

The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Article 59 of our Constitution and rule 152, section 2(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We also held meetings with Ministry of Works and Transport, and the implementing arm of UNRA, that is, the technical staff from UNRA. 

The committee further studied and made reference to the following documents:
    1. The draft loan financing agreement;
    2. The road development and maintenance programme status which I now lay on Table; and
    3. The minister’s brief.

I now lay on the Table these documents accompanied by committee minutes of when we met these people.

The committee also made three field trips. We thank the members of the Infrastructure Committee who accompanied the committee to the field. I also thank those who joined us at the time when we were considering the report. We also thank the shadow minister for works for joining us in those sessions.
 
We also got written responses from the ministry and UNRA and the concerns which were raised both in the field and when they interfaced with the committee.  

Members were furnished with copies of the performance of the loans in the last 10 years, when we presented this loan request, plus the map which was intended to give this debate a more national outlook.

Background 
Uganda’s transport infrastructure comprises of roads, rail, water and air transport of which road infrastructure is over 90 percent of the passenger and freight traffic covering 10,800 kilometres of national roads; 27,500 kilometres of district roads; 4,800 kilometres of urban and approximately 35,000 kilometres of community access roads. 

National roads which cover 3,000 kilometres are paved and connect districts and the country with its neighbours and are the responsibility of the central government, managed by Uganda National Roads Authority. Urban roads located within the boundaries of the urban councils are the responsibility of the urban local governments.  

Government’s 2002 National Transport Policy and Strategy (NTPS) hinges on the promotion of less costly, efficient and reliable transport services as a means of providing effective support to increased agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services. The National Transport Policy and strategy places emphasis on the provision of a technically sound, economically justified and financially sustainable transport infrastructure through the active participation of the private sector. 

In 1996, the Government of Uganda with the assistance of development partners formulated the 10 year (1996/97 - 2005/06) Road Sector Development Programme (RSDP1); in April 2002, RSDP1 was updated and rolled to the second year of RSDP2 (2001/02 - 2010/11) and its total estimated cost increased from the original US $1.5 billion to US $2.3 billion.

A mid-term review of RSDP 2 was carried out in the financial year 2007/08 to assess the pace of implementation.  

The Transport Sector Development Project (TSDP) is intended to support a three year time slice (2010/11 - 2012/13) of the five year National Roads Development  and Maintenance Plan prepared by UNRA as an interim investment plan prior to the update of the RSDP II to RSDP III being part of the long term National Transport Master Plan.

The Transport Sector development plan is aimed at improving the sector performance through contributing jointly with the other development partners in a sector wide approach. PSDP is further intended to be the first in a series of proposed transport sector projects that would individually support a three year rolling plan for the overall road transport investment and reform programme.

In the Financial Year 2008/09, Government embarked on a programme to scale up interventions in the road sector, which programme has been maintained in 2009/10 and focus has been placed on upgrading and maintaining the existing stock of infrastructure. 

A review of the 2009/10 transport sector budget –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you really have to read word for word, can you go to the relevant areas?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker for your guidance. With your advice and having presented the previous loan with similar objectives, if I am allowed, I can straight away go to the project components on page 6; and go to 5.1: 

The Project Objective

The project development objective is to improve connectivity and efficiency of the transport sector through the three components; 
    (i) Improved conditions of the national road network;
    (ii) Improved capacity for road safety management;
    (iii) Improved transport sector and national road management.

The Project Components

The project comprises of five components: 
1. Upgrading and Rehabilitation of National Roads: This component will be executed by UNRA. It will finance the paving of Gulu–Atiak–Vurra and Arua-Oraba roads, approximately 160 kilometres linking Northern Uganda with southern Sudan and the north-eastern DRC. This component will also finance the preparation of design and bidding documents for the reconstruction of Tororo-Soroti and Lira-Kamdini–Gulu roads amounting to 229 kilometres in preparation for future financing. This will further help to ensure that the entire northern corridor from Kenya to southern Sudan and DRC borders is eventually paved and in good condition.

2. Enhanced road safety is a component; we have already had a debate about that.

3. Preparation of Kampala Urban Transport Project: This component will be implemented by the Ministry of Works and Transport and a special stakeholder committee will also be put in place to oversee its implementation. A   public-private infrastructure advisory trust fund of US $267,000 has been solicited by the World Bank to finance a pre-feasibility study for the establishment of a bus rapid transit system in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

The pre-feasibility study will prepare terms of reference for the preparation of design and bidding documents for the bus rapid transit system infrastructure in the selected corridor of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

Draft bidding documents for bus operators, fare collectors and fund managers, system financial models, central business district traffic management and parking studies, a bicycle pass master plan as well as draft legislation for a Metropolitan Area Transport Authority.

Honourable colleagues, you will recall about two years ago Parliament did approve another facility for the Local Government through KCC to do with the Kampala Master Plan because we had an outdated structural plan. 

4.  Support to Ministry of Works and Transport: This component will assist the Ministry of Works and Transport to focus on its core functions namely; policy setting, strategic planning, sector oversight and monitoring, and forth to spin off some of the responsibilities to newly created entities under its umbrella. 

There will also be the following sub-components:
    (i) Strengthening of policy and planning division through updating of the sector policy, review of sector legal framework and introduction of transport sector data management system;
    (ii) Assistance to put in place the proposed multi-sector transport regulatory authority;
    (iii) Assistance to the transformation of District Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) into the agency; and 
    (iv) Other support to Ministry of Works, Transport and Housing through technical assistance, studies, equipment, training and financing of operating costs.

5. Support to Uganda National Roads Authority 

This component will include:  
    i. Improvement/refurbishment of regional offices of UNRA;
    ii. Provision of additional technical assistance to the one provided under European Commission (EC) financing;
    iii.  Financing of the various studies needed by UNRA to enhance its performance. Remember that we have been complaining as Parliament because of the delays which Ministry of Works and now UNRA go through because of delayed designs and procurement processes;
    iv. Provision of training;
    v. Provision of office equipment and supervision of vehicles;
    vi. Financing of incidental operating costs due to UNRA acting as a project implementation unit of the TSDP. 

Implementation
Should I skip this and go straight to terms?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, proceed. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you.  

Loan terms and Conditions

The IDA will allocate US $350 million support of the Transport Sector Development Fund. The funds will be progressively committed under a succession of two credits as determined by the progress of implementation. The credit will support implementation of each of the two phases. Phase one of the Transport Sector Development Plan will be financed using a specific loan that is the one we are debating of $ 190 million from the IDA and a grant of US $8 million from DFID.

The loan shall be subject to the following conditions. The loan amount, as I have already mentioned, is US $190 million. The borrower shall repay the principle of the loan over a period of 40 years including a ten year grace period. 

The borrower shall pay a commitment charge at a rate of one half of one percent per annum on un-disbursed portions of the loan, which shall begin to accrue 120 days after signature of this agreement. For emphasis, this is why the committee and Parliament has always been insisting that we can reduce the time lost in preparation of the project in terms of the designs and procurement.

The borrower shall pay a service charge at a rate of three quarters of one percent that is 0.75 per annum on a principle amount of loan disbursed and outstanding from time to time. This is largely a concessional loan facility.

Before I go to the observations, conditions attached to the financing. 

1. 	Condition one is submission to IDA and DFID of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on the legal validity of the loan and grant documents to the Republic of Uganda.

2. Government to ensure that the implementation agencies adhere to procurement and disbursement considerations as required under the financing.

3. Submission of IDA and DFID of quarterly progress reports and annual progress reports in a format and content as required by IDA and also submission of annual financial audit reports for both the Transport Sector Development Plan and Program and UNRA. These are the audits that we have been debating with the shadow minister in the last loan. It is a loan requirement but I think it is also good governance practice that these audits are done.

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	It was observed that US $4.5 million allocated to Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and US $3.5 million for enhanced road safety was insufficient for the activities under this component. So, some of these recommendations we make are not necessarily for the decision of this loan. We make some recommendations for the minister to take heed and for the sessional committee to follow up, and not only recommendations we make as a committee of Parliament which are strictly for this loan.

	The committee recommends that more funds be reallocated for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and for the enhancement of road safety.

2. 	The committee observed that the creation of the National Road Construction Company was long over due. Government should endeavour to set up a national road construction company and further build capacity of its human resource component through VAT training in order to cut down on costs associated with high hire of private contractors. Further still, attainment of zonal regional equipment should also be looked at as an option to cutting down on construction costs.

	There has been unending debate about the unit cost and about the cartel of these companies. I think we need to have a national road company, which can also quantify its own costs and if possible be able to do our own roads like some of the countries we have seen, which are using their own companies where necessary. Right now, we cannot make a comparison. We would be making it between a cartel of a few foreign companies, which can actually agree to keep the rate high. That is why we need to review the policy. It is not a policy reversal but we are recommending a policy review.

3. 	It was further observed that the roads recently taken over by the Central Government were still lacking as little or no effort has been taken over their maintenance. The committee recommends that Government draws up a clear strategy on the management and maintenance of roads under their jurisdiction. I think the whole Parliament is concerned about this matter and we think that money should be found, maybe through a supplementary, to make sure that this is addressed.

	Further, creation of zonal UNRA offices is urged to ease the monitoring and management of roads under their jurisdiction.

4. 	It was observed that most of the roads constructed are at the width of six metres plus 1.5 and yet as the committee did indicate in the old report, we should graduate to an international standard of seven metres’ width for the safety of our people. We should not depend so much on what the donor has. The standard of the road should be a national standard. How many kilometres we cover depends on how much money we have got, but we cannot compromise on standards. So we think that in future we should make it a national policy.

5.	 The committee observed that some roads under construction lack diversion roads and road signs while some are being used while undergoing construction. We did report this and our team, which went and visited the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road, got these interruptions. We are saying that contractors must have the responsibility to provide diversion roads but also make sure that they provide for safety of the road users.
	
	The committee recommends that Government and resident engineers ensure compliance of construction of these diversion roads and makes sure that they have enough road signs to ensure safety for road users.

6. 	It was further noted that a specific, scientific formula for sharing of the road fund is lacking in different regions. Government should fast track the development of a scientific formula to ensure equal distribution of funds for the district, urban and community access roads, for regional balance.

7. 	The committee observed that the project cycle, which stretches for about two years, is too long. We have emphasised this point and every time we are discussing matters of works, this has been an issue so it is just an emphasis.

	We recommend concerted efforts to reduce the project cycle to avoid penalties and associated costs that go with un-disbursed funds.

8. 	Most of the local contractors offer substandard works and they are ill equipped and thus unable to compete favourably with the foreign companies. We think that the country should have some private sector local companies, which are capable of competing with the foreign companies. However, there are the stories of the Mukalazis and others, whose names I do not have to mention, who have been a disappointment even when Government gave them equipment.

	The committee recommends that Government should consider building local capacity through setting operational guidelines for these companies in terms of equipment, capacity and education levels for the human resource in order for them to be able to compete favourably with foreign companies and form joint ventures with them. This way, Government will be supporting local companies. We think this is a matter of national concern. It is patriotic; even if it means that the ministry itself gives some technical assistance to these companies, we can only be proud as a country if we have our own companies.

In conclusion, the committee noted that the Government’s 2002 National Transport Policy and Strategy hinges on the promotion of less cost efficient and reliable transport services as a means of providing effective support to increase agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services. This Transport Sector Development Project is, therefore, intended to bridge the gaps in the transport infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker and Members, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow US $190 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the proposed Transport Sector Development Project. 

As I conclude, I would like to make an appeal to the sessional committees. The committee has been interacting with the Ministry of Finance and we now have a list of performance of different loans in different sectors. So, when presenting the state of the economy report, we are going to give you details of ministries which have performed well in loans; the education ministry happens to have been in the lead and the worst happens to be the Ministry of Agriculture. However, this is not the work of the Committee on National Economy; it should be the sessional committees to follow up every loan that we do get as Parliament. With that I beg that you support the loan request and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The shadow minister will take five minutes and the rest two minutes each.

4.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee from page 4 of the report where in the last paragraph of the page you say: “A review of the 2009/2010 transport sector budget and 2009/10-2013/2014 National Budget Framework reveals that the total planned transport sector expenditure in 2009/10 is US $560 million equivalent of which US $178 million would be from DPs.” Should I take it that that is also a development partner? 

The two loans that we are talking about already – the US $120 million and the US $190 million - are they supposed to be part of this assessment of what we are getting from our development partners? –(Interjection)- You will take note and then answer them. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My colleague, the shadow minister, the two projects are different. The first loan of UA 180 million, that is, US $120 million, is the road sector support project which we presented on Thursday. Now there is this one that we are talking of which is going to be dispensed in two units. We are now talking of the transport sector development project. So, we are talking of two different projects. 

MR ODUMAN: What this sentence is saying is that the total land transport sector expenditures would amount to US $178 million from development partners for the planned transport sector budget. So, my question was whether those loans are part of the transport sector. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the Minister of Works and Transport.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for giving way, shadow Minister of Finance. If you read the sentence again, it says: “A review of the 2009/10 transport sector budget and the 2009/10–2013/14 National Budget Framework reveals that the total planned transport sector expenditures in 2009/10 … – this financial year. These loans are going to cover a number of financial years within the budget framework. So, I think your worry is that this is US $120 plus US $190 and yet here you are talking about US $178, so what we are trying to approve here is more than US $178. But the US $120 plus the US $190 when approved and when this project starts will be executed over three financial years. So, the US $178 is only talking about this financial year.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, honourable minister. We will follow that up at a later stage. 

Madam Speaker and Members, I have never seen a more wasteful loan than this one. I want to invite Members to page 7. It is extremely wasteful! It is our responsibility to keep mentioning this so that you do not blame us later –(Interjections)- Yes, when you are called to explain. First of all, the committee has given us the components of this project but again, like before, they have not told us how much money is going into each component. I do not know why. 

I agree that the ministers are supposed to circulate briefs here but sometimes it appears that they do not. Like on this particular one, I do not have a brief. I had a brief for the previous one but where is the brief for this one? That brief would contain the breakdown. As I keep saying, this is a cheque to be signed. What is the amount? You do not have the details. How do you sign such a cheque? The members are here and they are the ones to sign but they do not have the details. Madam Speaker, this is a recurring issue. 

The committee - whether the brief is there or not - should obtain information and upload it here so that at the time members are signing the cheque, they have the information. Now look at the component; we do not have the figures and when we continue to sign this, it is up to you to explain to your electorate what you signed. As for me, I do not have it. 

On page 7, under the upgrading and rehabilitation of national roads, there is a sentence there which says, “This component will also finance the preparation of design and bidding documents…” Really, we borrow in order to prepare bidding documents! We cannot be here to do that as a country [HON. MEMBER: “On which page?”] This is on page 7. This is the most wasteful loan I have ever seen. 

Now I will take you to component 3 on page 8 - Preparation of a Kampala urban transport project. What is this? We have debated in this House several times and we keep talking about the Kampala Transport Master Plan. What we were told in the past is that KCC has a plan for modernisation of the transport sector in the city council and all it needs is money, and I think they tabled such a plan here at some point. So, we need to see how this is related to that plan. Is there any duplication? What is it? Is this related to the Bill for the takeover of Kampala? Under which arrangement is this? 

“Support to the Ministry of Works and Transport.” This is the most wasteful loan. (Laughter) Hon. Minister, look at component No. 4 on page 8 - “This component will assist the Ministry of Works and Transport to focus on its core functions namely, policy setting ….” You cannot set policy at this stage as a ministry. You cannot tell us that you need to borrow to help you do strategic planning, that you need to borrow for sector oversight and monitoring, that you need to borrow to assist in spinning off some responsibilities to created entities.

Really, I keep talking about the herd instinct. Many times we might move as a kraal but as a result, we move in the same direction and when it comes to time for you to explain your personal responsibility here, it is going to be difficult. You are borrowing in order to help an existing ministry staffed with many ministers, commissioners and directors to help them to design policy! 

On page 9, No. 5, we are creating authorities. It appears we create authorities but by the end of the day we do not have capacity. Component No. 5 is to support Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). What are we supporting it with? There is refurbishment of the offices, provision of training, the financing of incidental operational costs - yes, that is why we are borrowing. 

When we were creating this authority, there was a certificate of financial implications, that we shall finance the authority. Now here we are and we saying that we cannot even refurbish the offices, we do not have operating funds, we do not have desks for them therefore we must borrow because we do not have money. We have just realised that we do not have money; that is what Government is saying.

In addition to the admission that we are having a problem sustaining a created authority, we are creating more. This is what we are creating - the National Road Safety Authority which is on page 7, a metropolitan area transport authority which is also on page 7, and another transport regulatory authority. We have no idea how these things together will deliver one thing. This is the most wasteful loan I have ever seen and each one of us must take personal responsibility for participating in the passing of this. To help existing ministers and directors to set up policy - to me it is shameful to be part of this.

4.24
MR SIMON TOOLIT (FDC, Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with page 7. As my minister has already stated, I would like to ask the chairman of the committee to come out with the figures detailing how much money is going to each component so that we know what we are giving to each component. Improving the capacity for road safety management, for example, is capacity building and we need to know how much we are spending there.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Much as the day this loan was committed we got a detailed brief from page 8 and 9, I know we have a problem because we are very busy that we cannot all be keeping our copies. What I can only say is that as much as we are getting extra copies, we all received these copies when the loan was committed to Parliament. However, I realise the problem; next time we shall be attaching another copy.

MR TOOLIT: Actually, when we are dealing with figures it is very important that we know exactly where the loan is going to.

When you go to page 8, support to the ministry, I remember very well that when were discussing the policy statement for the ministry, all these activities were budgeted for. Don’t we have a policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport? Don’t we have a strategic plan for the Ministry of Works and Transport? Why should we borrow to finance something which already exists? The money was budgeted for and the ministry is functioning; I think this loan really has no basis.
 
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira):  First of all, I would like to use this opportunity to welcome hon. Toolit and to congratulate him for having recovered after a long spell away from Parliament after that unfortunate accident. Maybe he might have missed some of the documents.

One, as the chairman of the committee on the National Economy says, when a loan is presented here, all components are given. However, for the benefit of honourable members, we are photocopying one summary sheet to show the components. 

Secondly, the money for supporting the ministry and supporting UNRA, which was also referred to by the shadow Minister of Finance, is a grant from DFID and it was clarified. It is not a loan but it is attached to the component of the loan of the World Bank. The support for restructuring the ministry and UNRA is a grant from DFID of US$ 8 million.

MR TOOLIT: I thank the minister for clarifying on the issue. However, our point is that let us know the component which has already been financed and demonstrate to us that there is still a shortage which needs us to borrow more money. If you cannot give us the difference between what we have already financed through the other grant and today you come to us here to ask for more money through a loan, then it becomes difficult for us to appreciate what you are talking about. It is important that when these details are given, the committee should actually put in place a detailed analysis so that what we are talking about now can be really put in place. We can then analyse and know how much is going to each component of the loan.

4.26
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): It is seems to me that this government spends more time requesting to borrow money than any other function. Making requests to borrow money seems like a core function of Government. It is true we need roads but is borrowing money the only way we can get roads in this country? We need them and there is no question about that but what about doing what other countries do: sensible expenditure, cutting down on expenditure, saving and cutting out corruption? That is how other countries are saving their money which we want to borrow, but all we do is borrow, borrow and borrow for everything that other people do without borrowing. 

We have heard in this House that lenders put conditionalities on their loans to mainstream some of their core values on each activity that they want to spend money on. What is the core value of this Parliament? How about mainstreaming some of those values as conditionalities on Government before we pass any loan? Can’t we make it a condition that when Government presents a request for us to borrow money, they attach a plan showing internally raised funds to pay for a percentage of the required loan? 

There are many areas in which we can raise funds or save money; we could ask all public servants to travel economy. India does that and India is not poorer than Uganda. We could scale down on the quality of vehicles that we drive. Some of those bazungu you see here driving those Prados and Pajeros, when we go to their home they drive us in small vehicles and they take us around in tubes because they do not drive the vehicles we allow them to drive on borrowed money. Some of the money that we borrow here is going to buy Prados for experts and for ourselves. We could cut down on the tea and parties that we have -(Member timed out_)

4.26
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido):  I thank you. I support what the shadow minister highlighted before this Parliament. Components No. 4 and No. 5 in the report that was given by the committee give the conclusion that this loan should be deferred and the committee gives us a seriously comprehensive report so that we can approve this loan. The minister has given us a sheet trying to outline the breakdown of the amounts in each component but since the shadow minister has given a very detailed and clear explanation, I ask this august House to defer this loan. I thank you. 

4.28
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): I thank you. I stand to support the loan request. (Applause) In spite of so many other things that could be involved in the report, I am happy that we are connecting Uganda to Southern Sudan –(Applause)- at least before Kenya does it. 

I would like to make this House understand that UNRA is a young baby. If you went to see the place where they now stay - and this is an organisation we have entrusted with the entire national road network. They need to be housed and they need to have regional offices. We have 22 offices but if you go all over the country, their offices are in a bad shape. However, I do not support the issue of forming another agency. To me, MTRA should be out of this and we should have a road safety agency so that we can have money for road safety and specific people to handle road safety. We can buy vehicles that can tow these trucks that normally break down on the road. 

They talked about the Road Fund and up to now, they are not happy about the Road Fund. This House will want to see how much we have been able to realise from the fuel levy and other taxes. The point of the finance ministry allocating money to the Road Fund is very unfortunate. We would like to assess and see how much money we have been able to collect from the Road Fund like Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia and many other countries are doing. Our finance ministry has kept a grip and we do not know; we are in the darkness. They gave us Shs 160 billion but we do not know from what. This House made a law here and we would want to know the amount of money we are collecting so that we can say, “Next financial year, let us increase the levy on fuel or reduce it.” 

All over other countries, road funds are sustaining the maintenance of roads but here it is a secret to somebody, the finance ministry. I feel the works or finance ministries should bring an amendment to the PPDA Act because it seems it is holding every ministry in procurement. We would like to have our work done in record time; we cannot approve this loan for Moyo and Gulu and then we let two years go by without seeing any activity on those roads. If we can approve the money today and we are assured that the road works would start next year, I would be happy. Why should they keep the PDDA Act -(Member timed out_)

4.31
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I thank you. I rise to support the loan request but will further need an explanation from the minister. On page 6, on project objectives, this to me is already the mandate of the ministry which was budgeted for in the normal budgeting process. So, I do not know why you have brought it again. 

The other issue is on page 8 on support to the works ministry. Here, the same question still comes up; whatever has been put here was already budgeted for because it is a normal thing. 

The other issue is on page 9 on support to UNRA. Here, like my colleague hon. Byanyima has said, this is a young baby that we need to nature. However, at times these issues are used to just take money. When we talk of training, for example, like many other trainings we have had in this country, you cannot qualify it or monitor. So I pray hard, hon. Minister, that you monitor this thing and people do not use it just to eat money. 

The other issue is on the provision of vehicles. It is common knowledge that when this issue comes up in any ministry, people will start funny deals. It is common knowledge that it has happened in CHOGM. Now that we are going to give them leeway to buy these vehicles, they are just going to buy vehicles that really are not in line with our economy – so much money and yet we actually need roads more than these vehicles -(Member timed out_)    

4.33
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): I stand here to support this loan request very strongly. When we were here discussing the last loan, there was the issue of distribution. Here we are saying Vurra-Arua–Oraba and Gulu–Atiak roads linking us to Sudan and DRC. Anybody saying that this is a waste of money, I cannot understand. We also see that in the east, Soroti and Dokolo are going to work on. Anybody saying this is a bad loan, then I cannot understand. We have registered every month, every week a number of people dying on our roads. A loan request comes here to enhance safety on the road, somebody says, “That is a bad loan.” I cannot understand this. I am very bitter about the carnage on our roads but if they are coming here –(Interjections)- to form a body –give me time please! 

Madam Speaker, if they are going to form a National Road Safety Authority to assist us with road safety surely, anybody with a heart should support this. (Applause) Everybody knows that driving in Kampala is a nightmare. They are going to work on traffic, policy, strategy and then you say it is a bad law? I cannot be part of the people with that kind of thinking. They are going to improve the rapid bus system. This is what we need. Buses cannot move.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the hon. Byandala has continuously castigated Members of Parliament for trying to look critically at whether there is value for money. He is suggesting that it is not worth it to look at value for money and that we should just allocate money in this country to where we cannot do our oversight role as Members of Parliament. Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know the word wasteful loan has recurred a lot in these debates. That is what he is referring to. So, he is in order.     

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. When you look at this loan, it is us here who restructured the Ministry of Works. We created UNRA and created the Road Fund. With restructuring, we need to train people and support them; otherwise, if we just restructure and leave them there, nothing will be done. So monies, which are going to be allocated to the Ministry of Works – assistance to the transformation of District Urban and Community Roads (DUCAR); these are the roads we are always talking about.

4.36
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In principle, I support the loan request. I support the report for the loan request, but I kindly request the Minister to help me. On page 8, number 4(iii), I have a serious conceptual problem. The definition of sector oversight and monitoring is not clear. I thought that this is a core function and an ongoing activity inherent within the operations of the ministry; a function that cannot be performed without using board money. I am wondering at the gaps that exist and how they are going to be filled using board money. What will happen when this board money is completely utilised? What is the problem you are going to address under sector oversight and monitoring?

You talked about strategic planning. We know that a strategic plan reflects the overall direction of the ministry. We are wondering what the problem actually is. Are you trying to tell us that you have no strategic plan and you want to put in place a strategic plan?

Lastly, what is meant by policy setting? What is the meaning of the word “setting”? I told the Minister he already had a policy in place and as a ministry, they are still implementing this policy. Please help us know what gaps exist. Otherwise, I support the report.

4.38
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support this loan. I am also mindful of some work that has been done by the Ministry of Works, which was contracted to some contractors. However, the roads have become old too fast. When you look at Mbale-Tirinyi-Iganga Road, which is older than Mbarara-Ibanda Road, it is still okay. The Mbarara-Ibanda Road is going to be reconstructed. This is less than -(Interjections)- 12 years ago when it was finished. The Mbale-Tirinyi-Iganga road is much older. It is still there –(Interjections)- while the Mbarara-Ibanda road, which is more recent, is in a bad state.

The other problem in the report is about the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road. It is 152 kilometres and you are saying that you need Shs 57 billion to reconstruct it whereas the Lira-Kamdini-Gulu road, which is 126 kilometres, needs Shs 252 billion. Why is this so?  

Also, why you are saying that this will be done in future when money is available? In the documents you have given us, you are saying under No. 52 that procurement of a works contractor is ongoing, yet you are saying there are no funds. This is in the same report. 

Under 27, Lira-Kamdini-Gulu road reconstruction, you are saying works are underway on the Lira-Kamdini section and works on Kamdini-Gulu will start in 2010/2011. In the report, they are saying they are just going to look for money because it is not there to start the work. 

The last issue I would like to find out from the honourable minister is why the length of these roads is changing. This is shown in the same document. When you look at the documents you have given us; the last one you have given us; you are giving us a total of 299 kilometres for the two roads. Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road is now 151 kilometres down from the original 152. Then the Lira-Kamdini-Gulu is 148 from 126 kilometres. Why is Mbarara-Kikagati 75 and yet I know it is shorter? 

Therefore, I want that clarification so that he does not move everywhere with roads. The distance is changing, especially regarding my issue of 51 for Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha road, which is supposed to include the Bududa circular road, which should be more than the 41 you have indicated here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members who supported this loan. I would like to clarify the observations members raised.

First of all, hon. Oduman, the Shadow Minister of Finance wanted to get the detailed component and we have quickly given this summary of the component. Maybe when you realise that there is money - a loan for bidding documents - I think that is taking this too far. The sentence might not have been clear. When they say preparing bid documents for the design – “… the component will also finance preparation of bidding documents for the reconstruction of Tororo.” I think the way it was written makes it look as if the loan is for buying paper and binding filled documents. The actual component is for engaging a consultant who is going to do the design and eventually prepare the road for construction -(Interjections)- Yes, I am correcting the impression in this statement that I might have given. Of course, we do not need a loan to go and buy paper and bind documents. If that is the impression the statement gave, please let me clarify. It should have meant hiring the consultant that will carry out the design and prepare the biding process for the road to be tendered out for construction. So, the money is for consultancy work. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Minister for giving way. I am getting a bit confused, when I look at this component, the document speaks for itself and what the minister is explaining is totally different from what is contained here. This is the report given by the committee and not the minister. 

So, is the minister now disputing the report of the committee? I am wondering about this, because this is a committee report; it is not the minister’s statement. The question is; hon. Minister, are you disputing what the committee reported to us? Secondly, if the issue is only about engaging consultants, the whole matter runs through, it is not just about bidding documents. 

If you looked at page 7, “To prepare a draft law for the creation of National Road Safety Authority,” this is just to prepare a draft law - is that also consultancy. You are talking of drafting the law –(Interjections)– I am not looking at those other aspects, I am looking at the drafting of a law. It is a component which is multifaceted and you are talking about that aspect of drafting the law as well. Does it also require a loan?

The same thing applies to page 8, the last paragraph, last sentence –(Interjections)– “Systems Financing Model, Central Business Traffic Management and Packing – a Bicycle Path Master Plan as well as a draft Legislation for a Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (MATA)”. Hon. Minister, the question again is about drafting legislation, would you have to borrow money for purposes of preparing documents like draft legislation; do you need a loan for that?

MS ABIA BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Minister. My shadow minister is really concerned about the costing of your loan because – I wish you had access to this document: “Annex 5, project cost.” This House is going to sign this cheque and put in US $3.3 million unaccounted for. Look at annex 5: “Making the Crash Data Base Operation”. What is the role of the technocrats who are sitting in these offices?

On that very note, there is, “Other support to the Ministry of Works is US $1.1 million”. We do not know what those resources are going to do. When you go further down: “Operational costs, undefined, US $1.1 million”, and further complaint is that this is going to cost this country US $4.2 million to do the supervision of Vurra–Oraba road works. 

Get this in mind that upgrading Vurra–Arua–Oraba road, which is 85 km, is going to cost US $79.2 million. Now, what are we talking about? Come down and do the real analysis. We are not being told in clear terms. Turn to page 11: “The borrower shall pay a commitment charge at a rate of 1 percent, which is 0.1 percent per annum of the un-disbursed portion”. We are not sure who much this translates into. 

Then they go further to say, “The borrower shall pay a service charge at a rate of three quarters of one percent”. Now, how much money is this in real terms when we are taking this loan for 40 years down the road?

This is why my minister and I are saying that this is totally unacceptable because we need the specifics of this to know whether in the long run this kind of borrowing will be a cheque that Parliament endorsed to enslave Ugandans or to save them. 

I am should be the first person to support loan because I know that is the gate way to where my uncle resides, in Koboko. But look at this; this is broad day robbery. If you take this page alone and define these loans, you find that the money we are spending on other unexplained costs is about Shs 6.6 billion. How can we committee ourselves to this as Parliament? It is totally outrageous and unacceptable in ordinary terms if not in God’s face. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe I should start with the concerns of my friend hon. Bako. This is not the first loan we are borrowing from World Bank; this may be the tenth and you will not get conditions of borrowing money anywhere else lower than this. In fact, this loan is 80 percent grant. Even the other loan you saw from ADB, 0.7 on the principal standard – repayment 40 years is by the way for the advantage of the borrower to take a long time. This is one of the softest loans you can borrow and such loans are given to least developed countries like Uganda which are coming up. 

Hon. Lukwago, this expenditure that you are refereeing to – first of all, I clarified the issue about preparation. If you see this summary, you will see under a (6), we note: “Design and bidding documents for Tororo–Soroti and design and bidding documents for Kamdini”, it is clarified. If there is a typing error in the report and we agreed with the chairperson that they should add, “Design”, what is wrong with that? First of all, hon. Lukwago is a lawyer, and he never does anything for free as far as I know. For every case you have, he charges. Why do you expect us to hire consultants to prepare these bidding documents and do the designs for free?

By the time we hire consultants, because we know we do not have enough people in the ministry. That is why when I want to go to court, I know I do not know law, I hire a lawyer - hon. Lukwago - I hire a lawyer to defend me. So we hire consultants because we do not have enough capacity and we are not the only country in the world, go all over the world, you will find projects, they are consulting.

In fact, most projects are designed and are supervised by consultants. Our role in the new structure as a ministry is policy formulation, regulation and monitoring. This is all over any modern society. So maybe –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, we are concerned about road safety. This MTRA we are talking about; Multi-Sector Transport Regulatory Authority does not make sense in the Ministry of Works. I can assure you we want a road agency; we would want a big and recognised road safety agency, not MTRA. We have been against this organisation; it does not make sense in the ministry. This money, US $3 million should go and join the road safety agency so that we can be safe. I move, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the minister will tell us what he intends to do with the road agency if he is now introducing this so that we understand your plan.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, I am seeking this clarification because the issue is becoming - which one should we take on? On 04 May 2008, Members of Parliament received copies of a letter from the President which was written to the Prime Minister. In his anti-corruption letter the President was raising the concern of officers conniving with contractors to inflate the cost of the construction and he made it clear that day light robbery of the road construction fund is unacceptable.

I want to have this clarification from the minister if in his plan now, he has borne in mind the concern which was raised by the president because of inflated costs of construction in this country and what measures have you put in place that we get value for money? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the last one will be from hon. Fungaroo.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. We had some discussions with the hon. Minister on some infrastructural development projects in West Nile for which money was passed here; 21 bridges to be constructed and since then these works have never been done. When we followed up even with my colleague hon. Arumadri, going up to the ministry headquarters in Entebbe, going up to UNRA, the statement that came was that some of the bridges lie on the roads, for example, from Vurra-Arua to Oraba and they are now incorporated into this project for which you are requesting for money. Now here we have not indicated which ones out of the 21 bridges have been incorporated here and at what money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Fungaroo, really I thought you are raising something different. You are a member of this committee.

MR FUNGAROO: This is the clarification I would like to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are a member of the committee -(Interjections)- it does not matter, he is a member of this committee as far as the Speaker is concerned.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I have looked at this document; the summary the minister has given us. When you look at this document, I want to plead with the minister that he accepts my proposal. It is necessary to borrow money for section (a) and section (e) only of this summary: support to UNRA and upgrading and rehabilitation of the national roads - then we would like the minister to come back here later to explain to the House the need for the National Road Safety Authority, the Metropolitan Area Trade Authority and the Transport Regulatory Authority; how different are they from the Uganda National Road Authority. What are they going to do? How much is it going to cost Uganda to pay for all the officials that are going to be employed in these authorities? Maybe the minister can tell us, how many authorities do you need to be able to run the road sector? (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: We shall have as many authorities as the authorities that are required but anyway - I think let me explain. There will be no authority established in this country without the authority of Parliament. That is the first thing you should know. That whatever authority we want, we will have to bring it first to this Parliament for its approval. Before we established the National Roads Authority, we had to start it and eventually came to Parliament and if you found it was a reasonable authority to establish, you approved it. Before they established the Uganda Revenue Authority, the Ministry of Finance had to start it somewhere and come here and any other authority whether it is Civil Aviation Authority, finally the approval is here. But we are the initiators of policy as the Executive and when we tell you that for us where we have reached, I will go to components now and I think hon. Byandala touched them. 

We think this is now how we want to go. If you realise the Ministry of Works and Transport of four years ago was both a policy formulator, a regulator and was an implementer. It did roads - in fact when you took it to the old days of PIDA, it used to design, supervise and do everything when the work capacity was minimal but since that time, we have been carrying out major reforms in the sector. What did we do? We said, now the Ministry of Works and Transport, you are going to concentrate on policy formulation and serious policy formulation and you need experts to do that. We need to train them, you need to equip them so that they can sit and think for the transport sector. How many times have I been here or any of my colleagues that Parliament has not complained about road safety, poor roads, congestion, bad vehicles; how many times? 

In order to solve this, you need well equipped and well resourced policy formulators. Serious thinkers, they wake up early in the morning and they think of how we can have a very efficient and effective transport system in this country. You will need to have serious regulators. You borrow for training and you even borrow money for education. Haven’t we got loans for education? Haven’t we got money to train people? Did we approve any money here in the budget to train? We are trying to develop you a Ministry of Works and Transport that is going to deliver the services you require and the country requires.

And when we are borrowing small components of it, please bear with us. Component (b) road safety; how many times - I am coming here to make a statement on the launching of a decade for road safety and when we launch that statement we shall give you more details of how we are going to handle road safety.

So, I wish they could leave that so that when I come, Parliament will know more details about this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be tomorrow morning?

MR NASASIRA: Tomorrow morning?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes Hon. Minister, tomorrow morning.

MR NASASIRA: I am coming tomorrow morning to make a statement to Parliament and on Monday we are launching a decade of action for road safety.

Kampala urban transport project -(Ms Bako rose_)- let me leave this because I want to answer hon. Bako. Kampala Urban Transport Project; who is happy with the way traffic is in Kampala? Now we want to find components, get experts - you go to the Kampala City Council you are talking about, find out whether there is a transport economist, a transport planner, a transport engineer – nothing! [MR LUKWAGO: “Byandala is there.”] Byandala is in Parliament -(laughter)- now we want to get money to hire people to institutionalise and strengthen Kampala City so that there can be a Kampala City Council or whatever it will be called to plan for this city, to get out the jams everybody complains about - you say we do not want?

Component (c) -(Interjections)- no and under that Kampala Transport Project there is what we call preparation of Kampala Bus Rapid Transport. This is where we are going to have special dedicated lanes for buses crossing Kampala and we will eliminate all these matatus so that they are on the peripheral and so that we do not get jams. I thought it is us here who complain about jams. I do not mean germs that cause diseases; I mean long queues of cars. (Laughter) How long are we going to remain in a jam? Kampala is about to get into a gridlock, we plan to get the system working and you think this one is useless? 

The UNRA has been talked about that it is a baby. You know all this is part of all the reforms we have been making: have a small ministry for that purpose- plan, regulate and monitor; have a roads authority that supervises designs and construction and that is well capacitated with brunches that work with offices; have an authority. There are other authorities like the Road Authority and this other authority MTRA and it will be approved by this Parliament or rejected by it. MTRA is supposed to be the regulator of all surface transport: rail, water and road. At the moment, if you ask me who regulates transport in this country, it is partly regulated by the ministry. I have one commissioner and an assistant who is called Transport Regulator. That is not regulation. 

So, we are getting - at one time when Government was collecting tax and we had a customs department we thought that was enough. When we restructured and formed the Uganda Revenue Authority, you know what the Revenue Authority is doing. The whole structure of governance now is to have policy formulators, independent regulators and have the private sector doing most of the work. 

From the sister complaining about the President’s letter, the President’s letter was talking contracts in the districts -(Interjections)- yes. If you read the letter, he was saying that if the districts are not doing the work, send that work to the Ministry of Works and Transport -(Interjections)- can you quote the paragraph? I will wait. Is there a paragraph on Ministry of Works and Transport? If you are not going to quote it then there is no need for me to sit down. (Laughter) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. minister, what I am quoting - which you really know because all of us as Members of Parliament received this copy, and I am sure for the purpose of the hon. Minister, this is a letter from the President, dated 4 May 2008. It says in part, “…the controversial …” that is in his anti-corruption letter - that the road sector that could be conniving with contractors to inflate the tender award costs. He said that the inflation of road construction costs was unacceptable robbery and it was stating that one kilometre was inflated four times and the issue is here. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission and for the sake of the minister, let me lay it on the Table -(Interjections)- and there is no mention of the district; it was on the road sector, not the district. I thank you.

MR NASASIRA: This is -(Interjections)- no, no! My sister did not confirm what she promised. This is just an extract from the Internet -(Interjections)- I thought the hon. Member was going to lay a copy of the letter signed by the President. This is just an Internet extract but all I know is that in that letter -(Interjections)- no let me finish. Please, let me finish. All I know is that in that letter the President wanted us to start force accounts. As I talk now, we have force accounts in every district, despite, by the way, the big opposition by our development partners. We are encouraging force accounts, buying equipment for each district, so we are complying with the President’s directive -(Interjections)- and those were the district roads. We are talking about the National Roads Authority. We are not talking about districts. This letter is not even signed. It is just an extract from the Internet. (Laughter)

So, hon. Byanyima, the MTRA is our idea. We are not fixed in Government; we shall discuss it and bring it to Parliament and we will discuss it. If Parliament does not pass it, we will not use it -(Interjections)- it does not matter whether we pass the money; we have had savings from loans. For us, we think it is a good idea but when we bring it - and definitely I agree with you, we need a National Roads Safety Agency and we are going to form it. That will come in the statement tomorrow.  
  
Training, as I have said, is really necessary. Training and capacity building are necessary for our country in many areas. Even as I talk now, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, you know very well there are many programmes in this Parliament. In the Parliamentary Commission there is some capacity building in committees, capacity building for Members of Parliament. Where is there no capacity building? Why do you want the ministry to be incapacitated? 

Hon. Bukeni, if there are errors in the distances of 151 kilometres and say 152, we can adjust that one. But the different issue is that where you see money for Tororo-Mbale, where you see that work is tendered, that work that is tendered is under our maintenance budget now. It is under the Roads Authority. As you know, these roads like Lira-Kamdini and Tororo-Mbale-Soroti have grown old. They have got potholes and so on. The tender we have now is for what we call periodic maintenance for maintaining them and repairing where it is bad and so on. The design under this loan is now the design for reconstruction and upgrading from the little six metres to the seven metres. And this design will lead - if full reconstruction may be three or four or five years down the road but in the meantime we need to keep those roads pothole-free as I promised you. What you see here is to remove the potholes by resealing. I would like to appeal to all hon. Members, now that you have heard these clarifications, please support this loan. It is not a useless loan; it is a loan for developing our roads and for developing our country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to respond, separately from the other things, on why he has not reported on the performance of the Road Fund?

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two issues which I want to report on. First of all the Road Fund; you know that the Road Fund Act was passed by this Parliament but the Road Fund itself was just established this financial year. So, it is actually in the infant stages. But before the Road Fund had been formed, the Ministry of Finance has been appropriating - this financial year it has appropriated 116 billion so that it can be operational while we wait to have the fund benefiting from the fuel levy next financial year. So, beginning next financial year, the Road Fund will benefit from the fuel levy. 

The second issue is about the PPDA Act amendment. I want to inform the House through you that Government has been in the process of amending the PPDA Act and so far amendments have been passed by Cabinet and they are being drafted by the Parliamentary Council and should be in Parliament as soon as they are ready. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I know he has finished but the problem is: why do you want to take this House for a ride? We all put up a joint effort to have the Road Fund to assist in road maintenance because we have a backlog of maintenance; the maintenance was relegated to the back seat of a car long time ago. So, when we saw our friends in Kenya and Tanzania having a road fund, we thought that this Parliament would have the knowledge to know that this financial year, we are collecting Shs 20 off every litre of diesel or Shs 80 from petrol so that we could be able to assess. But why do you want to allocate it to the Road Fund? When we went to Tanzania, we found that they had collected too much money. 

At one time, when we asked one officer from the Ministry of Finance, he said that from July to December, we had collected Shs 202 billion - even that officer of Finance is somewhere in this House right now. But when you give us Shs 116 billion, what do you mean? We want to know about our money because whatever fuel that enters Uganda pays tax. So, we do not want to continue borrowing, we want to see that that money is enough to sustain the maintenance, why do you hide that information from us? (Applause)   

Madam Speaker, someone one time asked me, “Byanyima, why are you after the Road Fund? I can afford to give you 1 percent of your total budget to the Road Fund.” Can you imagine! We made this law against their will. You know what happened in this House? They were against the Road Fund, but finally they accepted. What we want to see is to assess how much we have been able to collect, that is all we want.

Two, the PPDA Act is now like a song. What we want since you have your hands tied – the procurement period is very long but we want to look at it and know where the loopholes are so that we can amend the law to suit our interests in Uganda. We are by the way trying to help you ministers because your performance is dismal. We want to help you so that you are able to perform. (Laughter) It is dismal because we are now finishing the financial year and there is nothing on the ground. We are trying to make life easy for you but you do not want to help us. Please, Madam Speaker, let him tell us how much we have collected in the Road Fund. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I do not recollect the conditions we set for the minister to perform under that Act, you are required to report about the Road Fund every year, so when are you going to start reporting? 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I have just told this Parliament that much as the Road Fund Act was passed, we needed a plan on how we can execute this Act. We had to appoint a board -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am shocked that the hon. Minister is coming here to Parliament – he is in charge of his sector and he is telling us that he managed to secure money without a plan. What was that money which you secured supposed to have been for? And is it not a sign of inefficiency for the whole minister to have rushed for money while he had no plan as to how to use that money? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let him explain how he is going to manage that Road Fund and how he is going to report to this House.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we have established a board which will be running the Road Fund. After that, we appointed managers but before that we could have not known how to run that Road Fund. That is why from next financial year, the Road Fund will be benefiting from the fuel levy. But before that, we thought that for the Road Fund to operate, we should have initial appropriation, which we did for this financial year. That is all, Madam Speaker. 

MR ODUMAN: We need to be guided. We passed a law, over two years ago that provided for collection of money which Government would use for road maintenance at that time. You are saying you took time to operationalise but from midnight to night at that time money was supposed to be deducted from fuel since then. If you took time to operationalise that, where has that money been going? Where is that money as we speak? -(Interjections)– Which account is that? (Laughter) 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we have not been collecting money from the fuel levy -(Interjections)- all we have been doing is collecting money in the normal way as tax and this tax has been deposited on the Consolidated Fund. And the Consolidated Fund is where we appropriate money in order to run Government services including this money, which we are debating today. So that is the position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the request to borrow US $190 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the proposed Transport Sector Development Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO DISSOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol):  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I stand here to present a report of the Budget Committee of Parliament on Supplementary Schedule No.1 for fiscal year 2009/2010. 

On 10 February 2010 the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule for the Financial Year 2009/2010. The Schedule was subsequently referred to the Budget Committee for detailed scrutiny and consequently to report its findings and recommendations to the House. 

As the committee was in the process of considering this Supplementary, the Minister of Finance presented an addendum on 23rd February 2010, which was rejected by the House for reasons that were given, like issues to do with maternal health, district roads which were taken over by the Central Government and were in a sorry state and also the issue of shortage of blood in health centres. 

On 24th February, when the Budget Committee sat, we noted that the decision of the House to reject the addendum the previous day had materially affected the Supplementary Schedule before the committee. The committee, therefore, took a decision to refer back the Supplementary Schedule to the Minister of Finance for resubmission as a comprehensive supplementary schedule reflecting critical priority areas to the House, including those that were mentioned by the House when they were rejecting the addendum.

Consequently, in compliance with the decision of the House and the Budget Committee, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented a fresh supplementary expenditure request on 2 March 2010, which request the Speaker referred to the Budget Committee for detailed scrutiny. I take this opportunity to present the findings and recommendations of the Budget Committee to this august House.

On page 2, we have the methodology. Sector committees were given time to sit and discuss their relevant sector votes, which were affected by the supplementary expenditure request. The Budget Committee also met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who appeared with a technical team from the ministry.

The Analytical Framework 

According to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Government is required to lay before Parliament the proposed supplementary expenditure estimates for the identified activities upon which the amounts appropriated were insufficient, or when a need arises for a purpose for which no amount was appropriated.

The Budget Act, 2001 requires that such resource supplementary expenditure should not exceed three percent of the total approved budget in a given year, without prior approval of Parliament.

The Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Budget Act, operationalise Article 156 (2) of the Uganda Constitution. 

Once all the laws governing supplementary expenditure are read together, the following guidelines emerge:

1. 	Once emergencies occur or appropriated funds for certain critical activities get exhausted, Government can get recalls for supplementary expenditure.

2. 	Government can proceed to fund supplementary activities or emergency activities provided the total required funds do not exceed three percent of the approved annual budget; that is the appropriated amount plus the statutory. Then the report should be made to Parliament on the activities funded through supplementary expenditure within four months after the expenditure has been incurred.

3. 	If the supplementary expenditure required is more than three percent of the approved budget, then parliamentary approval must be secured before any expenditure over and above three percent can be incurred. 

In addition, the law, that is section 1(3) of the Budget Act, 2001 requires that there shall be consultations between the affected departments if the supplementary expenditure will induce any re-allocations of funds through budget cuts.

Furthermore, section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 requires that supplementary expenditure should be accompanied by a statement indicating the impact of the supplementary funding on the original stated outputs and outcomes, or a revised work plan.

Activities already funded and those pending Parliament approval:
The committee requested the Minister of Finance to provide a schedule of activities that were financed by the supplementary expenditure of Shs 227,525,000,000 that the minister authorised within the three percent threshold, indicating how much was spent on each activity and the source of funds for each activity.

Attached is appendix one referring to that schedule. We also requested that the minister provides a schedule of activities that will be funded by the supplementary request that requires prior approval of Parliament, indicating how much for each activity, and the source of funds for each activity. Appendix two attached gives details of those activities.

Evidence of consultations between the affected votes 

The Budget Committee requested the Minister of Finance to provide the committee with a schedule of votes that were suppressed, indicating yields from each vote. That was also provided by the minister and is attached as appendix 3.

The Budget Committee was informed that indeed there was consultation between the losing and gaining votes through Cabinet. The Minister of Finance informed the committee that the tradition has been to consult ministries collectively at Cabinet level through their respective ministers. 

The Budget Committee was not satisfied that the Cabinet debate of the supplementary expenditure constitutes consultation between the affected departments and agencies as required by law. The Budget Committee had previously recommended that consultations should not only be at the political level, but also at the technical level, where the impact on work plans and procurement plans for each sector can easily be quantified.

Revised work plans and procurement plans

It should be remembered that during the Budget Speech and subsequent discussion of the Budget and ministerial policy statements, it was a requirement for each sector or agency to furnish Parliament with their work plans, procurement plans and recruitment plans for which funds were to be appropriated.

The Budget Committee requested the Ministry of Finance to provide a schedule of the revised work plans, indicating the impact of the supplementary funding on the original stated outputs and outcomes for the various affected votes. This information was not availed to the committee. 

It is the considered opinion of the Budget Committee that a supplementary expenditure should be accompanied by revised work plans for monitoring and tracking the progressive attainment of the sector priorities and targets.

The committee, therefore, recommends that sector committee chairpersons follow up to ensure that adjusted work plans in accordance with this supplementary are submitted to them in due course.

Source of funding for the supplementary expenditure 2009/2010

The committee was informed that the supplementary expenditure would be financed through the following avenues, namely, draw down from Bank of Uganda, Shs 337.084 billion;, budget cuts Shs 53.733 billion, Non-Tax Revenue, Shs 8.032 billion; reallocation within the budget for financial year 2009/2010, Shs 1.2 billion; Non-Resource Tax, Shs 15.704 billion and balances rolled over from financial year 2008/2009 amounting to Shs 0.48 billion.

Draw down from Bank of Uganda

The committee asked the Minister of Finance to provide a detailed technical and legal explanation, and implications of funding a supplementary budget through a drawdown from Bank of Uganda, as well as evidence that previous draw-downs from Bank of Uganda to finance previous supplementary expenditures were restored.

The Budget Committee was informed that draw-downs are temporary advances to Government and are done as a last resort. That there is an understanding between Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda that Government may use advances from the bank to cater for short falls in revenue collection.

The committee recommends that draw-downs on Bank of Uganda to fund supplementary expenditures that are not of emergency nature should be discouraged.

Budget Cuts

The committee noted that part of the supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010 would be funded through budget cuts. The schedule of ministries and departments whose votes were suppressed and the yields realised is attached as appendix three.

The committee was concerned that some departments, which are perennially under-funded like the Law Development Centre, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and hospitals, have also experienced budget cuts. The Budget Committee does not support budget cuts of the Law Development Centre, the DPP, hospitals and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Divestiture account and other government accounts

The committee was concerned that Government was funding the supplementary expenditure through draw-downs on Bank of Uganda and budget cuts of even vulnerable sectors when other resources such as the Divestiture Account are redundant and unutilised. It is the considered opinion of the committee that during times of emergencies, funds on this account – that is the Divestiture Account – should also be applied. 

Budget Projections 

The committee observed that the current budget revision by more than six percent of the approved budget is an indication that the assumptions underpinning Uganda’s budgeting projections are inadequate and unrealistic. This, therefore, calls for detailed scrutiny of the macro economic fundamentals of our national budgeting process. 

The cost of hosting international conferences

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee noted that under the supplementary expenditure Schedule No. 1 for financial year 2009/2010, Government is requesting for supplementary funds to facilitate hosting of four conferences, namely, the AU Summit, the review conference for the ICC Statute, the conference of Speakers of EAC and the Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly. The committee is concerned about the huge costs involved in hosting international conferences, whose positive impact on the growth of our economy is not clearly indicated. 

Contingencies Fund

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the contingency fund has never been operationalised. Furthermore, Shs 2 billion that Parliament appropriated for contingency purposes has not yet been used. The committee recommends that this contingency fund be operationalised to enable access to this fund in times of emergency. 

Sectoral Analysis, State House - Presidential donations

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that some of the supplementary funded activities under State House, like payment of fees for some poor and needy students, contradict major programmes like UPE, USE, student loan schemes et cetera. 

The committee recommends that in future, the student loan scheme should take care of the needy students currently being funded under State House.

Office of the President, Defence and Internal Affairs

The committee noted that there is apparent overlap on supplementary funding for classified expenditure to address terrorism threats. The committee learnt that Uganda’s presence in Somalia under AMISOM had exposed the country to terrorism threats from Al-Qaeda and the Al-Shabab militants. 

The committee recommends that since Uganda went to Somalia under the auspices of the African Union and later the UN and the AU, the UN should also be encouraged to contribute to the anti-terrorism effort. 

Office of the Prime Minister 

Emergency relief for the landslides and flood victims:
Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the new supplementary schedule contains requests for handling the calamity that befell the country when landslides covered villages in Bududa and floods overwhelmed many parts of the country, and also famine in Bukwo and Karamoja. A total of Shs 25.099 billion has been earmarked for emergency relief food and basic needs for the landslides and flood victims, and this money requires prior approval of Parliament before it can be utilised. 

Ministry of Finance – M/S Phenix Logistics

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee observed that Shs 1.5 billion is required for capitalisation of M/S Phenix Logistics, which will increase Government of Uganda shareholding to 79 percent. 

The committee noted that Phenix Logistics appears to be a bottomless pit and other shareholders are unwilling to inject more funds into the said company. The committee noted that during the last financial year 2008/09 supplementary expenditure, Phenix Logistics received Shs 1.349 billion and Parliament was informed that this was supposed to be a revolving fund to be repaid to Government. This was in addition to previous Government interventions in the company. 

The Budget Committee found no economic merit in continuing to capitalise Phenix Logistics and consequently recommends to Parliament to reject the supplementary funding to Phenix Logistics. Government should come up with a strategy on how to make the company self-sustaining. 

Education - Mountains of the Moon University

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that Government intends to provide Shs 0.5 billion to the Mountains of the Moon University. The committee observed that Parliament this financial year 2009/10 appropriated funds to all private universities through the Appropriation Act, including Mountains of the Moon University. 

The committee was informed that the money that Parliament appropriated for Mountains of the Moon University was diverted by the Ministry of Education. The committee now recommends that the supplementary funding to the Mountains of the Moon University be rejected and the Ministry of Education should provide the Shs 0.5 billion from its budget to the Mountains of the Moon University. 

Ministry of Public Service: Pension arrears

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that Shs 34 billion is required to cater for the payment of ex-service men and Shs 81 billion to cater for a shortfall in the payment of pensions and gratuity for teachers, military service and the general Civil Service for this financial year. 

The committee was informed that Government was undertaking a forensic audit of the existing pension arrears to determine the stock with a view of prioritising their settlement. 

Previously, however, Parliament noted with concern the ever accumulating pension arrears across the board. Parliament also noted the delayed installation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System to enable automatic access of pension upon retirement.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should prioritise the IPPS to expedite access to pension entitlement. The committee further recommends that the forensic audit should also be expedited as it is unfair for old pensioners to remain unpaid when new entrants are being paid.

Ministry of Justice – Compensation to M/S Basil Reed-Bouynues

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that Shs 37,050,000,000 was required to clear arbitration awards to M/S Basil Reed-Bouynues (BRB). The committee sought to know the circumstances under which this arbitration award arose when it is on the record of Parliament that the company which was constructing the Jinja-Bugiri Road abandoned the site. 

The committee was informed that Uganda won three cases against the company and also lost two in the arbitration court. The committee was further informed that Uganda lost the case because it did not meet some of the contractual obligations. Non-compliance to the contracts was occasioned by some officials, who should be held liable for the loss. 

As a result of Uganda winning three cases, it recovered about Euros 11 million from M/S Basil Reed-Bouynues. These monies were paid in three instalments to the Uganda Government as follows: Shs 1,704,750,817, Euros 6,560,572.08 and Euros 2,296,699.09. Documentary evidence to this effect was given to the committee and we were satisfied with the documents provided. However, the arbitration court awarded Euros 13 million to the company (BRB), which amounts to Shs 37,500,000,000 which has already been paid. The committee was further informed that the net loss to the government in this arrangement is only about Euros 2 million. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Payment to four former ministers:
The committee observed that Shs 0.815 billion was required to supplement expenditure to clear payment for the four ministers who were appointed ambassadors. The committee noted that increasing the emoluments of only four ambassadors would be preferential treatment and inequitable. The committee recommends that as a policy, all ambassadors should get the same benefits. 


Hosting the Africa Union Summit 

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that Shs 4.610 billion was required to facilitate hosting of the Africa Union summit in July 2010. Of this amount Shs 180 million is meant for beautification of Kampala and other surrounding areas like Entebbe and Jinja.

The committee recommends that the supplementary budget for beautification activities be rejected as cleaning the city should not be dependant on hosting conferences, but a continuous activity.

 East African Community Affairs

Hosting of East African Community Investment Summit: 
In the course of consideration of the supplementary schedule for the Financial Year 2009/2010, the Ministry of Finance informed the committee that Cabinet had just approved a supplementary request of Shs 1,382,046,080 to enable Uganda to host the East African Community Investment Summit from 27th-30th April 2010. The committee recommends that these funds be provided to facilitate the hosting of this important investment summit.

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) (District maintenance)

The committee was informed that Shs 30 billion was relocated from UNRA development budget to the recurrent budget of UNRA to maintain over 10,000 kilometres of district roads which were taken over from Central Government, and they are currently in a sorry state. The committee supports this move. 

The committee, however, was concerned about the capacity of UNRA to execute the volume of work within this financial year ending June 2010. The committee, therefore, recommends that UNRA enters a memorandum of understanding with districts which have the capacity to execute the works on behalf of UNRA. On this one, as Members of Parliament, we shall request the minister of works to provide Parliament with a schedule of how this money is going to be allocated in the near future.

Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS)

The committee was concerned that preparatory activities for the forthcoming Population and Housing Census slated for 2011 cannot commence due to a funding gap of Shs 2 billion identified by Parliament during the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

The committee recommends that these funds be provided under this supplementary expenditure to enable UBOS commence the mapping exercise countrywide for the planned national census.

Parliamentary Commission 

Allowances for new ministers:
The committee noted that Shs 273 million has been provided to the Parliamentary Commission to cater for the salary and allowances of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The Committee noted that although Parliament approved the creation of 2 ministerial positions in October 2009, to date these positions remain vacant.

The committee recommends that these funds be re-allocated and utilised by parliamentary committees to monitor the implementation of the budget. It should be noted that Parliamentary Committees are chronically under-funded and have not been able to fulfil their oversight roles over time.

Parliamentary Union of Islamic Conference

The committee was informed of the shortfall in funding requirements of the sixth Session of the Parliamentary Union of Islamic Countries Conference held in Uganda between 24th and 31st January 2010. This request amounts to Shs 2,237,011,472. The committee supported the proposal to re-allocate these funds from the development budget of the Parliamentary Commission to recurrent statutory.

Maternal Health

The committee noted that in spite of the concerns raised by Parliament on the need to adequately fund maternal health, there was no provision for that in the supplementary expenditure request that was presented to Parliament.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should present to Parliament a comprehensive strategy that Government has put in place to address issues of maternal health.

The committee further observed that there is need to support activities that increase blood mobilisation in the country. The committee recalled that blood collection materials were a problem that was raised on the Floor of Parliament. To this end, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 500 million should be provided to the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services and the Uganda Red Cross to support this cause before the close of the Financial Year 2009/2010.

Conclusion

The Budget Committee recommends that Parliament does not approve the following requests for supplementary funding:

    1. Phoenix Logistics; Shs 1.5 billion
    2. Mountains of the Moon University; Shs 500 million
    3. AU summit Beautification; Shs 180 million

The Budget Committee further recommends that Parliament approves the following new requests for supplementary funding:
    1. Uganda Bureau of Statistics census preparations; Shs 2 billion
    2. Parliamentary Commission conference; Shs 2,237,011,472
    3. East African Community Investment Summit; Shs 1,382,046,080
    4. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; Shs 500 million

The Budget Committee further recommends that the following areas be considered as key priority areas and should, therefore, not be subjected to budget cuts to fund this supplementary:

Vote - 014 Health; Shs 965,717,000
Vote - 162 Butabika Hospital; Shs 43,932,000
Vote - 163 Arua Hospital; Shs; 75,390,000
Vote - 164 Fort Portal Hospital; Shs 89,083,000
Vote - 166 Hoima Hospital; Shs 58,184,000
Vote - 168 Kabale Hospital; Shs 91,628,000
Vote - 169 Masaka Hospital; Shs 91,933,000
Vote - 170 Mbale Hospital; Shs 73,913,000
Vote - 171 Soroti Hospital; Shs 68,721,000
Vote - 173 Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital; Shs 61,085,000
Vote - 010 Agriculture; Recurrent Shs 4997, 917,302 and 
Development - Shs 1,676,880,000
Vote - 152 NAADS; Shs 376,364,687
Vote - 109 Law Development Centre; Shs 59,489,000
Vote -133 DPP; Shs 323,936,758

The Budget Committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament approves the following figures as supplementary expenditure for FY 2009/2010 and recurrent supplementary expenditure adjusted as follows: As per schedule, Shs 142,750,410,000.   Adjustments are as follows: We add UBOS: Shs 2 billion and East African Community Investment Summit, Shs 1,382,046,080.

5.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Albert Oduman): At the top, on purchase of the new aircraft, what is going to happen to the old aircraft? We need to know. Is it the same aircraft or it is a different one? We really need to know -(Interjection)- yes. Was it sold and to who? It was supposed to have been traded in -(Interjections)- yes! That was the understanding. It was supposed to have been traded in. What happened?

Lastly, on the same page, when you go down to the Uganda Police Force, there are a number of things I am not comfortable with. You have non-residential buildings of Shs 5.2 billion; what are we talking about? This is Police. We have transport equipment of Shs 4 billion; what are we talking about?

Lastly and more disturbing is the machinery and equipment for the Uganda Police Force of Shs 12 billion. I am worried about the sort of equipment this is. (Laughter) I am worried about this equipment, because how come this was not foreseen at the time of budgeting? Equipment cannot be an emergency; Members, you cannot call them an emergency. Even the aircraft; it cannot be an emergency. I think this is an afterthought and it must be towards the pursuance of a certain objective. We need a proper explanation about the provision for machinery and equipment. Otherwise, I think the committee did a good job. Thank you.

6.07
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, in general terms, first, I need to get clarification from the minister about this issue of a supplementary budget. Honestly speaking, six percent? Aren’t we abusing the powers given to Government? Six percent! I am not an expert in this field, but for the supplementary to rise up to six percent, is it justifiable? Don’t you think there is a problem somewhere? There could be other reasons other than the justifications given here.

Again regarding the twin votes on page 9, State House and Office of the President, here, you could see that the committee was not satisfied with the justifications given. I am wondering why the committee was too shy to reject this proposed supplementary budget. When you see the committee’s analysis here, presidential donations – the committee was not satisfied and noted that the work State House is seeking to provide for here is duplication in terms of education. It is a duplication of other Government programmes - UPE and USE. I suggest we reject this –(Mr Mutuluuza rose_)- I do not have time. I am sorry. I do not know whether I will be compensated, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It might be good information.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. I am happy that the committee has rejected such supplementary budgets for poor, destitute students. I do not think it is entirely rejected because in my constituency as I talk now, there are about 50 students who are going to benefit from this scheme -(Interjections)- students are being picked from families, from -(Interjections)- friends of the person you know –(Laughter)- So, if it is true that the committee rejected it, we do not know, but then I have seen somewhere under Office of the President what they call classified expenditure. They might reject it here, but get it under that vote of classified expenditure. Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Mutuluuza for that good information, but I do not know the criteria that were used for your constituency to benefit from this scheme. My constituency has not benefited at all from these Presidential donations. This is why we are saying it is subjective and discriminatory. Let us go for the formal system, which is UPE and USE. Everybody can benefit from that; we budget for that. In any case, how could it come as a supplementary if it was known that there was such a scheme and the President would provide for that fund? How does it come as a supplementary? 

Again on the same page, Office of the President, I do not know why the committee never recommended that this money for terrorism threats should be rejected? I do not know why we are saying ‘yes’. We knew the implications when we sent our troops to Somalia and, therefore, such threats from the Al-Qaeda and others were expected. We should have prepared for that. I thought there were such safety measures. How come, it is now being considered as supplementary? 

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the chair of the committee. On page 16, I see a list of priority areas that should not be subjected to budget cuts to fund the supplementary budget, and there are names of hospitals. I need clarification as to why hospitals like Lira, Gulu, Bugiri are not appearing, yet others are appearing? Does that mean the committee is implying that the budget of these hospitals can be subjected to budget cuts?

On page 15, regarding the issue of maternal health, I think this is a song that has been sung in this Parliament for a very long, long time. The committee has given us a new melody. I remember at one point, the Ministry of Finance made even a commitment that they would present a request for a loan to fund issues of maternal health. 

The money we are spending on burying people who are dying as a result of preventable causing, resulting from maternal health, can be saved. Why don’t we, as a Parliament, give a timeframe to these powerful ministries to present this request to this Parliament and we pass it and we work on it? It has become a song and we have sung it for a very long time. Why don’t we act? For how long are we going to continue singing this song? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 15 of the statement, “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should present to Parliament a comprehensive strategy that Government has put in place to address the issue of maternal health”. Sometime back His Excellency the President asked us to come up with a roadmap to accelerate reduction of maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity in Uganda. We came up with a plan which was distributed to all Members of Parliament. Subsequently, after His Excellency signed this plan, we made an appointment with him on how we were going to fund this plan. We met him and he authorised us to approach the World Bank. We calculated and found that we needed about US $600 million to fund this plan. 

His Excellency authorised us to borrow that money and we are going to borrow it in instalments of US $100 million annually for six years for purposes of absorption. This process has advanced and I think this week, we had the final meeting with representatives of the World Bank. The representation is coming from New York to endorse this plan finally, and then there will be final meeting this year in New York to approve the US $600 million. 

We should be able to start receiving the money by the end of this year or early next year. I would like therefore to lay before the House the roadmap for accelerating the reduction of maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity in Uganda –(Interjections)– it was pointed out on page 15, if you can look there: “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should present to Parliament a comprehensive strategy that Government has put in place to address issues of maternal mortality”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, after laying that document on the Table, it has become a Government commitment and a Government assurance. This House will not take it kindly if you continue delaying that actual process. You have said it is going to be phased; you must start and give us a date for when you are going to start. (Applause)

DR MALLINGA: By early next year we should have received this money. This is a matter of financing; there is nothing we can do to put that plan into effect without the money. And the money we are going to borrow is for the purpose of operationalising that plan. And the plan is: we are going to repair all the 100 bed hospitals and all general hospitals in the country. The roofs will be replaced, plumbing will be done, electricity, theatres will be improved on including health centre III which need to be repaired. 

Regional referral hospitals – we are already sending money. And what you have seen here, which has not been cut, is actually part of that money which we are sending to regional referral hospitals for rehabilitation and some of the hospitals have done extremely well. 

The World Bank has increased, without our request, US $30 million, for reproductive health and it is going to be used specifically for family planning, which is part of improvement of maternal health care. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the minister. I think we need to get a distinction between infrastructures: that is building the hospitals, equipping and so on and what actually happens in the hospitals. On Sunday, I want to give an example, when I was passing in my constituency at night, at around 8.00 p.m. I found at one police station about six people who had cut each other on the head with pangs and axes and bleeding profusely and helplessly. We put them in cars and took them to Atutur Hospital. Now in that hospital, we went to the casualty wing at night, but there were no lights; there was no sign of life in the casualty wing. There was nobody! 

When we asked the guards they said, “These people are not here”. One person, I think she was a nursing aide, appeared in a blue uniform and said, “You know, here we do not even have Diclofenac, we do not even have gauze so how can we help you?” 

Sir, I had to ring your colleague, the Minister of Health for Primary Health Care, hon. Kakooza. He is the one who helped us to ring the in-charge; we had to search for his contact. Actually my district speaker rang him and said, “We have a problem”, but there was no response. So I had to ring him. When I rang him, I also gave him that same number and he rang. Within three minutes, three people had appeared. The nurse in charge, the hospital administrator and they said, “Somebody had just rang me.” How is that loan going to help that kind of situation? You are talking of borrowing to build and equip, but will equipping help the medical workers to stay in the hospitals?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I just wanted to bring to your attention - you know, you are talking about equipping referral hospitals. On Sunday, I was in a place called Buwanda deep in Luuka. The roads are extremely bad, hardly accessible and those people told me that the nearest health facility is 12 kilometres away; Buwanda in Luuka in the sub-county of Nawampiti behind Butembe Hill. So, when you talk about referral, I think you should be addressing accessibility at a lower level.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I think we are diverting from maternal mortality but however there is something like decentralisation which I have been trying to combat. The hospital he is talking about is decentralised; is run by the local government. We provide skilled care over these hospitals when it is needed but the day to day administration of Atutur Hospital is the responsibility of the district and they have failed to do so.

I am going to bring a paper to recentralise all the health services in this country and what you are describing, Madam Speaker, is just the same problem, decentralisation of health services. What has happened is that we rushed into decentralisation when we did not have people at the districts to administer the hospitals. We send drugs, for example, to districts - hon. Mwesige the other day stood here and complained about his health centre IV where there were no drugs. I called National Medical Stores, they had just delivered drugs to Fort Portal two weeks before that and when hon. Mwesige called his district, the drugs were lying in Fort Portal and they had not been delivered to his health centre IV because there was no fuel at the district headquarters. So, a lot of problems we are facing are because of decentralisation and lack of skills. Let us have one health system in the whole country. As I speak now, we have about 100 districts in the country and we have 100 health systems in the country.

6.27
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. I am wondering why we have to borrow money from the World Bank to cater for women’s health when the committee has clearly stated on page 6, “Sources of funding for the supplementary expenditure”, that there is money on the Draw down Account in Bank of Uganda totalling to Shs 377.84 billion. Why can’t we use some of this money to fund the roadmap to the reduction of maternal and infant morbidity and mortality in this country? Why do we have to look for World Bank to give us this money when we have our own money? Does this mean that women’s health is not a priority for this government? I would like to know from the Minister of Finance why we cannot use part of this money to do that.

6.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with a supplementary issue on page 12. They are talking of compensation to Ms Basel. If at all we recovered the 11 million Euros as being reported, recovery is different from the money being there. At least this House is interested in knowing where this money is. 

On the Committee of Local Government Accounts, we have been recommending recoveries in districts but accounting officers have been sharing some of the recovered monies. Reaching there, you ask where the money is they say, “You see …” – they could not account or explain where the banked money is. So, as hon. Rwakimari was saying, the 11 million Euros if at all it is there, we could also add it on the money being explained that it is in Bank of Uganda such that we can kick start the process of funding maternal mortality.

The issue to do with education, it is on page 6; we are talking about issues to do with Mountains of the Moon whereby 0.5 of a billion was paid out. I would want to get a clarification from the minister - maybe even the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. Busoga University is one of the private universities licensed by the National Council of Higher Education; it was promised the same money but it has never accessed any money. I am surprised to learn from here that Mountains of the Moon has ever got money and there are plans of adding it money. I find this —(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that ever since I joined this Parliament, for the last three consecutive years, Mountains of the Moon University has been receiving Shs 500 million annually and when I dug further, it is more to do with the personalities involved behind this university. Shs 500 million 2006/07, Shs 500 million 2007/08 and when I left my portfolio as shadow minister, there was still another request and this is consistent to what goes on in the persons behind this university. So, if you can find some time, we shall discuss this so that you take it up because that means every private university would need to access this kind of resource but the personalities involved behind this are the brains behind having subsequent budget allocations in terms of donations from the President.

6.32
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The first comment I want to make is on the issue of maternal health and as a Vice-Chair of the Social Services Committee and also a professional doctor, I want to confirm that what hon. Mallinga was giving us is a beautiful song because we have heard this for a long time.
 
We have had joint meetings with Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance where even Finance has denied knowledge of the process of formulation of the loan and I would want, before we conclude this debate, Ministry of Finance to also give us their view on the process of that loan because you can see even the Ministry of Health is not sure, they are saying by the end of this year, by next year, as mothers die in the country. (Applause)

We did raise these issues even when we interfaced with the Minister of Health to include key issues which should be funded under this supplementary request but the ministry could not raise any. So, I think we must take this issue seriously otherwise we come here, we are treated to a lullaby, a song, “One year, two years.” This has been the answer from the ministry ever since I came to this Parliament. So, I think Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance, you must assure us that there is something being done with a definite time line so that we are sure that this Parliament and this government considers women of this country as a priority otherwise, mothers continue dying and we are here talking very good English.

Two, just to clarify the issue of the Mountains of the Moon that it is true this is the second batch not the third as hon. Bako is saying. The Ministry of Education has worked out an arrangement of a public-private partnership where grants are extended to private universities, mainly universities which have innovative courses which are not being offered in most of the public universities -(Member timed out_)

6.34
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need your guidance on page 11 of this report where money was appropriated by this Parliament through the Appropriation Act and money was released to the Ministry of Education. I need your guidance. Where did the minister get powers to divert that money, the Shs 500 million from Mountains of the Moon University to another maybe university? I do not know. 

It is not true that Mountains of the Moon is the only university which gets money from this - I will quote Kampala International University. In fact, this financial year they have got Shs 4.0 billion. I will quote Christian University Mukono; I will quote Nkumba University. So, it is not true that the money was allocated there because of the people who are behind that university.  

I want to inform this House that this is a community-based university with some trustees. In fact, the university is getting some aid and very soon the university will come to beg for support because one of the conditionalities of that aid is counterpart funding totalling to almost Shs 2.5 billion. So, one of these days the university will still come to this Parliament to request for that money. 

6.37
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report but I have my concerns. The report is telling us that before these kinds of requests are made, we needed to have adjusted work plans. I think that is the finite law that before you actually bring in your request you should have adjusted your work plan. Now, in this case they are requesting us to approve this kind of request without prior adjustment of the work plan and they have clearly cited that there is a problem that will arise as to how you are going to monitor. So, what are we doing? Why don’t we defer this until you bring your adjusted work plans then we give you money that we can oversee?

Secondly, to re-echo what the shadow minister has said, Shs 20 billion for the Police and yet the maternal health roadmap does not even have one coin is really demeaning to me as a woman. The other day we had the first ladies here talking about Cancer and so forth and we all know for sure that Cancer likes the most precious parts of both women and men and that is what we should fight to protect and save -(Laughter)- instead -(Interjections)– no, I will leave that for you to discover because you know. 

Madam Speaker, my opinion is that we should transfer this Shs 12 billion from the Police for the undefined equipment to put the first resource to financing that maternal health roadmap.

6.39
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue on the report of the committee on page 11, regarding the ex-servicemen. It is good that the hon. Minister of Defence is in attendance. 

I really feel disappointed that Ugandans who served in the previous national armies are now being treated to a supplementary budget; Ugandans who served more than 20 years ago, including the hon. Minister of Health. And every other time we get into general elections, Government calls these ex-servicemen, they are asked to fill forms, they spend even the little they have and nothing is paid. Government has never been serious with catering for these ex-servicemen, not even in the main budget and now they want to pay them through a supplementary budget. How serious is Government on this issue? 

The Minister of Defence and all ministers here know very well that one of the reasons why they have been performing very badly in West Nile is because the majority of the ex-servicemen, particularly those who served in the UA come from West Nile -(Interruption) 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the honourable member holding the Floor is that for a long time, the ex-servicemen were in court with Government on this matter and it went up to the highest court and they lost. There was no way the government could solve this problem until now when Government, in its wisdom and in consideration of their service, is finding a way to solve their problem. Instead of thanking the government I find my honourable friend really doubting the spirit of Government to settle this matter in a better way.

6.42
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate the committee for a job well done and well presented.

As I was saying a few minutes back, Government is either seeking to borrow money from abroad or to get a supplementary budget from within. I am very glad that the Budget Committee is able to put their foot down to some requests. 

Madam Speaker, the driving theme of this political term is Prosperity for All, which is based on the principle of save then borrow. This is the principle we are teaching people down there. This is the principle we are using to set up SACCOs. But unfortunately, Government is only practising the “borrow” component of the principle not the “save” component. I think that Government needs to lead by example and to walk the talk of save then borrow.

I will never forget the day that I travelled with three heads of state when they were coming from CHOGM in Kampala. I came to Parliament and gave witness that the presidents of Cyprus, Guyana and Malta travelled from Kampala aboard Emirates, a commercial airline in business class, where I was also seated. So, where there is the will and enough dose of patriotism, it is possible to save money; it is possible to reduce public expenditure so that we spend time to build this country instead of spending most of the time discussing loans and supplementary budgets, which is not supposed to be taking the bulk of this Parliament’s time. Where there is the will, there is a way. So, I would like to encourage the Budget Committee to lead us in this exercise of reducing costs. There are numerous areas where we can reduce costs. 

It is very irregular for the President to move around with actual cash; himself donating vehicles to Chief Khadis. When he was on the NAADS Bonna Bagaggawale country wide programme, the President literally carried sacks of money with him in brown envelopes containing 50 million, 100 million saying, “You have done well.” This is extremely irregular! -(Member timed out_)

6.45
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarifications on Appendix II on Vote 013 where the chairperson has indicated that they are giving facilitation to the Commission of Inquiry on USE and UPE worth 4.381 billion? I do not know but we are now left with only two and a half months to complete our financial year and all this money, 4.3 billion for a commission of inquiry, what kind of commission of inquiry is that that needs Shs 4.3 billion within a period of two months? 

Secondly, I would like to strengthen the point that was raised by the shadow minister of finance on page 6, “Source of funding for the supplementary expenditure.” They have indicated it here that: “The committee was informed that the supplementary expenditure would be financed through the following avenues….” They were just informed but do not know and are going ahead to bring the Supplementary Budget for us to approve without proving whether there is money. So, I would like the chairperson to clarify on that. 

Thirdly, there are budget cuts of 53 billion; maybe the committee chairperson will give us the clarification of what votes are affected and whether those votes will not be necessary.

The other one was reallocation of 1.2 billion; maybe the committee chairperson will also have to clarify to us on which items are affected. 

6.48
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank hon. Colleagues for appreciating the efforts that the Budget Committee took in coming out with this report and the recommendations it has made. 

I have a few issues to clarify; one was by hon. Oduman. I clarified the one that was on Phoenix Logistics and then on the aircraft trade in. I can only certify here that proceeds from sale of the old presidential jet, that is, the Gulf Stream IV, were received by Bank of Uganda. While going through this supplementary, those were the very questions we asked and we were provided with a letter to confirm that Bank of Uganda received US$ 10 million as proceeds from the sell of the plane. This money was utilized for the purpose of trading in for the new aircraft. 

As for the police machinery, there was a consultancy and documents of which were availed to the committee’s satisfaction about the 5.2 billion. We also received the justification for the equipment which had gone through the PPDA procedures. And then for the transport equipment, we got documents, which I can read through briefly: “The Police is purchasing 19 lorries - troop carrier trucks, Steyar, one crime investigation van, one stretching boom platform fire truck, 300 M turn table, 10 fire tenders, 10 water tanks, one crime investigation van, 10 ambulances, 380 police motor cycles, one suspense escort van…” et cetera. So, the equipment schedule was provided to the committee and we were satisfied with the kind of equipment they are going to purchase. 

Concerning the President’s Office on matters to do with the students who are being funded under this office, we noted that this should be funded under the Student Loan Scheme. The Student Loan Scheme is yet to be in place but what we can do at the moment is to try and follow up. As soon as this scheme is in place, all the students funded under President’s Office should be transferred so that they can access loans.

Hon. Obua wanted a clarification on Gulu, Lira and other hospitals. I would like to state that when you look at the schedule that was presented before Parliament, all the money for the Ministry of Health and all the hospitals that were presented in that schedule for budgetary cuts have been taken care of. There are no budgetary cuts for the Ministry of Health and these hospitals meant for development expenditure. So, lira and Gulu hospitals were not among those presented for budget cuts. So they did not have to appear on this schedule. 

On maternal health, the minister has tried to answer. 

And then hon. Muwuma, to clarify on Busoga University, I think the Ministry of Education is best placed to answer this.

Mountains of the Moon; a clarification has been given –(Dr Kamanda rose_)– hon. Minister, can I finish and then you clarify after? The powers to divert money, I think the Minister of Education should help us there. 

Hon. Abia, adjusted work plans; now in our report we have clearly recommended that within the short time we went through this report, we were unable to get those adjusted work plans. So, we made a recommendation that we cannot stop there. Those committees whose sectors have been affected by this supplementary should go ahead and get these adjusted work plans because it is important that we have them as we use them as a tool during our oversight work. So we still have to follow up and get those adjusted work plans.

Hon. Onzima raised the issue of ex-service men. We made inquiries on who these people are and how this money is going to be allocated. The hon. Minister of Defence wrote and copied me as Chairperson of the Budget Committee this letter, which I presented to the committee when we were discussing. He gave us a brief summary of the outlook of the distribution of this money and who the people they are talking about are.

The ex-service men who are directly affected by the Shs 34 billion are those who served the country between 1962 and 1979. It is also true, according to this letter that they took Government to court and they were claiming Shs 1.7 trillion but they lost this case all the way to the Supreme Court. 

His Excellency the President, in exercise of his powers and considering the wide interest of the state and stability of the country, directed that these Ugandans be paid ex-gratia. So on account of that directive, this money is going to be paid as follows: 
    • In the Northern region, it is estimated that the number of ex-servicemen will be 1,463; 
    • North East we are looking at 1,407 ex-servicemen; 
    • North West, that is especially West Nile and hon. Onzima’s area of concern, has 5,439 ex-servicemen and these include the Bamuze group, I think;
    • The East 1,433; 
    • Central 1,482; 
    • South 145; 
    • West 809; and 
    • South West is 1,831 ex-servicemen. 

These are estimates and the grand total is 14,761 ex-servicemen. The details were given to us but the minister also informed us that there is a team going around the country to confirm these numbers and the people actually affected. Once that confirmation has been collected, I believe the minister will give us - as Members of Parliament, we need to know who these people are in our districts - a schedule of who these people are and how much will be paid to each of them according to the districts that have been affected. That is by district.

Hon. Kamya raised the issue of cost reduction. Well, we shall work together.

Hon. Euku asked me to clarify on Vote 013, Shs 4.381 billion for commission of inquiry. We undertook to task the sector committee and they came up with a report, which said they were satisfied with this allocation of Shs 4.381 billion for the commission of inquiry. They looked at the detailed activities and how they are going to conduct it and they said they were satisfied so we carried it forward and accepted it in our report.

About sources of funding, honestly that is all we have to do and all we could get. We were informed and we believe this must be true unless you have information to the contrary.

Regarding budget cuts, the schedule and the re-allocations, I think some of them can be handled by the minister. Otherwise, thank you so much. These are the clarifications I wanted to make. I hope the minister will make clarifications on other questions that have not been answered. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I also thank you on behalf of the House for a good job? Let me now invite the Minister of Education to make his responses and then the Minister of Finance. 

6.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I want to clarify that as the Minister of Education and Sports, we have never diverted money for Mountains of the Moon University. This august House allocated or appropriated Shs 1.0 billion for Busoga University, Shs 500 million for Mountains of the Moon University and Shs 2.0 billion for kick starting this petroleum institute. 

As far as we are concerned, our records read that the Shs 500 million for the Mountains of the Moon University is there as well as the Shs 1.0 billion for Busoga University, according to the appropriation by this august House -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Budget Committee and in the course of our discussion, we saw Shs 700 million being given to a fully-fledged public university in West Nile. The President also directed that a constituent college under Gulu University should be established in Lira. There is no money. I was listening keenly to the minister when he mentioned some of the support given to other universities and colleges and he never made mention of anything in Lira. Can you clarify whether there is any allocation given to that university as well?

MS ABIA: Madam Speaker, from what hon. Odit has said, yesterday I was with the chairperson of the committee that was set up to fast track issues to do with the West Nile University. Ever since the President made his commitment to the people of West Nile and ever since he said that we need a fully-fledged public university, no coin has reached this committee and they are stuck. 

Yesterday, I was locked up in a meeting of three hours in Makerere University with this leadership. We are desperate, we need this money and the Minister of Finance is here. We initially heard that we had Shs 700 million for the kick start process but nothing has happened. Mr Minister, together with the Minister of Finance, can you tell me what I should tell the people of West Nile now?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is further clarification to the minister. The minister is saying the Shs 1.0 billion is with the Ministry of Education. If it is really there, why can’t you pass it on to Busoga University because it is supposed to serve a purpose instead of saying it is there. That is the clarification I wanted to get from you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister of Education, I want to give information and seek clarification that the money given to the Kigumba National Petroleum Institute is not enough in the first place. It is unfortunate that the oil companies have taken a lead in most of the petroleum issues. As Parliament, we need to wake up and find resources for sectors that will be handled by the state and not oil companies. 

We need to impart skills not only for graduate education but for the skills required for the next stage, which is about a year from now. I am not aware of any training taking place anywhere unless you are going to import these people. If we intend to re-tool the existing technocrats, can we then put in place a re-orientation or a re-tooling or possibly an in-service training even for the district officials around the oil area? 

The other sensitive area, which I want to give to the Ministry of Finance, since I may not come back, is the area where oil has been discovered, the land systematic demarcation and the land use planning for the Albertine area which is not done. The oil companies will not do this. 

I thought that in a supplementary like this, this is a matter of national concern. But what is happening now is that the same oil company which did the aerial survey is, through its contacts, trying to acquire fraudulently all the oil wells and the country will soon have a conflict to deal with or possibly to compensate these individuals. So, why don’t we find money for the systematic demarcation of land, land use planning, and the Albertine plan? This is a requirement of the state but we are leaving the oil companies to do everything as if they are going to own the oil. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Education, please answer so that we go to the Minister of Finance and finish this matter. 

MR MALINGA: I have something to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On education? Okay, hon. Malinga, the last question.

7.05
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, the minister has just told us that the ministry has Shs 0.5 billion for the Mountains of the Moon University. The committee is saying that the supplementary funding for Mountains of the Moon University be rejected. I am confused; if the ministry has Shs 0.5 billion, how did the request for another Shs 0.5 billion find its way to Parliament? Who is this person now asking for another Shs 0.5 billion when the ministry has the other Shs 0.5 billion? Isn’t somebody trying to find money for another purpose other than for the Mountains of the Moon University?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Education, please answer and then the Minister of Finance. 

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the answer to hon. Malinga’s question is that this one was rejected by the committee because this august House already has appropriated Shs 500 million to Mountains of the Moon University. Then the other question from hon. Mukitale on the Shs 2 billion – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. I just want to provide helpful information to you. It is true that we appropriated Shs 500 million for Mountains of the Moon University and the ministry again requested for Shs 500 million as supplementary. So, when we interfaced with the Minister of Education - hon. Kamanda Bataringaya was also present - we agreed it was an error and that this money should be paid to the Mountains of the Moon University. It shouldn’t come as a supplementary because I think administratively, they had put the money on the petroleum institute, which was wrong, and we did advise that if Government wants a supplementary for Kigumba, then it should be brought separately. That is what was agreed.

Secondly, we had also appropriated Shs 700 million for the West Nile University but by then, the understanding was that the West Nile University would be a constituent college of Gulu University. So, money was sent on the Gulu vote but later on, the thinking changed that West Nile University should be an independent university. So, we advised the minister that money should just be got from the Gulu vote to West Nile University; it doesn’t have to come as a supplementary because the money is already there in the budget. So, the Shs 700 million is there; it has been appropriated by this Parliament. It should just be given to kick-start the university. 

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, precisely, that is what I was going to say. On the issue of Kigumba - the petroleum institute - this august House appropriated Shs 2 billion and the institution has just started and they have not yet come to us to request for more funds. So, this answers my colleague, Mukitale, on whether to provide funds because they have not even used the Shs 2 billion which this august House appropriated, although their budget was talking of Shs 3 billion. 

But we said, “Parliament appropriated Shs 2 billion, once you finish that and account for it, then you can ask for a supplementary.” That is the position. Therefore, for Busoga University, the Shs 1 billion is there; for Mountains of the Moon University, the Shs 500 million - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is the Shs 1 billion of Busoga doing in the ministry? (Laughter) That is what hon. Muwuma asked. 

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, you see there are procedures. Appropriation was done under the ministry. This august House gave us Shs 1 billion; therefore, Busoga University should take the measures in requesting for it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am aware that Busoga University requested for this money. So, please, release the money. Stop holding the money for Busoga. 

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, since we are going to have the Minister of Finance very soon, he will answer about the fourth quota. This money will be released before the end of the financial year.  There is Shs 200 million for Lira Constituent College. That is what I wanted to say. So, be rest-assured everything is catered for. I thank you. 

7.10 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for work well done and as the Ministry of Finance we agreed to agree with them. The issue of draw down accounts has been explained to the committee and these are normally advances that we get from the Bank of Uganda and once we make good from our collections on the revenue, they are made good and we have given the evidence to the committee. 

On the issue of the revised work plans and the procurement plans, Madam Speaker and colleagues, we are proposing that when the various ministries are preparing their work plans for the fourth quota of this financial year, they should clearly indicate the areas where we have had the cuts and implications thereto. 

On the comments that we use part of the Divestiture Account for other government accounts, we do refer the committee and this august House to the PAD Statute which indicates which areas can be used to fund from this particular Divestiture Account. 

On the area of Phenix Logistics, Madam Speaker and colleagues, we do concur with committee observations. However, we would like to appeal that you give us the opportunity to give a comprehensive way forward for Phenix Logistics and we shall present this at an opportune moment maybe when we are looking for supplementary schedule No. 2.  

Otherwise, we concur with all the recommendations that have been given by the committee. As far as maternal health is concerned, we shall discuss this in detail with the Minister of Health. We have a request from IDA of a loan of US $130 million to support this intervention in maternal health and as I said, we need to work this out with the Ministry of Health to see what can immediately be done. However, we as the Ministry of Finance do not ask for supplementaries. Supplementaries are asked for by the various ministries concerned. 

On the issue of the West Nile University, if you want clarification, the funds will be made available once this supplementary is passed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.14
Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 145,952,456,080 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Chairperson, during the debate there was an issue that was raised regarding drawdown and the minister dodged the committee and also dodged this House on that question. The committee said that it was informed that draw-downs are temporal advances to Government and are done as last resort. The committee asked for evidence that previous draw-downs from Bank of Uganda to finance previous supplementary expenditures were restored. There was no answer both in the committee report and also in the presentation of the minister when asked to clarify. So he has dodged at two stages. So, where is this money coming from? We are saying that as we get the money as advances, are we putting it back? We are worried as to what is happening to that account, that drawdown; what is it?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I have said that a drawdown is what we get as an advance on temporal basis from Bank of Uganda and when we raise funds through URA, this money is put back to Bank of Uganda. We have done this consistently ever since we have been drawing down from Bank of Uganda. The Accountant-General is under duty to bring this information to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 145,952,456,080 be provided for supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 98,263,571,000 be provided for supplementary development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Authorities

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 213,719,263,000 be provided for as supplementary statutory authorities’ expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, the statutory expenditure is a direct charge to the Consolidated Fund so it is just for the information of Parliament. We do not appropriate statutory expenditure. So I propose that it is just for the information and we do not go into the appropriation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose that the House be informed that the total sum of Shs 213,719,263,000 has been provided as statutory expenditure.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 2009/10 with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopts the report from the Committee of supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank all the Members from both sides of the House for this hard work. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 March 2010 at 9.30 a.m.)
