

Tuesday, 13 March 2018

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have been informed by the Clerk to Parliament that training sessions for Members of Parliament on the utilisation of ICT facilities in Parliament have been organised to prepare Members for the e-Parliament. The training sessions started with the Budget Committee yesterday, 12 March and will continue until 28 March 2018.

The venue of the training is the Training Suite on fourth floor, North Wing and it will be starting every day at 9.00 a.m. Members are expected to attend. 

On 14th March, that is tomorrow, it will be the Committee on HIV/AIDS and related matters; on 15th March, Committee on Equal Opportunities; 16th March, Committee on Human Rights; 19th March, Committee on National Economy; 21st March, Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; 22nd March, Public Accounts Committee; 23rd March, Committee on Local Government Accounts; 26th March, Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises; 27th March, Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation; and 28th March, Committee on Appointments.

I therefore would like to urge chairpersons to assist in the mobilisation of the committee members to attend and participate in this programme.

Honourable members, according to our law on the budget, we expect ministerial policy statements to be here by Thursday 15th, as the law requires. Therefore, we will be expecting the documents to come and once they are in, you know exactly what the committees are supposed to be doing to facilitate this process.

I will cause alteration on the Order Paper. One, regarding item 3(II), the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has just called me and said that he will not be ready until tomorrow. 

In addition, I will add an item on item No.3: Annual report on the state of equal opportunities in Uganda, Financial Year 2016/ 2017. That report is ready.

On item 8, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts says they will be ready to proceed with this particular report tomorrow so it is deferred. Therefore, those two items are deferred and one item is added.

Honourable members, there have been issues in the social media and press about comments from one of our own. I have been approached by UWOPA and the honourable member has also come himself. I have scheduled him to make a personal statement tomorrow.

Honourable members, I urge you that when you speak, you speak for Parliament and you should respect Parliament. As a Member of Parliament, there is no statement that you can make that will not impact on this House. Therefore, you owe it to the rest of the parliamentarians here that the statements you make should carry the dignity and decorum of this House. Thank you.

2.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. This is not the first time that this matter is coming to the Floor and it regards the disturbance by our brothers; the Jie people who live in Karamoja. They have always given us headache, caused a lot of havoc in terms of stealing our cows and other animals and we have always reported to this House.

The last time this matter was reported, the Speaker guided that the Minister of Internal Affairs takes action so that peace prevails in Agago District. However, Mr Speaker, I beg to report that despite all the efforts we have made to co-exist with the Jie people, I am so disappointed that the people of Agago, up to day, are not living peacefully because the Jie people move across the border and steal our animals especially cows and goats.

The last case was two days ago. From December to date, since the directive was made, no efforts or improvements have been seen. In Adilang sub-county, we lost several animals. Mr Opoko George lost five animals, Odinga Joseph lost 14, Ochaya James lost two, Odong Mathew lost seven, Tokwora Baptist lost one, Okidi John lost one, Ojara John lost two, Okello Yacobo lost 26, Aning Denis lost 21, Akello Santurina lost nine - The list is long, Mr Speaker. I cannot read it emtirely but I really want to beg that Government prevails over the Jie people because for us, we do not have guns.

However, some of these Jie people, despite the disarmament that was done by Government, still loiter around the district of Agago especially the bordering sub-counties of Adilang, Lapono and Paimol. These sub-counties are not at peace at all. People do not sleep peacefully because their ears have to be alert as the Jie might invade the kraals.

Therefore, I would like to ask Government to take a different approach from the one that is being taken by Internal Affairs because we are not seeing results. All these four sub-countries that border Karamoja are suffering, Mr Speaker. I beg to move and thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, these matters are still continuing.

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is indeed very unfortunate that at this time we still have incidences of people invading their neighbours to steal their property. It is a known policy that nobody is supposed to move with a gun, ever since we started disarmament and stealing of any property is indeed criminal. 

Therefore, the minister in charge will be required to come and tell us what we have done. However, I know for sure that we deployed trained police to guard that area. In case there are gaps, we will ensure that we put commensurate force so that people do not suffer. The minister in charge will come on the Floor of this House and give us a progress report on this incident –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for the response and the directive she has given. However, I would like to seek clarification from her because she indicates that the police have been deployed to safeguard the area. I wonder which part of the district the police were deployed. Was it the special police that was deployed to handle this matter? To my knowledge, there has not been any new deployment at the district. In any case, the current police we have at the district are overwhelmed to handle some issues, especially of policy.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for giving me this opportunity. What hon. Franca Akello is saying about the Jie warriors is also affecting Abim District. The police are incapacitated and walk on their errands. The Jie are very good at walking so they are better than the police. The police vehicle for Abim District has been parked here in Kampala for the last six months. 

Therefore, how do you expect the police to manage the Jie? By the way, the name “Jie” means fight. This implies that you are dealing with people who are not easy and we need to find a way of managing them. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for the supplementary issues they have raised. I would like to be on record that if we did not have police in Karamoja, the situation would be different because we know where we have come from regarding that part of this country. The information given by hon. Janet Okori-Moe, who I always call my central executive committee member, is that police are there but are incapacitated. 

The information given by hon. Franca Akello is that there is no police in the area. If it is a matter of facilitating the police more, we have always discussed the issue of buying vehicles for police in every district in Karamoja and I believe that is what we are pursuing. Like I said, we may require deploying more of the force. However, to say that we do not have any police on the ground, is to mislead – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I made this statement a few minutes ago in your presence. I do not remember making a statement on this Floor of the House regarding her response on the police. I did not remember mentioning that there is no police at all. I have brought before this House an issue, which is burning and that involves the theft of our animals and I would like the Government to address it. 

Is it therefore in order for the Government Chief Whip to accuse me and make false statements regarding something that I did not mention on the Floor instead of addressing the problem that has been brought forward? She has not given us a clear directive of how we will recover these lost animals. Is she in order to meander around and put words in my mouth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip, you have every right to put words in your own mouth. However, you have no right to put words in other people’s mouth. In this case, you said things that the Member never mentioned. I think you were hoping that she was going to say that but she did not, unfortunately. Please wind up.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I was asked to mention where police is. That insinuated that she does not see police on the ground and I said that we have police. 

However, I am sorry. If there is any word that I have transported from my own words to hers, I wish to expunge that. I stood here without meandering and talked on this microphone saying that the minister in charge will be required to come before the House and give us a progress report. Therefore, asking me for further information will derail us because the minister is coming.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not want this matter to appear on the Order Paper. Please, call the minister to come and speak to the House about this matter today.

2.24
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the statement made by our own Member of Parliament representing Bugangaizi East constituency, Kakumiro District. The statement was made on television on 9 March, 2018 and was replicated yesterday, 12 March 2018 on BBC and other media houses in the country including WhatsApp and twitter. I would to quote his statement: “As a man, you need to discipline your wife. You need to touch her a bit, tackle and beat her somehow to really streamline her.”

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the Domestic Violence Act, 2010 and other laws in Uganda, prohibit wife beating and all forms of harassment, violence against all family members, including children and husbands. Uganda is a signatory to most international laws aimed at preventing gender-based violence, including the Convention of eliminating all forms of discrimination against women and widows. 

Uganda Government recognises that gender-based violence is a serious problem and approved the national policy on elimination of gender-based violence in October 2016. During the celebrations of the International Day of Women on 8 March 2018 in Mityana District, His Excellency the President of this country was advocating to fight against domestic violence. He made a statement that, “A man who beats his wife is a coward and should face the full force of law.”

As women of this country, under the Uganda Women's Parliamentary Association umbrella, we take this statement from a national leader at the level of an MP to be unfortunate to this country and to the women in particular. We demand that hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko withdraws his statement with an apology on the Floor of Parliament and also makes a public apology on the media.

Mr Speaker, the study that has been carried out by the World Bank has indicated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made your prayer. Can we pause there? Are you going to debate this matter?

MS AZAIRWE: No, sir. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have made your point. Let us pause it there. Honourable members, like I said at the beginning, the honourable member for Bugangaizi East approached the Speaker this morning and said he wanted to make a statement today. He was however not sufficiently prepared to do so. Therefore, he will make a statement on this matter tomorrow.

As you are aware, statements of personal explanation do not attract debate. He will make his speech to the House tomorrow. 

2.27
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the General Secretary for Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association and I represent the people of Lira District, which includes quite a number of women. At national level, we represent the women of this country. Anything unfortunate that is mentioned about a woman concerns the women of this country and of this world, including the men. 

You realise that gender based violence is a serious problem across countries and continents. Acceptance of intimate violence; partner beating, is not acceptable. In Uganda alone, violence is at about 30 per cent, which is twice above average in developing countries. We do not want a situation where an honourable Member of Parliament, a legislator, somebody who is supposed to legislate on behalf of the people of this country, women inclusive, talks negatively. 

Recently, World Bank approved US$ 40 million to help in strengthening social risk management in Uganda alone. That is costly. Uganda wants to curb it but somebody wants to abate it. Is he serious? 

We realise that at least 62 per cent of women in this country face domestic and gender based violence and at least 59 per cent of the men face it too. It is a serious concern but an honourable Member of Parliament says that women have got to be touched a little to strengthen and align them, as if we are motor vehicles or goods.

Mr Speaker, it is high time that the men in this country knew that we are human beings just like them and that there is no need to align somebody by beating. That is not acceptable. We therefore call upon this honourable member to apologise to the women of this country and to all Ugandans and to withdraw his statement with apologies. We say that charity begins at home. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you were communicating, you informed the House that the honourable member is organising his personal statement for tomorrow. Right now, I can see honourable members trying to debate and talking without understanding exactly what the Member of Parliament really meant. 

The procedural point I am raising is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to allow the honourable member to come with his personal statement. After that, we need to try to understand exactly what he meant – (Interruption)

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know the matter we are talking about very well. The honourable member made his statement in English and in a local language, Luganda. He expressed himself very clearly. Therefore, it is erroneous for hon. Gilbert Olanya to say that we do not know what we are talking about and that we have to wait for his statement. He made the statement publically and it was clarified in Luganda. Therefore, we know what we are talking about as women of this country. Is he in order to tell this House that what we are talking about is not in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I communicated this. I also informed you that a statement of personal explanation is going to be made tomorrow. Remember that it does not attract a debate. If we assess the statement of the honourable member tomorrow and we are not satisfied with its contents and the Member’s response to the issues, then probably Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association can take this up at that stage. However, if we are satisfied with the Member’s statement and whatever he will have said to the House, we could then pause it there. Would that be a good way to proceed with this matter? Thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure to raise a matter under our Rules of Procedure; Rule 51 and Rule 25.

The rule is in reference to the statement by the minister. As we were entering these Chambers, I came across a statement entitled, “Statement to Parliament on the Occasion of Commemorating the International Women’s Day, 8 March 2018” and it had been laid on the table outside. 

Uganda celebrated the International Women’s Day on 8th March and ideally, we would have expected a comprehensive statement from the minister so that we can have an opportunity for all the sentiments being raised. 

Take particular note of this year’s theme: “Empowerment of Rural Women and Girls: Opportunities and Challenges in Recognition of the Empowerment of Rural Women”. A girl is central to economic growth and sustainable development of the country, amongst others. Mr Speaker, whereas the other day we had the national day for Archbishop Janan Luwum and it was swept under the carpet, equally this time round, such an important day, where Members have strong sentiments and views, particularly we who represent the rural areas, we are let down when Government does not present a statement so that we can see how to advance the rural woman and girl as indeed this year’s theme was. 

Probably, we would have brought out the bottlenecks and examined the policies regarding women in this country and how we can push forward the women agenda in this country.

Mr Speaker, is Government procedurally right to have such important days, which touch on 55 per cent of our population in this country, and it is merely taken as any other day and no statement is made? If I look on the Order Paper and the business to follow, that item has not come up yet the ministry is well staffed with four ministers. 

Mr Speaker, shouldn’t the minister and Government be told or ordered by this House to bring a comprehensive statement here? Probably these outbursts would then be minimised and we can all be on the same page. It can also be a message that once we have such important days in this country, Government should not run outside Parliament to address the media and a certain section of the population because in the process, the country misses out on the interaction that such a statement would have in Parliament. 

Is the minister and Government procedurally right to dump such an important statement outside without having it placed on the Order Paper or laid on the Table? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not aware that such a statement exists in this House. The only way I get to know about such a statement in this House is when we are notified of its presence and we move to have the matter put on the Order Paper. However, there may be many documents flying around for information and some of them do not attract this level of focus by Parliament when they are not meant for Parliament use in the Chamber.

Honourable members, you will also recall that the International Women’s Day celebrations happened when this Parliament was on recess. I do not want to believe that no statement was made by the Government on this matter, whether in the media or otherwise. Certainly, no statement could have been made to this Parliament because it was not sitting. What I would advise is that the themes of these celebrations are not lost. 

Honourable members, you could draw out a motion that captures the spirit of the message in the International Women’s Day and we see if we can have a debate on it and see its relevance and see how far we are with these matters of women in this country and those issues that are captured in the theme of the celebrations and we can make some conclusions. That would be a good way to proceed with this matter so that we do not lose out on a discussion on this important event. Is that okay? 

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. I would like to thank the 70 Members of Parliament who actually attended the Women’s Day celebrations in Mityana. It is on record that it was the most attended Women’s Day celebrations so far; 70 MPs and 21 ministers turned up in Mityana. That means they were aware that 8th March was International Women’s Day celebrations. However, the minister in charge is here and she has taken note. If such a motion comes here, we will be able to discuss it further. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon is a group of youth from Bukoto County Central in Masaka District. The constituency is represented by H.E the Vice-President. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

2.41
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning revenue loss. This matter came up in September and Parliament pronounced itself and gave time to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, we passed a law on excise duty on cigarettes. However, there was a ruling in another EAC partner state. On local content, we passed a law imposing a tax of Shs 55,000 per 1,000 sticks of cigarettes. The import duty was Shs 75,000 per 1,000 sticks. 

However, I have reliable information that one company is importing and paying less than what is in the law. This means that Government is losing revenue. I remember the Speaker, who was then in the Chair, telling the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General to go and appeal against that ruling. To date, there is nothing. 

What is happening in revenue today is, if you pay less Shs 20,000 per 1,000 sticks, this means that for every carton, there is a revenue loss of Shs 200,000. Each carton has 10,000 sticks. If 22,000 cartons of cigarettes are imported, when you multiply 22,000 cartons by Shs 200,000, the revenue loss totals up to Shs 4.4 billion. 

I would like to know what the minister is doing because this was a projection of revenue collection. This is setting a bad precedence regarding the relevance of this Parliament in domestic revenue tax laws and measures set.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is this true?

2.44
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Kakooza for raising this issue. I know something about this issue.  A certain company – I do not know whether it is wise to mention it now or at a later stage – sued us for having put a tax on all imported cigarettes, which are manufactured in the country. The East African Court of Justice in Arusha decided against the state of Uganda. I got the papers and passed them over to the Attorney-General who, we are lucky, is right here. Maybe I can call him to tell us how far he has progressed on that issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime, are we losing money?

MR KASAIJA: The unfortunate thing is that I saw this information when I was walking into Parliament so I cannot confirm. Maybe I can come back later with more details because I do not want to talk on guesswork. However, I would like that my colleague, the Attorney-General, tells Parliament and the country how far we have gone on the question of appealing against that decision.

2.45
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that this company is importing cigarettes and paying less tax. It is also true that the East African Court of Justice held against the Republic of Uganda. We have subsequently filed the appeal. Therefore, as a matter of fact, the appeal is there. 

However, the issue is that the decision of the lesser tax was decided upon by the East African Common Market Protocol. They became a matter of law as we understood it in the East African Community. I think that this Parliament, in its wisdom, passed the other sum and, as I understood it, it was against the advice of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that sat at that time. We have appealed the matter and we are going to appear in court in April. 

I have already asked for a meeting and ironically, it is going to take place tomorrow between myself, the ministers in charge of Finance, Planning and Economic, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and myself. The main contention is going to be the ranking of the law because the East African Court passed judgment against it and that is what we have appealed against. Thank you.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I would like to raise is that since the matter is already in court, I do not see why the Attorney-General could discuss the same matter which is already in court. Under Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, this is considered sub-judice. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not discussing the merits of the case.
 
MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, when the Bill was brought by this Government under Article 93, about domestic revenue collection and was passed by this Parliament – I am talking about the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017 which is not in the protocol of the East African Community and can be varied by a partner state. We do not have the same rate like Tanzania and Burundi. We have our own rate passed by our Parliament and it does not require any East African Protocol since it is a domestic revenue collection.

My point is that if that ruling is obliged to, it would mean that this Parliament will not have any log imposed on taxes for revenue collection. This is the reason I am saying by this time, even the imported cigarettes in the stores of British American Tobacco (BAT) could have paid the taxes depending on the tariff rate we passed here until the case is heard in the East African Court of Justice.

As we speak, BAT has imported volumes of cigarettes. They are waiting that this Parliament maybe can change the law. The cigarettes are in their warehouse. Excise duty does not need any other partner state to dictate on us what we pass as Parliament. Otherwise, Parliament shall have no role to play to impose tax measures as a partner state. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a proper brief on this at a later stage? Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, do you have something to say?

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter was processed under my leadership in the Bill entitled “Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017”. 

I would like to give a brief background. British American Tobacco initially was producing in Uganda; it had a factory here, employed Ugandans and contributed directly to our economy. However, this company decided to go and produce elsewhere and import its products in Uganda. The favours it had been getting without our notice was that its products produced elsewhere were being classified as local products attracting the same duty with the companies which remained in our economy.

When we noticed this, we decided that we must differentiate in order to protect our own companies. We said if they wanted to import, they would pay a different rate higher than the rate our companies which produce from here pay and we brought the proposal to this House. Mr Attorney-General, this proposal came from the committee and the House adopted it.

However, after four months or so, we saw a ruling. When this ruling came to the committee, the question we have been asking is that: If there is an issue in regard to the laws we pass in this House, which court should decide whether the laws should apply or not? Is it the East African Court of Justice or our courts of law in Uganda?

Mr Speaker, we think that if there is any issue in this law, it should be determined by a resident court in Uganda. We do not think that another court seated elsewhere can determine what this Parliament should legislate on.

As we speak, BAT is paying taxes at local rates not the rates which were determined by this Parliament. Therefore, I would like to urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and those charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the due tax is collected and remitted to the Consolidated Fund to follow this matter urgently because we want   revenue. I am aware we are in a shortfall and this would be one of the mechanisms to close the gap of the shortfall. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members, for your contribution. I am not qualified to speak about the quantities of cigarettes that have been imported and the loss in terms of taxes. What I know is that the East African Court of Justice ruled against us and my office has appealed that ruling.

The East African Court has regional jurisdiction; it does not have jurisdiction in the globe and we are part of the East African Community. The question is - and that is what we are appealing on Mr Speaker, and I do not think that it is in order to give details until I am in a better position to give exact details.

The issue is that when we agree to an East African Protocol, we are supposed to see that our laws synchronise with that law that we are going to agree with as the East African region.  What we would like to find out is whether that was done, the superiority of the jurisdiction, and if it be found that those people have been wrongly avoiding tax then they would be made to pay the tax.

However, I would like to request that together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I could give the specific law under which we are under the jurisdiction of the East African Community. Thank you.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would need to check with URA why they disregarded the Ugandan law and adhered to the East African Community law. I would like to promise this House that I will come back after I have examined it. These are legal issues - The answers I would be seeking is whether URA is obligated to disown a law made here in Uganda but respect a law made outside Uganda. Those are some of the questions. Therefore, I will come back to this House, Mr Speaker, and inform them of what the law says about this matter. Thank you.

2.56
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the invasion of Moyo District and cattle rustling by armed forces from South Sudan.

On Sunday 11th of March, over 100 armed men crossed from South Sudan with sophisticated weapons, guns, arms and ammunition. They raided a place called Bari village in Pamujo parish, Metu sub-county and made off with over 1,000 cows, some goats and sheep. The resultant effect was the displacement of people, loss of lives, schools closed and general insecurity, anarchy and chaos in Metu sub-county.

There have been spasmodic attacks from June last year; however the recent one was the worst. In total, over 2,000 cattle have been rustled from my constituency. We strongly pray and recommend the following action points for the attention of the government:

    1.  The government should boost security strength by opening more UPDF detaches and increasing the number of personnel on the ground.

    2. Deployment of Anti-Stock Theft Unit of police to support the army in securing the border and fight cattle theft as it has always happened in Karamoja. The one of Karamoja was successful, so we wish the same police will be deployed in our area.

    3. Providing additional logistical support in terms of fuel, food items and vehicles to facilitate effectiveness.

    4. Organizing a high level security meeting for stakeholders from South Sudan and our government with full support and involvement of the local leaders of Moyo District.

    5. The Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister for Security, Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Office of the Inspector General of Police should address the members of the public to restore their faith and confidence.

    6. Establishment of vigilantes, formed under the guidance of the army and police to patrol the areas.

    7. The government should either recover the animals or compensate the owners whose names are being compiled. In this case, a helicopter gunship can be used for surveillance in order to locate the exact position of where the cattle are being kept so that they can be brought back to the owners- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought we had agreed that when a Member is rising on an urgent matter, he has the information. In the course of him raising what he knows, you cannot give any better information than he already has. You can only supplement when he has finished.

MR ALERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In a nutshell, remember in 2014, there was a serious attack by these ragtag elements from Sudan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you go to 2014, you have exceeded the ambit of the rule that allows you to raise urgent matters.

MR ALERO:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

MR SSSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The complexity of the matter that the Member has raised is really what prompted me to rise up. When he says there has been an incursion from a foreign country, people armed and have crossed the borders into the country, that takes a dimension that is not within hon. Aza’s mandate solely, but covers the entire country. 

It means that Uganda as a country is under attack. If an armed group enters the country and indeed carries away people’s property and sometimes people lose their lives, that is the mandate of government and we needed to get the situation from government to concede before he can make his recommendation. If it is the case, then other processes can be invoked. 

Has Uganda been attacked? Are our people’s lives and property safe? How come that we are protecting people in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia and South Sudan and we fail to protect our own within this country? It is a serious matter that government cannot just be seen to remember but they must address us as a country on what they have done as government and what robust response has been taken. 

You cannot be good outside, even in Equatorial Guinea when you cannot protect your own people. I thought that this is a matter that government must really come to terms and tell this Parliament. If there is any way we can help, as Parliament, we therefore move rather than sweeping it under the carpet and a Member makes lamentations, yet the problem is much bigger and would require the collective response of this government and the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not yet had any response from the government, so we cannot prejudge what they are going to say.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to supplement on the information hon. Aza has given. As the chairperson of West Nile Parliamentary Caucus, we received all these complaints yesterday and all the LC V chairpersons in that region are on alert. It is not only Moyo that is affected. Other areas affected include Koboko, Arua, Zombo, Nebbi, Amuru and Kitgum districts. 

The information I would like to give is that first of all, on the Eastern DRC border, the people there are already fleeing towards us. Some of the people who are fleeing are coming with arms. Some of the pictures that have been sent to us on social media by our brothers who are doing business the other side are very shocking and traumatising. 

Because of the tribal clashes there, our people fear that some of these people are either being pursued or are running out of fear but with ammunitions. You can never tell what will happen when they congregate in a community. There is fear in that part of Uganda.

The area MP (from South Sudan) who neighbours Aringa North constituency was murdered in Yumbe by a young boy. You can imagine a young boy holding a gun and killing a Member of Parliament. The situation in that region is not something that we should take for granted because as far as we know, any time the warring parties in South Sudan might start a war in West Nile. That will endanger our people. 

As you are all aware, we have just started receiving rains. The people along the border can no longer go to their farms because South Sudanese have settled there and are not in gazetted refugee camps. They have re-created their own camps with military hardware. It becomes really difficult for locals who do not know anything about ammunition to begin questioning these people. 

First of all, they are occupying their gardens and these people cannot question them because they do not have anybody to help them. The government should really come out clearly because down there, it is a situation of war, not just an invasion or cattle rustling. These people come in numbers. The ones who raided cattle just two days ago in Moyo came in hundreds.

How do you expect a locality to confront a hundred armed men? I think this is a matter that needs urgent government attention and therefore, we do appeal that they respond as quickly as possible. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we get a response from government on this because it is a serious matter, and yet we are getting into a debate already?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter raised by my colleague is very important. Right now, we have refugees from South Sudan who are creating their own camps. They are not going to the camps allocated by government. Wherever they come, they negotiate with the communities and they are given some piece of land to start their own camps. This is very dangerous.

I really wanted to supplement on this very important information. Let government take it very seriously so that we find a way of controlling the refugees in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know these are members whose areas are affected, but we cannot extend this any further than we have already done. I would like a response from government, and I also would like to request the Government Chief Whip to call the responsible minister to come here and speak to us before we close today.

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A matter concerning the security of the people of Uganda is indeed a serious one. Therefore, the government cannot brush it off. The geographical position of this country has not changed; the neighbours have not changed ever since Uganda existed. We are neighbours to DRC, South Sudan, and Kenya. Almost, when Somalia catches flu, Uganda also catches flu in terms of security. We are neighbours to Somalia in terms of security. 

Therefore, we have been living with these challenges and government has always come up to deal with the matters of insecurity for this country. 

So, I must thank my colleague, hon. Tom Aza, who has raised this important matter. It is going to make the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to fast-track his statement to this House because I know for sure that UPDF, Police and all other security agencies are working together. I can instruct my staff to trace the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs so that he can come and brief us of what government is doing. Of course, I have to list names –(Interjection)– I need protection from hon. Ssekikubo, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, what I have said is: “Please, alert the Minister of Defence to come and guide us on what is going to happen today.” I see now the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is here. We can as well receive –(Interjection) - Please, we are not going to push matters forward when we can deal with them today.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Most obliged, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Internal Affairs – 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I apologise for being late; I was in another meeting by the direction of the head of state. 

On the last issue, I do not know if I can get the gist fully. However, on the attack in Moyo, I was in a meeting with the chairman and other leaders from that area this morning. Briefly, what I can say before the substantive statement is that this was an armed group of people who invaded the people in Moyo on Sunday at dawn; they raided their animals and went away with them. Our forces, the police and the UPDF, when they followed them up, thought these were ordinary cattle rustlers or criminals. At some stage, however, they found that these people were more armed than the force that was sent. Therefore, they withdrew, reorganised and got reinforcement from Gulu. By yesterday, they had secured that area, and they were trying to pursue those people.

This is all I can say at the moment. If there is need, I will make a substantive statement after I have got the details. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I also received information from you through the office of the Government Chief Whip over the attack sometime last month in the area of Agago involving the communities from Agago and Jie. We received a directive from the Speaker to the effect that we should make a statement here on that matter. 

When we checked yesterday and today, we were not on the Order Paper for that purpose and that is why we are not making the statement now. If you wish and direct, however, we shall be able to make that statement tomorrow because we know the facts; they were given to us, and we are preparing our statement as soon as we are – 

So, these are the two issues I thought, Mr Speaker, I should be able to clarify. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we prefer to have a copy of the statement before we can put it on the Order Paper. We do not want a situation which has happened very often; that you call an item and neither the minister nor the statement is in Parliament. It embarrasses us because for you, it looks like you are now already immune to embarrassment. (Laughter) For Parliament, we do not want it. 

Sometimes, we call an item which is on the Order Paper but both the minister and the statement are not there. It does not look good that we keep saying, “Next item”. That is why if you do not have a statement that has been submitted to Parliament, we will not put it on the Order Paper. We leave it to the members to come and raise the issues when the time comes. 

So, please, if you have a statement that is ready, submit a copy and it will be on the Order Paper tomorrow.

MR KANIA: Mr Speaker, we are not immune to embarrassment. We apologise for what happened, but an explanation was given. If it is in error, we will correct. We will submit the statement to the Clerk so that it is put on the Order Paper and we present it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, as the House may recall, a Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The National Biosafety Act, 2017” was returned to Parliament-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what matter do you rise? 

MR KAFEERO: Matters of national importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. How can you rise on a matter of national importance on a Bill? If it is a Bill, you can rise on a procedure; it cannot be a matter of national importance. (Laughter) Please, if you have a procedural point you would like to raise – 

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. As the House may recall, a Bill entitled “A Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled the National Bio-Safety Act, 2017” was returned to Parliament by His Excellency, the President and you subsequently referred it to the committee.

Mr Speaker, allow me to state that the committee has examined the seven clauses and the title that the President had concerns about. The committee would be able to report back to Parliament, however, the committee intends to interface with His Excellency, the President in the coming few days.

The committee, therefore, prays that this House grants us another two weeks for that meeting to take place then we can be able to report back to the House. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, substantially, what the procedural question he is raising, is seeking extension. The honourable chairperson is seeking an extension to a period within which the Bill returned by the President can be brought back by the committee. That is what he is essentially doing. (Laughter)

Honourable members, you will recall that this matter was debated and passed. This Bill was brought here, processed by the committee, brought back and we debated and passed it. The President examined the Bill when it was sent to him for assent but sent it back with some recommendations which I personally read to the House and the matter was referred to the committee. 

However, our rules are clear; that such matters must be handled by the committee within two weeks. It is way beyond two weeks since this matter was referred to this committee. The section under which this Bill - Rule 142 which covers Bills that are returned by the President is silent on the process of extension of time. It only gives two weeks and it is quiet though it is a Bill.

Therefore, we will use the authority of Rule 140 to allow the House to take a look at the chairperson’s request and see if this House can grant the extension because only this House can. It is neither the Speaker nor anybody else. 

Honourable members, the request is that the committee be given more time to be able to interact with the President who has returned the Bill; get the details from him then they can come and compile the report and bring back to the House as required by our procedures and Constitution.

Honourable members, that is the request from the committee; can we grant the extension? What period of the extension have you asked for? Two weeks? Honourable members, can we give the committee two weeks, they meet the President and come back to this? I put the question to the request for two weeks.
 
Hon. Ogwal, you are not the chairperson of the committee; so you cannot be asking for five years when you are not even a committee member. Can I put the question to the request by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on another serious point of procedure according to our Rules of Procedure, Rule No. 217. If I may read, it says that - it is about action taken on reports: “A minister shall submit to Parliament an action taken report detailing what actions have been taken by the relevant ministry following the resolutions or recommendations of Parliament or committee.”

Mr Speaker, sometime last year, towards the end of the year, a matter was raised regarding the children suffering from “Nodding Syndrome” and the Speaker guided that the committee on gender investigates the matter and report to the House. The committee did the same and did report to the House and resolutions regarding actions to be taken on the issues of “Nodding Syndrome” were made by this august House.

However, up to today, we have not yet received any statements on the Floor of Parliament regarding the resolutions that were made in this Parliament on “Nodding Syndrome”. Some of us, who represent these children, keep on seeing the ministers and other people making statements through the media instead of making formal statements on the Floor.

Therefore, I would like to find out whether the minister has got the statement to make, especially on the actions taken on the resolutions that Parliament made regarding the same. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of health, Rule 217?

3.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is true hon. Jane Aceng, the Minister of Health made a statement at the Media Centre when Parliament was on recess. Therefore she should come here and probably brief Parliament on how far they have gone – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, on what matter do you rise? 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ministry is not an individual. As far as government works, it is collective thought and action. Is the senior colleague, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Chief Whip, in order to insinuate that it is only hon. Jane who is in position to handle the matter when the Minister of Health is in the House? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the issue is that we see the Minister of Health here and we see you rising. Please.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the gender ministry did present a report to this House regarding the “Nodding Syndrome” and there were actions that were supposed to be taken. 

However, just to let the House know, that we are handling this case in a multi-sectoral manner. The gender ministry has a role to play regarding the psycho-social support and development. The Ministry of Health has been doing its part and that is clinical management; providing the necessary medication and therapeutic foods which we have been giving to these children.

It is in that respect that my colleague, hon. Jane Aceng, did make a statement regarding the status of the children who are affected by the “Nodding Syndrome”. I don’t know whether I should speak from the health side or we come with a joint statement with the gender ministry because the report hon. Franca Akello was talking about was in general regarding resolutions that this House made. It was not specific to health but if it is the wish of this House that I speak on our side, then I can be able to proceed and give the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the recommendations were multi-sectoral as you said. There are those resolutions that were in relation to the Ministry of Health but your minister decided to address the press on it; can she come and address Parliament tomorrow on the same? (Applause) 

MS OPENDI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will be here to make that presentation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, this matter on nodding syndrome will come tomorrow at 2 o’clock so that we hear what we have been hearing in the media.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, when the minister is coming to give us information on what is being done to address the problem of nodding syndrome, I beg the minister not to tell us history because we are very informed about the historical perspective and even the internet can give us information.

Now that the media has exposed the rot behind the administration in Government, can you tell us how you are addressing that rot because children are dying even now? We need emergency intervention. 

Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide that is why I am standing on procedure. The same minister was able to address the committee this morning and she was talking about generality, talking about 2009, 2012 and then 2014. We want the specific intervention which has been taken by the Government.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I did not want to raise this order; the honourable member was before the committee. I appeared before the budget committee this morning on invitation with clear points for issues or areas that I was supposed to address. 

One of them was giving a background and the status and that is the information that I provided. The other was on financing and the last one was on action that the Government is taking.

Is the honourable member in order to come and tell the House that I was speaking on generalities and history, when that is one of the key areas that we were required to present before the budget committee? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is requesting you not to tell us what you told the committee. Tell us something else because she knows what you told the committee. So she is proceeding properly.

MR BATEGEKA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Committee on National Economy is considering a matter that the Speaker referred to the committee on Budget; “a request by Government to borrow domestically Shs 736 billion.” We cannot do that unless this matter is officially referred to us.

The minister of finance has been to our committee to present the same matter but in our view it is not procedurally correct. We need a statement from the Speaker in that regard - who should handle this request of domestic borrowing; is it the committee on budget or that on national economy? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members that is why there was a proposal in the past that requests of this nature should come by motion because the elaboration of the motion would guide the presiding officer as to where this matter should go but the House did not approve this. From the heading you cannot really tell.

If indeed it was sent to a committee that is not capable of handling it, I now instruct the clerk that this particular item of borrowing -

I now instruct that the request to borrow Shs 736 billion domestically be referred to the committee responsible - which is the Committee on National Economy - to handle within the framework of the rules and report to the House as soon as possible but not exceeding the time provided in the rules.

MR JULIUS OCHEN: Mr Speaker, still on a health matter where we expect the minister’s statement tomorrow, it would be proper for the minister to also bring out very clearly how this nodding disease spreads. I have already got two cases in my constituency similar to the cases in Agago and Pader. 

It would be important that the ministry of health gets into the area and investigates the situation and informs the country about what is on the ground, so that we are aware of how the disease spreads. We the local people on the ground are not able to tell how it spreads. It can only be confirmed by technical people. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: According to the public statement that we have had from the minister of health, there are no new cases and yet when we you go to the ground the information is different. Let the minister of health come back tomorrow and guide us on this thing so that we know where we are on this issue.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this Parliament should guard against intimidation and ridicule by the ministers and the front bench. Members who are representing the people come and report to the country that our people are being left to themselves.

The nodding syndrome disease which we grappled with even in the Ninth Parliament is still continuing to ravage our people, but the minister dances to the media and abuses the integrity and understanding of this House. That should not be tolerated - who speaks for the people?

Members representing the communities afflicted by the nodding disease are alerting the country about a problem but the minister - I am sorry to say - I would not like to impute other ex-officio members. If she was indeed representing the people she would have known the sensitivity and grandeur to attach to such a very sensitive matter.

Mr Speaker, it is high time this Parliament took up measures to control and tame members of the front bench who want to scandalise the leaders and representatives of the people because it puts us in a difficult situation. Our people are dying but the minister thinks for public relations they can water it down.

I would propose that the Leader of Government Business, on top of the minister’s statement, tells this House what measures he has taken to streamline his ministers that make it a habit to abuse the integrity and the understanding of members of Parliament.

If we do not take a stern action, members of Parliament will be intimidated from even raising matters that are pertinent to their people and to us who have been seeing it; we feel saddened that a section of the population is dying but the minister thinks it is business as usual. It is an insult and abuse that this Parliament should never condone and accept. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, my observation is that members of Parliament are very keen to learn. When they come to Parliament even some who have been here long - their interest is to learn how to function and relate -

The Government Chef Whip should put some pressure to the front bench members to go through some refresher course - this is not something that anybody should be ashamed of because I do not see how a minister can rush to the media to report about a very serious matter, which affects all of us in that manner. We, and our voters, were watching on the television and reading about it from the newspapers and the same voters ask us about the same issues. 

Therefore, I believe, this minister should come on the Floor of Parliament and tell us what is going on in their various dockets such that we shall be able to amplify when we go to our constituencies. It is important that the ministers be trained on how to conduct affairs in respective dockets –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we all know the sensitivity of this matter we are about to debate tomorrow regarding the nodding disease. We are all concerned about it and we want to find a solution. 
However, is it in order for the senior legislator, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, having identified a certain minister who made a statement in a certain way she may not be satisfied with, to generalise that all of us at the front bench need training on how to handle these matters when we have been handling matters of this nature in a way that she has appreciated on the Floor of this House before? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, what the honourable member for Dokolo is saying is that the burden is shifted to you to show the contrary. That you are equipped - (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, You have just made your guidance because I have heard colleagues mentioning that the minister who made the statement should come. My colleague is not available now and that is why I said that I would be here tomorrow to make this statement. 

Therefore, I would like to be guided whether members want the particular minister who made the statement or the minister of health can come tomorrow to give this statement. That is the guidance I wanted from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we do not want the Ministry of Health but the Minister of Health. If you are the one holding the post, you come as Minister of Health but not as anything else. Do not come here as the Permanent Secretary. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, as regards the domestic borrowing loan matter, I think we need further guidance from you. Domestic borrowing is aimed at financing the budget and the domestic borrowing, which is currently before us involves activities which are not in the budget – those that are supplementary in nature. The guidance I am seeking from you concerns the circumstances under which the Committee on National Economy will proceed when the nature of activities that this loan is going to finance do not exist in the budget. 

I would pray that we look at the idea whereby the Budget Committee handles one side of the supplementary and the Committee on National Economy handles another side of the budget such that by the time we come here, we do not hit a stalemate whereby you are approving a loan that does not have activities inclusive in the budget. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the complication we have with these things is that all borrowing is meant to support the budget, whether external or domestic. The question is, when there is borrowing, which committee handles them? That is the question and the answer is straight - the Committee on National Economy. 

However, if on the same request there are aspects of the borrowing that could be handled by another committee - for example, I do not know what this particular request was - but if there are aspects that could relate to the committee on finance, then it would be handled appropriately. However, as long as it is called a request to borrow, the purpose is immaterial, in my assessment, unless I have to come back to this. 

However, if it is the feeling of the committees that have been looking at this particular request that the two committees should handle it jointly; I would be persuaded to make that reference. If it is the borrowing - because I do not see how the committee on finance would be going to handle a request for borrowing - that is the complication I have. If there are aspects of this particular request that would require the committee on finance to be part of it, then let me make this reference. The Clerk would sort out the details administratively whether it is the Committee on Budget or Committee on Finance. Now it is even getting wider - the Committee on Budget, Committee on Finance, and the Committee on National Economy - let the Clerk now handle this matter appropriately and it is referred to the appropriate committee to handle this particular request.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the guidance I would further seek from you is that the Committee on National Economy handles loans to finance the budget. My interpretation of the budget is the output of the Appropriations Act. Here is a situation whereby this loan is going to finance activities that are outside the Appropriations Act. What would be their basis of approving this loan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will end up being approved by the Supplementary Appropriations Act. It will end up being appropriated by this same Parliament even if the expenditure is made before the event. It will still be this same House to pass it. 

However, let us not complicate it, honourable member. Let us say that if there are aspects of it that should be handled by another committee, let the Clerk streamline and deal with it administratively. Then reference is made to the appropriate committee, that is the Committee on National Economy and other aspects which are relevant to other committees - the Clerk will make the necessary adjustments and make the referral. Please extract the minutes and transmit accordingly.

Honourable members, today we have not been able to go quickly to the order paper because the issues were very involving. Can we now get to the order paper - There is another point of procedure.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure especially that we are talking about borrowing and the budget and my committee has been faced with a huge challenge of the South Sudan traders. They petitioned Parliament and the matter was referred to the Committee but at the same time, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a commitment that by February, the issues of South Sudan traders would be resolved. 

The traders are business people who moved to South Sudan, were earning us foreign exchange and were creating opportunities for our people. They took all the risks but when the problems happened in South Sudan, they lost all their businesses. I cannot believe that these taxpayers have not been compensated for the last five years. 

Mr Speaker, I have with me a bilateral agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda concerning payment of money owed to Uganda-South Sudan traders by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. They even went ahead and made a commitment but up to now, nothing has been done. These traders have lost their assets to the banks; they have gone through stress and untold suffering. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I pray that this matter is handled urgently because it was this august House that passed the payment of these South Sudan traders, which has been ignored by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to lay on the Table this agreement and urge you to see that this matter is handled expediently – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I rise on procedural clarification. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please it is a procedural matter. I need to guide on it or rule on it. Procedural clarification should be after my ruling. 

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, I lay on Table the bilateral agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda concerning payments. It was signed by the two ministers of finance; the Minister of Finance and Planning of South Sudan, hon. Stephen Dhieu Dau, and our own minister, hon. David Bahati, who is seated here and has failed to honour the agreement- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it dated? 

MR RUHUNDA: It is dated 22 December 2016. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this matter has been very involving and it has taken quite a bit of time. I remember there was even a motion in this House. We debated some resolutions apart and the minister then, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, made some commitments here. Now they are telling us of a contract between the two Governments. 

I even remember there was a petition that was brought here and because of its nature, I referred it to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle. At that time, the minister had said that he was coming back with a comprehensive list of the verified suppliers of the Government of South Sudan. However, we have been waiting. Honourable minister, you need to say something about this that can guide us because I need to make some directions on this issue.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true that this issue has been here with us. I led a delegation together with the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda to South Sudan. The two countries, at a level of the heads of state, agreed that if it were possible, the Government of Uganda, like other countries such as Kenya, should look for some resources and come to the rescue of our people. Thereafter, South Sudan would pay them back at a later stage. 

Therefore, the two heads of state agreed and we committed in an agreement which we signed. Then there are those who had not been verified and we started the process of verification by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. That has been on-going. 

We have been trying to complete this process but at the same time trying to find out how best we can help given the resource envelop. We do not underestimate the contribution made by people, especially those who engage in export trade, because their contribution is very enormous. Indeed, we were getting over USD 700 million between the trade of South Sudan and Uganda. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, yes we committed that we would come to this House. However, I do not know where hon. Alex Ruhunda picked our document because I now find it in his hands. Therefore, if you give us an opportunity, probably we can prepare a motion, bring it here and see how best we can find some resources to relieve our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can that motion come tomorrow? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, if we are ordered to do so we have no option. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have this motion presented tomorrow? 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this matter, like you rightly said, has been debated. We have had petitions and we are very sympathetic with those that lost their resources in the process. 

However, this is a very controversial matter because when you enter into a business, there are elements of risk that go with it. Right now, there are people asking for bail out because they have suffered an economic tsunami. Those people that have been trading in South Sudan also suffered from a security tsunami. My own multi-million dollar investment suffered from a political tsunami. 

Therefore, which one are you going to table before Parliament? Mr Speaker, I think it is wrong for us to exploit –(Interjections)- no, I am seeking clarification because these are Ugandans. We are all doing business. Even the Bible says you count your cost before you go into business. 

However, you have gone into business with South Sudan but it has not worked out well. There are people who have gone into business with Kenya and it also collapsed. That is the same problem. There are also other people that have gone into business with Congo and I have that report. It has not done well. Even here internally, there are people who have businesses with the Ministry of Defence and they have not been paid their money. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is a very controversial matter. If you bring that document here for us to deal with people that are dealing with Sudan, then all of us can close businesses. Thereafter, we can go to Sudan and wait for it to collapse and then we come to Parliament so that we can get free money. 

I am completely opposed to it and I would like to put my interest straight. I would like the people of Dokolo to hear me. We have a Member of Parliament from Dokolo, hon. Okot-Ogong, who lost billions of shillings. Who is going to refund him? Why these people from South Sudan? What is so special? If they had a genuine case, the Sudanese Government should have paid them; the companies are probably still there with those people who traded with them. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to deal with matters that will divide Ugandans. That is why I am standing here to state my position and make it clear. 

Therefore, I am seeking clarification. What makes these people trading with South Sudan so special? Can we all, that have suffered tsunamis, bring our documents so that we can also ask those that suffered economic and political tsunamis to bring their documents tomorrow - you bring yours and we bring ours. Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can I ask for the purposes of the record of this House because they are recorded mainly in English and Swahili - what are political and economic tsunamis so that those writing can also make sense of what you are saying?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am told that the computer has really educated the current population. Therefore, when I talk of tsunami, I am meaning turmoil, disasters, crisis -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, economic crisis, political crisis -

MS OGWAL: Abnormal situations. I was looking at abnormal political situations that created collapse of some businesses. I am also talking of some security turmoil that could have caused the collapse of some business and human crisis, which can also cause collapse of some businesses. Therefore, when I use the word tsunami, in total, it brings out the meaning of what I want to say. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was privileged to be in that House when the petition signed by several business members of these communities was presented here. I was again lucky today hearing the minister for the first time saying they made some commitments and they would be willing to bring back the report and through a motion.

I was surprised, Mr Speaker, to listen to the eloquent debate from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, a debate that is very good - both inciting and exciting. This House, unless we are going to change the rules, decided that the matter be handled by Government and Government reports back. A motion, you were guiding the House that it could be brought tomorrow. The debate is superseding the motion.

Whatever we say, Mr Speaker, the matters of South Sudan or anywhere else like all business related - I think since this matter, particularly of South Sudan, was brought to this House. Are we proceeding well to seek clarification in a very preemptive manner that would curtail what would hitherto be a very good debate and will deny other people the benefit of getting the details of what is contained in that motion by Government and what was in the petition? 

I think I would seek your procedural guidance whether we are proceeding well after you guided that let the motion - actually you were seeking our opinion whether the motion could come tomorrow and then I was almost tempted to also join mama whom I respect very well and love the passion she debates with -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is mama? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: For the record and having close relationship with the people of Dokolo, itat means mama and that is hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She is the only person in this House referred to that way. Now many of you know for sure what -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural matter.

MR OBOTH: And this is right, Mr Speaker. Are we proceeding well by preempting the motion concerning South Sudan businessmen including some of us who are here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think I was clear in my communication. I was just waiting for the hon. Ogwal to frontload our debate so that she does not have to debate when the motion comes. Each time she wants to speak, I will say, “We will refer to your earlier submission on this subject.”

However, that not being the case, we cannot anticipate - there is nothing substantial before the House that we can debate. That is why I said that for you to make that challenge on what has been proposed, there has to be something before the House. However, right now, there is no matter that you are debating. Therefore, for you to be given that opportunity, the minster will have to come with a motion tomorrow and I will use my discretion to allow you say the same thing if you still have those objections the way you have put them.

However, honourable minister, please bring that motion, which will capture the petition, the contract, any motion that has been adopted by this House and specifically propose to this House what you think should be the implementation method that this House should adopt.

LAYING OF PAPERS

SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON THE UTILISATION AND PERFORMANCE OF THE USD 200M LOAN FACILITY FROM EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICAN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK (TDB)
   
4.04
THE COMMISSIONER OF PARLIAMENT (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I have a Special Audit Report on the Utilisation and Performance of the USD 200 million loan facility from Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (TDB). I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that. Honourable members, there is a background to this particular report. You recall that it arose from a report of the Public Accounts Committee of this House. It was debated and towards the conclusion of the debate, a referral was made to the Office of the Auditor General to carry out forensic audit on this subject to guide the House in the conclusion of the debate.

Therefore, this particular report will not be referred to the committee again; it will now be informing the debate which was already before the House because it is dealing with a particular aspect of the report of the Public Accounts Committee. 

Therefore, it should not go back to the committee; it will be a back and forth. We will be able to debate this report together with the audit report from the Auditor General’s Office on Thursday afternoon.

Therefore, honourable members, we will have to make these copies available to the Members so that they can internalise them between today and tomorrow so that we debate this matter on Thursday and conclude it whichever way. Thank you.

THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE STATE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN UGANDA, FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Women Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have the annual report on the State of Equal Opportunities in Uganda, financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Equal Opportunities to examine and advise the House within the time frame of our rules and how we proceed with this matter.

THE HALF YEAR MACRO-ECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the half year macro-economic and fiscal performance report for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee on finance and economic development.

THE SEMI-ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18
    
MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the semi-annual budget performance report for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee on budget.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 19.0 MILLION (US$26.85 MILLION EQUIVALENT) AS A SUPPLEMENTARY LOAN FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) TO SUPPORT THE KAMPALA SANITATION PROGRAMME PHASE 1 (KSP 1)

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion to authorise Government to borrow up to US$26.85 million as a supplementary loan from the African Development Fund to support the Kampala sanitation programme phase 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Chris Baryomunsi, the Member for Workers and hon. Gilbert Olanya. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the sewage system in Kampala was built in the 1950s. Currently, it serves less than 10 per cent of the total population and is comprised of obsolete and inadequate sewer networks, characterised by routine bursts and overflows. As a result, the bulk of the people in the city rely on poorly managed on-site sanitation.

In an effort to address the above challenge, in 2004, the Government developed the long-term sanitation development programme for Kampala through an elaborated Sanitation Strategy and Master Plan for Kampala City, which was updated in 2015. The overall implementation concept for Kampala Sanitation Programme Phase 1 has two approaches namely; Lake Victoria Protection Phase 1 and Lake Victoria Protection Stage II.

The programme will directly support Government to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, ensure access to water and sanitation for all. The Kampala Sanitation Programme will improve access to sanitation in the city by reducing pollution in the Murchison Bay where the capital city draws its water supply. 

Mr Speaker, this is a supplementary loan to the ongoing project which is handling issues to do with Kampala sewerage system.  The expected output for the sanitation programme includes: Waste water treatment plant of the capacity of 45,000 cubic metres per day which is being constructed at Bugolobi Wankoko; 31 kilometre of sewers network constructed within Nakivubo and Kinawataka catchment areas; a pre-treatment plant and pumping station of capacity 9,000m3 per day, constructed in Kinawataka wetland and 4.7 kilometres of sewerage pumping mainly to drain Kinawataka sewage pre-treatment station. 

In our brief, we have attached the progress we have made and also looked at the cost of financing which is highly concessional. We would like to request Parliament to consider this request and authorise us to supplement the work that was already done to complete this project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members that is the justification to that motion. When this particular request was presented to this House, it was referred to – is it just coming now? Is it a new loan? Why have you justified it? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I could not disobey you.     

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was – okay, this is still the request. Honourable members, it stands referred to the appropriate committee on national economy to examine this and report to the House. The subject matter is urgent and you need to handle it expeditiously. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the bottom of it, it says: “Response by the Attorney-General”. That is what was captured from the minutes that the Attorney-General was expected to respond on some issues.

4.13
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last year, when we were discussing this matter, I was requested to go and look at both the minority and majority reports as well as the contract and then advise this House on the impact if we were to take the position by the minority or the one by the majority. 

We have examined both reports and I have also scrutinised the agreement as well. Unfortunately, the Minister of Works and Transport, Eng. Ntege Azuba was unable to give me her input. I was up until yesterday when I asked her for their input and they requested that I give them about three days. 

Therefore, I would like to request for an adjournment for a week to discuss with them such that I will be able to give the Government position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay members, such that we finish this thing in a comprehensive way? Honourable member, what is there to clarify? The learned Attorney-General has said he has his assessment of the report and contract. His assessment of the implication of whatever will happen but they have not interfaced with the Minister of Works and Transport who has requested to be given time to have a discussion with the Attorney-General before the Attorney-General gives his opinion. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding of the work that was given to the Attorney-General was that he was supposed to offer the legal opinion on the ground for termination of this contract. It is my understanding that at this stage, it is not necessary for any consultation with the ministry after all; this is the ministry that made this contract. I also understand that the Attorney-General has had time and this matter is not just coming up recently. 

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from him is that: What is it that you need the ministry of Works and Transport to clarify to you because this is a matter of law that we had expected the learned Attorney-General to make his submission on? Therefore, at this stage, what is it that you want from the Ministry of Works and Transport?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, on that day when we debated, hon. Richard Otieno disclosed to this House and also we are privy to a dossier or a confidential report that was presented to us regarding the matter by the ministry and the honourable minister here who is the author – hon. Bagiire. There is that document to that effect, regarding that matter which we have presented to the committee. If the Attorney-General did not access it, maybe we could be able to pass it to him. It was very informative. In the document that we got from the hon. Bagiire, he was agreeing – actually with the portion of the minority report. I do not know where the senior minister is coming from because she avoided coming to the committee and left it to the minister in charge.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I think we should not bend the rules of this House. The minister of Works and Transport was a witness in the committee and when this report came on the floor of the House, it was the ruling of the Speaker by then to give a legal opinion. 

Now when you go back and consult a witness to make an opinion - that is a conflict of interest. It does not make any sense. I would propose that depending on the report which was made – the minority and the proposal for termination and the observations, the Attorney-General is able to give his opinion and the Parliament can pronounce itself.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I do not want us in the end to make our minister look so ugly given the document that we have. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a specific request has been made by the person who had been asked to present an opinion on this. What it means is that in his judgment, it is relevant for him to seek an adjournment. Why don’t we give him that benefit? It is in his judgment, which he has exercised judiciously that he needs this extension to do whatever he needs to do so that he can come back when everything is covered. That is his request. Do we have any solid reason not to allow him?

MR BYARUGABA: In addition, the hon. Okupa has kindly told me that there is a confidential report which is not in my possession which he will want to give to me. This is the more reason now I would require the adjournment so that I can read that confidential report and incorporate it in my opinion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let’s give the learned Attorney-General the opportunity to look at this whole thing, interface with the people concerned with this matter and then come back and give us his opinion as the Attorney-General. This matter is deferred to next week.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW ADDITIONAL JAPANESE YEN 4.918 BILLION (APPROXIMATELY US$44.306 MILLION) FROM THE JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) FOR THE COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS OF THE NEW BRIDGE ACROSS THE RIVER NILE AT JINJA PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am not sure where we are. The other one we have was presented the same way. What is the status of this one? Is it coming for the first time? What is the difference between the presentations of the two?

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion to authorise Government to borrow up to US$44.06 million from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to finance the completion of construction works of the new Nile Bridge at Jinja project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the honourable Member for West Budama South, PWD Eastern, Member for Bunyole, and Member for Bukoto. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport through UNRA designed a project for the construction of the second Nile Bridge. This is a very strategic bridge. All of us who have gone through Jinja, have seen the works that are taking place on the right side from Kampala to Jinja. 

The loan was approved by Cabinet in 2010 and by Parliament in 2011. The project commenced in 2013. The project is expected to be completed in October 2018. 

However, at the time of designing that project, the depreciation of the Yen against the dollar was approximately 12.4 per cent at the loan signing and 25 per cent during disbursement period. Therefore, the amount of money in terms of dollars that we required was less than what we had budgeted for when we were requesting for the first loan. 

There was also a second challenge which was the higher tender prices at the time of the conclusion of the tender evaluation in 2013. The approved tender price to complete the project amounted to US$129 million far higher than the estimated amount of US$96 million. 

In light of the two challenges, Government approached JICA for additional financing to cover the financing gap since financing from Government’s own resources was not readily available. This is in line with the commitment made by Government in the financing agreement section (4) sub section (3) that states that, “should the funds available from the proceeds of the loan be insufficient for the implementation of the project, the borrower shall make arrangement to promptly provide such funds as shall be needed”. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we found ourselves with a shortage of resources to complete the project and yet the project is ongoing and going very well. It is a strategic bridge as all of us know. 

The purpose of this request is to seek additional funds amounting to US$44.06 million so that we are able to complete the work that is already ongoing. You referred this issue to the Committee on National Economy and I have been informed that they are ready to report to this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This matter was brought to this House and referred to the appropriate committee. To kick off our debate, we will get that report and then I will propose the question for debate.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow additional Japanese Yen 5.706 billion from the Japan International Cooperation Agency for the completion of construction works of the new bridge across the River Nile. 

In the interest of time, I will only say that this matter was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 24 May 2017 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. The committee has considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report. 

However, before I proceed, I wish to say we have a copy of the report, which is uploaded on the iPad and signed by many members of the committee. We have signed minutes and a minister’s brief on the proposal and the loan contract, which I beg to lay at the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

MR BATEGEKA: Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has explained the project and I have 10 minutes only, I do not need to go through the project but suffice it to say this is an ongoing project. The bridge is nearing completion and some of you, colleagues, might have seen it. Let me just go straight to the observations and recommendations of the committee on this loan request.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that the additional amount required to complete the construction works at the new Nile Bridge is overstated by Japanese Yen 1.815 billion. This is because the cost of the Japanese Yen depreciation against the US Dollar is estimated to be Japanese Yen 3.077 billion, while additional cost resulting from higher bid prices is Japanese Yen 0.814 billion. This totals to Japanese Yen 3.891 billion, lower than what is being requested.

The committee recommends that Parliament considers approval of Japanese Yen 3.891 billion as additional financing required to complete the construction of the new Nile Bridge at Jinja.

Performance of the ongoing new Nile bridge project at Jinja

The committee observed that Japanese Yen 6.174 billion has been disbursed by end of June 2017 out of the original loan of Japanese Yen 9.198 billion, representing disbursement of 67 per cent with less than one year to end the project. This also implies that 33 per cent of the initial loan remains undisbursed. With 18 per cent of the time remaining for the project to end, only 43 per cent of the project has been executed leaving road and tourism infrastructure outstanding. The longer it takes to complete the project, the higher the risk of facing higher costs in completing the project.

The committee further observed that the project has faced a number of challenges, including delays in obtaining clearance of project goods by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), delays in issuance of work permits to foreign workers by Government and lack of skilled labour specialised in bridge technology.

The committee recommends that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) expedites work at the new bridge to exhaust the existing loan disbursements before the end of this financial year (2017/2018) and pave way for additional financing that is required to complete the construction of a new Nile bridge. URA should establish a clearance system for Government projects to reduce delays in implementation of projects.

Local content

The committee observed that the majority of the workforce (89 per cent) at the construction site is local. However, the highly-skilled areas, especially under the supervision consultant, are largely foreign. The committee further observed that the major inputs used in the construction are imported with the exception of the reinforcement bars manufactured by Roofings (U) Limited. This is in spite of the growing steel and cement industry in the country.

The committee recommends that Government develops technical skill transfer programmes in all projects contracted to foreign companies to facilitate development of a critical mass of local skilled-labour to be used to maintain the established infrastructure. In this case, consultants should provide onsite training/knowledge transfer to UNRA counterpart project engineers on the various supervision activities of the bridge works at no additional cost. Where local capacity exists in the production of inputs to any public project, Government should support local producers in meeting quality and other specifications required for supply to the projects.

Sustainability of the project

The committee observed that the funds provided to UNRA for the maintenance of road and bridge infrastructure is insufficient to sustain all projects in the country. This is in spite of development of Government initiatives such as the Uganda Road Fund. While the new bridge project at River Nile has a provision of constructing a UNRA maintenance office and will also provide for a real time monitoring station by the bridge maintenance team, the capacity of the directorate of operations under UNRA responsible for overseeing asset and road maintenance activities is limited.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government identifies and facilitates additional specific external technical and management training programmes for UNRA counterpart staff. Government should also provide adequate funding under UNRA, to the bridge maintenance team to ensure sustainability of the bridge infrastructure.

Role of local governments

The committee observed that the illuminated bridge will have unique aspects of tourism infrastructure such as restaurants, exhibition halls, souvenir shops, parking, etcetera. This implies that revenues will be collected from tourists and other users. However, there is no management framework in place to guide the operations of the tourism infrastructure and management of revenues that will be generated. 

The committee further observed that local governments are not involved in the monitoring of the activities of the project to ensure statutory requirements such as occupational health and safety, environmental and social safeguards and labour laws are met during project implementation.

The Government should, therefore, develop a strategy on how the commercial aspects of the new bridge will be managed to include revenue sharing among local governments (Jinja and Buikwe districts) and the Central Government from tourism receipts to ensure sustainability of the tourism infrastructure. UNRA should at all-times involve local authorities when monitoring activities of the project and provide access to the project sites as and when required.

Environmental concern

The committee observed that during the environmental impact assessment, noise was found to be above the prescribed standard. Further ecological impacts are anticipated, especially on aquatic life. The committee, therefore, recommends that noise pollution should be mitigated through tree planting along access roads. In addition, to mitigate against loss of aquatic life, the project should establish fish conservation ponds. NEMA should ensure that the contractor repairs the quarry sites to avoid run-off of the soil and other materials.

Project-affected persons

The committee observed that there are still outstanding issues of compensation for some project –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Speak on the microphone, please, and wind up.

MR BATEGEKA: I am about to complete. The committee observed that there are outstanding issues of compensation for some project-affected persons, resulting from disputes of ownership and provision of counter claims for rejections. The committee recommends that the Government resolves any outstanding compensation issues for which it is a party before end of 2017 to give way for full implementation of the project.

Conclusion
Mr Speaker, the committee therefore recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to JPY 5.706 billion from JICA for financing the completion of the new Nile Bridge at Jinja Project be adjusted downwards to JPY 3.891 billion, subject to the above recommendations. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. Honourable members, the question I propose for your debate is a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow additional JPY 4.918 billion, from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for the completion of construction works of the new bridge across the River Nile at Jinja Project (II), be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. Each member - Are you rising to move a motion?

4.38
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I am aware of our right to debate. I am also aware that anything that requires borrowing money is creating liability on the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I happen to have passed Jinja Bridge on Saturday. If there is any other visible Government project which is ongoing, it is that bridge – (Applause). The sooner we do the approval, the better. There would be no – in every loan we borrow, we shall always have issues. How I hope that we stopped borrowing. What a contradiction that we are in a borrowing and a developing country.

As a frequent flier of the Jinja old bridge, I am tempted to recite an old African Proverb that “Good resolutions are like babies crying in church; they must be carried out immediately.” When a baby is crying in church during a sermon, they carry them out immediately. I find the borrowing for this bridge as a crying baby. Therefore, I move a motion that a question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know I am supposed to exercise the Speakers prerogative on this matter. However, once a motion of this nature is moved, I am supposed to assess and put the question to that motion immediately. I have seen two Members rising and saying they want points of clarification, not debate. I will allow the clarifications and then I will deal with the motion later.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we approve this loan, there are a few issues that we should get clarifications on. I would like to request the minister to tell us what happened to the original plan.

We have observed that when contractors want to get money from Government, they come with many variations. You find the first plan has different figures and after they have worked and at the completion stage, they come with claims of variations. Honourable minister, you need to tell us what happened exactly with the first plan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to understand this. Did the chairperson say there was a change in the plan? I thought they said there was a variation arising from currency changes not the plan because the currency fluctuated and so, it caused a loss in the net. Was it an alteration of the plan?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Mr Speaker, when a contractor is given a contract, they usually have their plan after a feasibility study to find the exact amount of money required to complete a particular project; they cannot start work without a feasibility study. I would like to seek clarification from the minister regarding that.

Finally, we have seen Government borrowing huge amounts of money for road construction but there are monies we have borrowed but we have not seen work on the ground. For example, the Jinja Express High Way. I would like to request the minister to also tell us how far it has gone. This Jinja Express High Way was approved to reduce traffic jam within Kampala.

Mr Speaker, if you move from Kampala to Jinja, you spend more than four hours without leaving the city centre. Thank you very much.

MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, last year, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, visited that project, and while we were interfacing with the engineers, we asked the engineers whether the project had resources to accomplish the task. The engineers assured the committee that everything was okay. When we asked about supplementary variations, the engineers also assured us that everything was okay –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, I have listened and read. I remember,   I was part of the team; with my engineering knowledge that went to Jinja. Indeed, the project manager in his brief - I have the document - said they encountered a peculiar Geo-technical issue which was not anticipated in the design. They said it would need additional money. Therefore, is hon. Ochen, in order to say that the engineers said the money was enough when we have the document on record?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was asking for clarification. Honourable members, both of you visited the project site and interfaced with the engineers. Please agree on what happened. (Laughter)

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, we even have Members here who were with me. One of them is hon. Othieno and others –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just raise the clarification.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, that is what I am standing to raise. When we interfaced with the engineers, we raised these concerns. The grounds were coming from the usual phenomena in the country, where for every project, issues of evaluation arise, and this leads us to question what happens at the time the projects are planned. When we start implementation and before completion of a project, the question of evaluation is brought up by the same planners and engineers who worked on this document and estimated the cost of the project. Therefore, the explanation we are seeking from the relevant officers is: Where does this question of evaluation usually come from? Thank you.

MR SSEMPALA KIGOZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You know, this country is borrowing from left and right. The project in Jinja, in my opinion, is worth it and I think we must complete it. Unfortunately, I see a situation where the project designers have strayed from the normal way of doing things. 

In any project, there must be what we call a risk analysis. In this country, where one government has been in power for 30 years, we should be having a record of how things happen so that we do not have to keep on refinancing projects all time. The risk analysis should have actually anticipated the surges in international currency, so that we do not have to come back all the time and ask for more money. We must be orderly from now on. In future projects, we must not have these things happening again. Thank you.

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, I have unreserved support for this request and I agree with my colleague that we do not need to delay. However, I would like to ask the honourable minister to clarify on some issues. 

You requested for 5.7 billion yen but the committee, having reviewed your request, is recommending 3.8 billion yen. We do not want to come back here and make an additional request for that difference. Therefore, I would like the honourable minister to clarify whether he is satisfied with the observation of the committee that out of the request he made, about 3 billion yen accounts for the exchange rate losses and only 0.8 billion yen is needed to cater for the variation. I ask this so that once we approve the 3.8 billion yen, we are certain. This is because 2 billion yen is a very big difference and even when the committee made their observation, they brought this out. How do you explain that? Thank you.

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My point of clarification is on the compensations. On page 8 of the report, you talk about the right of way and then you acknowledge that there are compensation issues. However, in the breakdown on page 11 of the report, you have not allocated any money towards the issue of land. Therefore, are the compensations catered for? Are all the people living along the bridge compensated fully?

Secondly, I would like to find out about the initial completion date of the project, which was April 2018, which has now been pushed to June 2018. What guarantees do we have that between now and June 2018, the Japanese yen will not depreciate again and we come back here for more money? Thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is also clarification but just for the sake of future programmes and projects. 

The Committee on Physical Infrastructure visited that project when it was beginning last year. While there, we were assured that the team had already established the suppliers and they knew the quantities of materials needed. Therefore, the clarification I need from the minister and chairperson is: if the suppliers and the quantities of inputs required were known at that time, why didn’t the ministry or whoever was responsible do price hedging? You sign an agreement with the supplier and agree to the quantities to be supplied. They knew who was supposed to supply the materials and they knew the exact quantities of cement needed. Therefore, the question is: why didn’t they do price hedging? 

With price hedging, you sign a contract with a supplier saying that for the next five years, for example, this supplier will supply a certain amount of items at a certain cost. In this way, you would not keep coming back to ask for more money citing price variations. That is the clarification I am seeking. Why didn’t they hedge the prices at the time they entered into a contract with the suppliers because they were known at that time? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, even when you are doing those wagering contracts, there are provisions for international variation of currencies. This is because one cannot say that they are going to supply these items at $10 and when five years later, $10 is now worth $5, they expect to supply at the same rate. So, they always factor in especially international variation of currencies.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the Minister of Works and Transport. All engineering projects of such high technical nature require professional indemnity. A consultant who has designed the project and done the investigations is supposed to be liable at any time. We see that the variation is very big and yet we need this bridge. Therefore, can the minister tell us, first of all, who designed it and what they did to the contract?  

When we went to the site, Mr Speaker, the consultant told us that they had encountered terrible conditions, which they had not anticipated. Therefore, did the ministry give the consultant a penalty for misguiding them on that unanticipated issue? Therefore, I would like to know whether there was professional indemnity. If it was not done, the minister has to answer. Someone cannot just misguide this House, and this is a lot of money. I do not know whether there was professional indemnity. Thank you.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple question. The committee is advising that the local governments or communities around should be involved in caring for the bridge and in sharing of the resources. In this regard, they mentioned Jinja and Buikwe districts, but they left out Jinja and Njeru municipalities, which are self-accounting local government entities too. Are they aware of that?

MR AOGON: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister and the committee. My question is on the difference. If the loan was estimated at around ¥5.8 billion but the committee recommended a less figure and yet you know we are dealing with a matter which is highly technical, which normally comes with bills of quantities, who then takes charge of the difference? It is like having a car that uses rims of size 13 but one chooses to force rims of size 17 on it; is that possible?

I think, Mr Speaker, this shows that there is a problem. When we have a reduction from ¥5.7 billion to an estimated ¥3 billion, it shows there is something big there. This is not church work but engineering, and we are going to the water.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, one of the Members said that the team that was working on the bridge project encountered some turbulence in terms of geotechnical difficulties. Didn’t they know what they call, “contingencies”? In any contract, there is a contingency fund; it is embedded in the figures of any contract. Do you have any copies of these contracts so that we review them together and I show you what I am talking about?

Mr Speaker, the last question is: are you not coming back here tomorrow to borrow more Japanese yen to help stabilise the economy? I say this because there was a similar problem sometime back. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before this report came to the Floor - I wish the minister and chairperson could listen - we had just received another supplementary loan request for Kampala Sanitation Programme Phase II of US$ 26.85 million. I think that is how this one was brought here too. 

Mr Speaker, before any project is undertaken, a feasibility study is done, it is costed, and projections are even made. You have just stated that even in the agreements, there is usually a plus or minus to cater for the unseen circumstances. If my memory serves me right, what we approved for that project in 2011 was US$ 125 million. Today, we are being told they need an additional US$ 47 million. That is a variation of almost 40 per cent. The question is: has foreign exchange depreciated by 40 per cent? 

This is a very pertinent question because even in other procurements, if any contract variation takes place and it is more than 15 per cent, they must seek authority, and if it goes beyond 25 per cent, they have to abandon the procurement. However, here is a situation where they are asking for a supplementary of 40 per cent of the original value. This, to me, is mind boggling. 

I think the committee was only being diplomatic when they said that it should be reduced by Shs 2 billion. They did not want to just throw the report out because if there was to be any supplementary, it should have been much less - not more than 5 per cent - to cater for those eventualities. The issues that have been raised regarding geological problems should have been addressed during the feasibility study with the consultants involved.

Therefore, I personally will not support this colossal amount of money to be given as supplementary. Yes, there could be need for a supplementary but not to this tune of 40 per cent of the total original cost. 

However, the problem again goes to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they delay the execution of some projects and loan approvals. We have received a report from the World Bank saying that out of the loans that are approved, there is over Shs 28 billion which has not been utilised yet we continue to pay interest.

Therefore, in the end, by the time we start executing the projects, inflation and exchange depreciation will be brought on board. The problem again goes back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; why do they always delay to execute projects? Most of the projects we are getting are resulting into a big cost to this country and that is something this Parliament must stand to reject. 

If need be, let that project be delayed so that we can do a thorough study to see whether we really need the 40 per cent of the total cost. I do not think it can be that much because projections were made. Were these projections made to say that by this year, this is what would be needed to be added?

Mr Speaker, I think we have a problem. We should not approve this loan request because it is going to cost this country heavily. They have just brought the other one for the Kampala Sanitation Programme; I am trying to get the original cost of the original loan that was also approved under the African Development Bank (ADB) so that we are able to know. This goes back to ADB; do you recall a loan we passed here for the –(Interjections)– You can shout that we are delaying the bridge but at what cost? 

We approved a loan request around 2008 for 29 landing sites. Five years down the road - I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip who was the then Minister of State for Fisheries. She came to Kasilo to commission one of the projects. However, out of the 29 landing sites, only nine were completed though those that had been fully completed were only five. She refused to commission it saying, “I cannot commission this type of work; this cannot be what the money was meant for”, and that was the end. Up to today, there has been no remedial action. It is just there like a white elephant.

Therefore, we should not encourage these types of things. I wish all the ministers could act the way the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa did. Even if nothing has been done to rectify the situation, she objected and said “we cannot allow this type of robbery in this country.” Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.05
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2010, I happened to interface with a team of engineers from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) who were doing the feasibility study on the bridge that is being talked about today. 

Mr Speaker, I am bringing this up because recently, we were with a delegation from the Ministry of Works and Transport, inspecting the road construction from Gulu to the South Sudan border through Acholibur. From the team that did the feasibility study on the project, we got a variation of Shs 25 billion on a project of Shs 68 billion. The explanation we got that time was that the company contracted to do the feasibility study never saw any bridge requirement on the road and that is why all the swamps were not considered, resulting in that variation.

Mr Speaker, if accounts were taken for this kind of engineering play that is done by the technical team in the ministry, that is a loophole used to extract money and at the end of the day the taxpayers pay the price. What I am saying is that this loan request should be scrutinized because I am not sure, from my engineering perspective, that the variation can be up to that tune if a real feasibility done and it was costed. You can look at the play between the Japanese yen and the dollar and then you look at how the Ugandan shilling has trended; these things cannot add up, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

5.08
MR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, yesterday the International Monetary Fund (IMF) warned Uganda Government against having unsustainable debt. On the one hand I do appreciate and realise that it is important that we borrow money, particularly for development projects. However, how does Government intend to balance this need for borrowing funds for development projects and the danger of having a debt that is way beyond our ability to repay as the IMF did point out yesterday? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.09
MR ELIAS ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I know you ruled that in these contracts there are normally international variation standards, and I agree with you. However, they cannot be to the extent that we are seeing here. The contract’s value, as my friend here said - what the finance ministry was originally applying for - constitutes about 40 per cent. However, when you look at what the finance ministry requested vis-à-vis what the committee considered, there is also a variation of about 32 per cent, which is consistent with the original variation.

Mr Speaker, since there are indicators that at the planning stage, we may not have done a very good job, the variations should be consistent with the factors that underpin them. In this particular case, we should have looked at the exchange rate fluctuations and any other factors apart from that.

I am not yet satisfied that a good job was done especially given the fact that today we have a lot of technology that should aid us in planning and in contemplating what the future is likely to be. I have not got evidence that this was done.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, our technocrats especially in these projects need to do a better job. We also need to be very conscious as Parliament so that we do not simply approve these variations. Variations of this significant percentage are a result of weak and poor planning. Thank you.

5.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is simple. For most of these projects, we are not time conscious at all and that is problem one. 

Secondly, we are talking about Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU). However, when you look at this report here, you realise it is saying that we only imported about 2,550 tonnes of iron bars only for enforcement. This means we are donating. Uganda, a borrowing country, is donating to foreign countries. I do not know whether we are benefiting or not. 

Can you imagine Uganda buying cement for this project from Hima Cement Factory in Kenya yet in Uganda we also have the same factory? That means we are giving our factories a vote of no confidence and preferring other factories or people to provide services and inputs for us. This is where I have a problem. When it comes to employment, at the top level, all the 17 workers are foreigners and out of the 38 engineers, only 16 are Ugandans, meaning we are not doing well. 

Therefore, coupled with what my colleagues have said, I would say that we should not approve this loan request because it is not helping us as a country at all.

5.14
MR MUYANJA MBABALI (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues. It is very important to know exactly what we are talking about. We are talking about a steel bridge, which means it is not a normal concrete bridge. We are talking about a steel bridge, which is suspended. If they have encountered ecology problems, that is one issue. There is also the issue of steel prices, which went up world wide by 75 per cent. When we talk about variations, we also know that there is the devaluation, which has been going on globally, of the yen and the shilling over the period of the same contract.

If we consider the value that this has for Uganda, as this is the only bridge that connects this side to the eastern side of Uganda; and if we put into account that the already existing bridge has got cracks and it is due for closure, this matter is very important and must be given priority. The request must be passed as soon as possible regardless of the nitty gritties, commas and full stops. 

We shall have a problem shortly when the only bridge we have will fail to afford –(Interjection)– No order! (Laughter)– The matter of this bridge must be given top priority before we come to a standstill because Uganda has no bridge to cross the River Nile. I rest my case.

5.16
MR PAUL MUSOKE (NRM, Buikwe County, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we discuss this very important subject regarding this bridge, I know there may be many shortcomings with the report, but if you have been fortunate to go via the old bridge, you will know that we need a new bridge today and not tomorrow. 

This Parliament should look at this as a learning experience. I have been examining this report and I have established the source of all these variations. The disbursements that were supposed to be made in 2010/11 came in 2013/14, and reason was the delays in getting the right of way. Secondly, the Government’s contribution did not come at the right time. All these, together with the depreciation in the currency, pushed the cost up. 

However, we have no choice; we need to get this money to have this bridge sorted. I, therefore, pray that the honourable members consider this request as a matter of urgency so that we can have this bridge done. Thank you.

5.18
MR OLEGA ASHRAF (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. We have been borrowing monies from the World Bank and other lending organisations but what we lack is the mechanism to monitor how these monies are being used. Money is borrowed and is simply given away without it being followed up. As far as I am concerned, this is the only bridge that links us to the eastern side of this country, and it requires good workmanship.

Secondly, we have our committees. If the committee cannot do a thorough job, why give it to them? I thought that they would investigate thoroughly and see as to how these monies came about. If they did not do it, let us do it from this House. So, Mr Speaker, in my view, since the work is going on, let us approve and set a mechanism to monitor how the funds are being used. Thank you. 

5.19
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I have noted that there are issues in regard to the extent of variation. There are also issues in regard to the consistency in the exchange rate difference and how it compares with the proposals in the loan.

Mr Speaker, two weeks back, the Committee on Budget together with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development visited NYTIL. While there, we picked interest in knowing what was being constructed at the bridge and we saw very good work going on. I would not wish that this Parliament be the one to frustrate the efforts being done at that bridge. 

Given the circumstances and what I have already mentioned in terms of variation and exchange rate difference, I would like to implore this House to deal with the substance, which is securing the bridge now, and then the rest of the formalities can always be done as we go along. Thank you. 

5.12
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, we should not abdicate our responsibility. We should not contradict the objectives of the bridge with our oversight role - How much money is got from outside, whether it is got correctly or not, in terms of wastage, inflation, variations upward; it is almost a common problem. 

If you follow any negotiations done by our Government, you realise that they do not negotiate downward like most of us do when we go to buy things in shops; they negotiate upward all the time. It is us, Members of Parliament, to check that. We must work to ensure that we save money for the future. We have many other things, which need money; for example, sorting out this issue of the bridge at the source of the Nile requires another bridge to be put up. Instead of wasting money like this through negotiating upwards, we should have built another bridge between Pakwach and the South Sudan border – (Interjections) – Yes, we need a bridge in Obongi.

Mr Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we should agree that the bridge in Jinja should be built but we must reject the wastage of money through these upward negotiations. Government should go back to the drawing board, get money from the right source and use the right method to save money urgently. If you come with a better deal tomorrow, we shall approve it. Otherwise, I request you, honourable members, not to pass this one, though this does not mean that we reject the construction of the bridge; it must be constructed but we should stop the wastage. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want the bridge but not the loan; how do you complete the bridge?

MR FUNGAROO: We are sure that this particular loan is not the only source of money for us. Our President is on record telling us that we have done many things with our own money. He one time said that Uganda built the road from Olwiyo to Kitgum with her own money. Why don’t we get our own money to build that bridge in Jinja; why?

Mr Speaker, the point here is not that we should not construct a good quality steel bridge. We have Steel Rolling Mills here; why don’t you produce steel from here using our engineers? We do not support wastage. Save money for a better future for Uganda. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion which I could not deal with earlier. However, before I ask the minister and the chairperson to clarify, I would like them to group these issues because they are quite many but about the same thing. There are only about four clarifications you need to make and I hope you have summarised them that way. 

Honourable members, there are two things that we need to deal with. One, this bridge should have been completed next month, but they have extended the completion by two months, to June 2018. Whatever method we are going to adopt, it must not involve a process that will exceed the period that is required for them to complete the bridge. This is because if it does, we will invite other unforeseen complications. That is what will happen. If they have said that the extended period will end in June, it means that whatever method we adopt must be able to facilitate that; otherwise, another request is coming, which we do not want. 

5.26
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, the request by Government to borrow for this additional financing came to this House on 24 May 2017. As a committee, we kept on asking for information from Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). Later, we were fortunate to get an end of year JICA project status report for 2017, which highlighted clear financing gaps. 

When you look at page 12 of the report, I did not read the details but the figure we recommend is arrived at scientifically. The ¥3.891 billion is properly categorised and the source of that information is the JICA project status report. I do not want to talk for the minister, but I would like to believe that at the time the minister was making this request in May, he did not have the advantage of this information, which came later. 

While interviewing the witnesses, we realised this gap; the request by UNRA was lower than the request originally submitted on this Floor by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, this was because the time had also changed. Therefore, it was not our cut but it was about getting the right information, and we proposed the new figure of ¥3.891 billion, arising from bidding price gaps and also foreign currency variations. Thank you.

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, on our part, as I said before, we have the difference of the amount of money that they are looking for and it is on account of two factors. 

The first factor is the exchange loss. By the time we went to borrow from the Japanese, the exchange rate was ¥82 per US dollar. At the time of implementation, it was ¥112.  This resulted into a difference of almost ¥30. That is why the speed of handling our decisions, as the Speaker said, is also very important, especially when we are dealing with issues to do with foreign exchange. Therefore, that exchange loss is what we are accounting for. 

The other factor was that at the time of bidding, what came out was that the bids that we received were higher than the amount of money that we had borrowed from the Japanese. The difference was around ¥800 million. Therefore, those are the two factors we are talking about.

One colleague asked why we do not hedge. When you are doing these projects, for example this bridge, go to Hima Cement Factory and tell them to give you cement at a fixed rate, probably at a certain amount of dollars, for five years. That is not possible because they are in business. Therefore, there are areas, which are beyond our control. However, the Ministry of Works will assure you that we want this bridge to be completed. The problem has been the foreign exchange loss, which was almost beyond our control. Thank you.

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good job that they did. I will talk about two or more issues that have been raised. 

We have taken up the issue of the environmental concerns and we shall deal with all the concerns, of course, working with sister organisations, especially as regards the issue of planting trees as noise absorbers. This is because we are part of the green effort on our roads. It is a matter that we are taking up seriously in the ministry. Therefore, this is not going to be an isolated case. We are going to make sure that trees are planted in the areas around the project.

There was a concern raised about tourists and how they are going to be managed. We are going to work with the Ministry of Local Government and the local governments in the areas to see that this particular matter is addressed because it is a gap that has been identified. 

It is true that some project affected persons have not been compensated. However, like it was brought out in the report, it is as a result of conflicts. However, we are trying to handle those issues and we shall bring them to a logical conclusion. 

Regarding the time that the bridge is going to be completed, I would like to assure this august House that we have mounted a lot of pressure on the contractors. For some of you that ply that road, you will know that it now takes over three to four hours, especially in the evenings, for one to cross that section of less than a kilometre from the Jinja roundabout up to the Nile Breweries Factory in Njeru Town Council. Therefore, we need this bridge and we are mounting a lot of pressure. Our supervision has been hyped up to ensure that the bridge is completed. We have agreed with the contractors that if all goes well, by the end of June we shall have the bridge.

About the issue of the express highway, the process of getting the contractors to do the job is at the tail end. We are working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development since this is a Public Private Partnership (PPP). Government has to obtain some money and also get contractors who are able, in terms of skill and money. Therefore, very soon the advertisement will be done. However, we have not yet got the loan, like it was earlier stated by a colleague. As Government, no one has asked for this loan yet. 

Mr Speaker, about the issue of professional indemnity, it is true that when you are undergoing such projects, this issue is put into consideration. However, the honourable colleague that raised this matter knows very well that when consultancy is being done, at times it becomes difficult. 

When they are doing their geotechnical studies, for example, it is done by sampling. When they are sampling, they may find that this particular place is soggy or rocky and when you go to another place, which was not sampled, you may find a different condition. That is a natural matter that is beyond the control of the owners of the project, the Government and the professionals that do the job. When the matter arises, you sit and deliberate. 

As we speak today, that issue was resolved and the money that we are requesting for today does not concern the peculiar geotechnical problems that were found, because that issue was solved at our level as a ministry. The money is being sought because of two problems: the issue of the exchange and the gap that arose from the time the loan was sought up to the time the contract was signed. Therefore, the issue of geotechnical problems was sorted out with the consultant, the contractor and we, the owners of the project. 

My appeal is that colleagues pass this loan request because we need the funds to complete that bridge – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, which figure are you talking about? There is ¥4.9 billion and ¥3.9 billion from the committee. 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, we sorted out the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the committee. The figure is ¥3.891 billion. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the request that is in the motion is for ¥4.918 billion. The figure that is now being recommended, with concurrence of the Ministry of Works and Transport and the committee, is now ¥3.891 billion. I do not know what the equivalent is, so I am going deal with the figures in Japanese yen. 

Honourable members, I will now put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow additional ¥3.891 billion from the Japan International Cooperation Agency for the completion of the construction of works of the new bridge across the River Nile at Jinja.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EUROS 37.1 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT (AFD) AND EUROS 35.0 MILLION FROM KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) OF THE GERMAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE MASAKA – MBARARA POWER TRANSMISSION LINE

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion to authorise Government to borrow up to €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) and €35 million from Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW), the German Development Bank, to finance the Mbarara-Masaka Transmission Line Project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? It is seconded by the Members from Bubulo, Nyabushozi and West Moyo. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the current restructuring reforms in the electricity subsector have registered positive results in the country. The total installed electricity generation capacity increased from 595 megawatts in 2010/2011 to 850 megawatts in 2013/2014.

The growth in the overall installed capacity in recent years has largely been due to additional capacity at Bujagali, with 250 megawatts in 2012, and also includes 100 megawatts of thermal power that is on standby for any eventuality and the other sources of energy. The total grid electricity supply increased by 7.1 per cent in 2012 from 2.737.8 GWh to 2.32.8 GWh in 2013. 

Despite the registered progress countrywide, the current generation sites and transmission lines have changed little over the last 40 years. The Uganda electricity subsector is currently characterised by insufficient generation and transmission capacity to meet the demand, which is growing steadily. The present electricity situation in southwestern Uganda is characterised by voltage at 11kV and 33kV nodes under normal loading, and under normal loading it is as low as 2.9kV and 23.0kV respectively. Therefore, this loan comes in to bridge this gap. 

The location of the project: This will be the construction of the transmission line between Masaka and Mbarara, located in the southwestern part of Uganda. It has a number of components which include transmission lines of 400kV works; extension of substations 220kV works; supervision and monitoring; contingent land purchase; compensation and wayleaves to avoid the delay of the project. 

Mr Speaker, you sent this request to the Committee on National Economy and they are ready to report to the House so that we can consider the approval of this facility and allow this transmission line project to take place. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this matter was referred to the committee and we ask them to report before I propose the question for your debate. Chairperson, please take a short time.

5.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development and €35 million from KfW, the German Development Bank, to finance the Masaka-Mbarara transmission line. 

The committee considered this request and we have the following documents to lay on the Table: 
    a) the signed report of the committee; 
    b) signed minutes; 
    c) a brief on the proposal; 
    d) the loan agreement; 
    e) the financing agreement; 
    f) the project implementation plan; 
    g) the resettlement action plan; 
    h) the environmental and social impact assessments; and 
    i) appraisal and feasibility documents. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR BATEGEKA: In the interest of time, I will move right to observations and recommendations of the committee because I have only five minutes. 

The first observation is that there is slow implementation of electricity generation and transmission projects. The committee observed that Government has prioritised the implementation of electricity generation projects in the country, for example Karuma, Isimba and others. However, the evacuation of that power is low and there is need for a lot more investment in transmission and distribution. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) should ensure that for new and upcoming power generation projects, land for evacuating power from these plants should be prepared well in advance and timely implemented to ensure that the built power plants are fully utilised. This will save the country from incurring losses as a result of paying for power that is not consumed.

Mr Speaker, the point we are making is that there is a risk of beginning to pay for capacity instead of the power being evacuated and used during demand. I will skip some of these because the report is uploaded. 

There is a low disbursement rate among UETCL financed projects. The committee recommends that Government should ensure that all proposed electricity projects presented before Cabinet should be scrutinised to ensure that preparatory phases such as feasibility studies and compensation of project affected persons have been carried out before they are further submitted to Parliament for their approval. 

The point I am making here is that the major reason for slow implementation includes acquisition of land for project sites and the pathways for the pylons. There are issues there and we saying that these must be scrutinised early. There are various recommendations we have put here including acquiring a central utility corridor, etc.

About wayleaves compensation, the committee noted that financial requirements for wayleaves compensation continue to escalate as new projects are embarked on. The committee recommends the following:

    a) UETCL should complete the wayleaves acquisition process before engagement of the contractors. 
    b) Government should consider acquiring a central corridor. 
    c) As a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should enhance the capacity of the evaluation department, which is now thinly manned, to cope with the demand for land evaluation, especially for infrastructure development projects.

Mr Speaker, some of these issues that touch on land need thorough discussion with a view to coming to an understanding on easing ways of implementation of Government projects.

About dependency on consultants, the committee observed the high dependency on consultancy services in conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission line projects by UETCL. Despite their successful implementation of several electricity transmission projects, there has been slow progress in translating these successes into building sufficient capacities within UETCL to conduct feasibility studies and design electricity transmission projects. Over dependence on consultancies and contractors poses an agency risk, especially where the consultant’s objectives do not coincide with UETCL objectives, which tend to cause delays in project implementation.

The committee recommends that UETCL scales up plans to build the capacity of UETCL staff, especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity transmission projects. This is in order to cut down the exorbitant amount of project funds spent on consultancy services towards conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission projects.

Mr Speaker, some of these issues are very important but they are to do with the way aid is designed. We engaged UETCL and even the finance ministry to have a further engagement on how we can build this capacity across all sectors, not only in the electricity sector. Colleagues, I think you will read the other observations, in the interest of time. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) and €35 million from Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW) of the German Development Bank to finance the Masaka–Mbarara power transmission line project be approved, subject to the above recommendations. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is that a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) and €35 million from Kreditanstalt Fur Wiederaufbau (KfW) of the German Development Bank to finance Masaka–Mbarara power transmission line be adopted. That is the motion that I propose for your debate.

Honourable members, you will notice that this is a bit different from the previous one where the committee recommended a different figure. Here, our own committee that has interacted with the other agencies has now recommended that we approve this request in the terms requested by the Government.

I am going to put the question, if you allow me, because you can see the difference between the previous loan - Let me just finish what I am saying. There is a big difference between the previous loan, which had issues, and I allowed a debate despite a motion that was moved that I should put the question. This one is different and therefore, I would like to put the question to this.

5.54
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): There are serious issues, Mr Speaker, and I request you to allow me to start my submission.

Mr Speaker, it is good to take electricity to Mbarara and to approve this loan request. However, first ask yourself, is there no electricity in Mbarara now? If it is there, is there no line taking electricity to Mbarara? It is there. Where is the source of the electricity for which a line is going to be constructed using this money? It is the Karuma Dam, which the President told us would be built to solve the power problem for northern Uganda. If you travel north, you see the power lines being constructed southwards instead of going northwards. What kind of injustice is this?

If this loan request was for a power line from Karuma northwards, if this money was to take the power line to West Nile, a place which does not have power like Mbarara or Masaka with power from the Owen Falls Dam built in 1954, it would be fine. Therefore, Mr Speaker, based on equity, justice and fairness, this loan request should not be approved to take power to Mbarara when Mbarara has power and West Nile does not have yet Karuma was built for this purpose. (Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Karuma power station is coming with three to four lines: One line to Kawanda, which is now being constructed; the other to Olwiyo and onto Arua, which is also being constructed; and another to Lira, which is being constructed. Therefore, it is not true that the lines are only coming to Kawanda.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, I thank my brother for giving this information. I think he should remember that he is talking to a person who is in Uganda, a person who travels on this road all the time. 

The constructed lines we are seeing from Karuma are running southwards. There is no line going to Olwiyo. Which Olwiyo are you talking about? I came from Lira last week and I followed this but saw that there is nothing being done there. Honourable members and people from the north, we should never accept this kind of injustice in our time as we are seeing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, the Speaker also comes from northern Uganda but we do not want a situation where we are using that only as the premise of our debate. I would like the minister to give a timeline of the power lines that are going this side and the other so that we start seeing - 

MR D’UJANGA: If there are Members from Lira, they could confirm that the construction of the power line to Lira is going on now. Actually, we are doing more. We are constructing the power line from Aswa to Gulu, Gulu to Lira, Gulu to Olwiyo, Olwiyo to Pakwach, Nebbi and Arua. The money was approved by this Parliament - US$ 100 million. We are also constructing power lines from Karuma to Olwiyo. 

The only problem we have had, which we are solving within Government, is that there has been a delay by Uganda Wildlife Authority because they are asking for compensation, and we are dealing with that. However, it is the same contractor who is building power lines to Kawanda and Olwiyo.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. 

I interacted with the contractors working at Karuma and they told me that they were contracted to make metal poles only from Karuma to Kawanda. Regarding the power line going to West Nile, Lira and Gulu, they were told to put wooden poles. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is: why don’t the contractors put the same metallic poles like the ones from Karuma to Kawanda? Why are you using different kinds of poles? 

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that that information was got from a wrong source. As a matter of fact, we are running away from wooden poles. We had wooden poles from Tororo to Lira if you recall, but of recent, we have replaced all of them with steel. All our main transmission lines from 132,000 volts up to 400,000 volts will be steel, like what you see on your left as you come from Karuma to Kampala.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would not like us to go into – 

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to put it on record that Obongi County does not have electricity and it deserves electricity. The honourable minister, who is my brother, talked to us in December 2016 saying that taking power to Obongi needed just six months but we are now in March 2018. 

We cannot believe you. If you have not fulfilled your promise of taking electricity to Obongi, how can we believe you when you tell us that we should wait because there is power going from Karuma to West Nile and other parts of northern Uganda? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all here and these commitments are made on record. It is a matter of time. On Sunday we were coming back and I saw what I saw. (Laughter) So please, let us leave this matter at that.

I put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development and €35 million from KfW of the German Development Bank to finance Masaka-Mbarara power transmission line be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chair of the committee and honourable ministers. Honourable members, I have matters that I have deferred and they include the debate on the US$ 200 million loan facility from the PTA Bank. That is coming on Thursday. Come ready to conclude this debate and we take a decision. Item No.8 is coming back tomorrow for debate - that is the Public Accounts Committee report on the matter that has been raised - as well as item No. 9.

Honourable members, there are other issues. This is to give notice to the minister responsible for refugees - the motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. That motion is coming tomorrow. Therefore, the responsible ministers should be here and I am giving you advance notice. 

There will be requests by Members to introduce private Member’s Bills and they are three. There is one on trusts. They will come on the Order Paper tomorrow under business to follow but they will come up on Thursday. 

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.  

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 March 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

