


Wednesday, 31 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to remind you that today, 31 march 2021, is the closing date for the Inspector General of Government (IGG)’s declaration - you have until midnight to fill the declaration online, if you have not already done so.

Secondly, I would like to remind the Government that the curfew continues to have an impact on the economy, in particular the tourism industry. When the lockdown was instituted, the airport was closed but since October, the airport was reopened.

It is important to take into account that a number of flights come in after 9.00p.m. For instance, the KLM Royal Dutch Airlines arrives about 11.00p.m.; Ethiopian Airlines arrives about midnight and takes off at 2.00a.m. Turkish Airlines arrives at about 2.00a.m. and takes off at about 3.00 a.m. Therefore, it means that the travellers and those who are conveying them are breaching the curfew guidelines. I would like to appeal to the Government to review that situation.

Thirdly, there are just two matters of national concern. I invite Hon. Ababiku.

2.27
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance - the non-delivery of an ambulance donated by the Ministry of Health to Adjumani District at the peak of the spread of COVID-19, last year. However, up to now, the ambulance has not been delivered. 

Adjumani District, being a border district, handles many emergencies. I request the Ministry of Health and Government to tell us the whereabouts of our ambulance that was donated to us and the reasons for its delay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I believe the Minister of Health is here. Okay - they have a matter on the Order Paper; I hope they will come. In any event, we would like them to explain to the people of Adjumani what happened to the ambulance donated to them, as a border district, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Please give us an answer by Tuesday next week.

2.48
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the implementation of the registration of marriages at URSB. According to requirements by URSB, only returned Form F from duly licensed and gazetted places of worship are registrable. This should be filed on a monthly basis. In addition, each of the marriages being registered must pay fees of Shs 35,000 for the Ugandan nationals and $35 for refugees.

The matter that I rise on is in regard to fees and the non-compliance by most of the licensed bodies – the churches. I recently wanted to know the status of my marriage; I went to URSB and I was very sure my marriage was registered - 12 years down the road. However, I was shocked that my marriage was not registered. The explanation I got is that where I got married from, they failed to file the returns. When I asked them, they said, “You know we have been through this insurgency, the Shs 35,000 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute; it is an important point.

MS LUCY AKELLO: And the fees are really a lot. As Akello Lucy, I can afford the Shs 35,000 but many of the villagers out there may not. I pray that for this period, where some of these places have failed to file marriage returns, that a waiver be given to them – and a window given - so that they are able to file these returns and then they are cautioned and helped to start filing these returns because this that may affect many people in the future. This is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is required to come to this House and update the country on the status of registration of marriages countrywide. Depending on how he answers, then we can discuss the issue of the waiver. We expect an answer from him in a fortnight. Thank you, very much.

I shall be amending the Order Paper to allow a response on the USMID programme and the Clerk will inform you as we move.   

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE    (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table:

    1. The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority Report for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    2. Report of the Auditor-General on the audit of the financial statements of Agriculture Credit Facility for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    3. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Prisons Authority for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    4. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda National Bureau of Standards for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    5. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    6. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Capital Markets Authority (CMA) for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    7. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Ware House Receipt Systems Authority for the year ended 30th June, 2020;

    8. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Wildlife Authority for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    9. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, (NUSAF III) Project, Inspectorate of Government for the year ended 30 June 2020;

    10. A repot of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Hotel Tourism and Training Institute, Jinja for the year ended 30 June, 2020, 

    11. A repot of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Lotteries and Gaming Authority Board for the year ended 30 June, 2020.

    12. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Projects, CEDIP component 2-5, IDA Credit Agreement CR 52690-Ug Project, IDP 130471 for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    13. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda National Council for Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    14. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Communications Commission for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    15. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project, (CEDIP) project ID130471 for the year ended 30 June 2020;

    16. A report on the Audit statement of expenditure summary of Bank of Accounts and their disbursement request for the resource enhancement, the accountability programme for the financial year ended 30 June, 2020;

    17. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Revenue Authority Corporate Expenditure for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    18. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Inspectorate of Government, DANIDA project upgrade for the year ended 30 June, 2020;

    19. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statement of Treasury operations for the year ended 30 June, 2020, report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity for the year ended 30 June, 32020;

    20. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Post Limited for the year ended 30 June 2020;

    21. A report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance for the year 2020.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, I do not know whether you have the report on the Tax Appeals Tribunal. 

MR MWIJUKYE: No, I do not.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, all those reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts and Committee on Commissions and Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.
 
REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO SDR 72.3 MILLION (SEVENTY-TWO MILLION
THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS) (EQUIVALENT TO USD
99.56 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) AND USD 30 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) TO FINANCE THE NATIONAL OIL
SEEDS PROJECT (NOSP)

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a request from Government to borrow up to SDR 72.3 million, which is equivalent to $99.56 million from the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) and $30 million from the OPEC fund for International Development to finance the national oil seed project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

However, honourable minister, a few days ago I was discussing with the members of Parliament from the Karamoja region; they said they would be happy to see a loan to deal with the water problem in Karamoja, which is part of the reason there is insecurity.

MR BAHATI: We are working on a project to extend water for production in Karamoja. I am sure that in a few months we shall be able to consider it.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance. Thank you. Let us go to the ministerial statements.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT IN FULFILLING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE LOAN AGREEMENT OF $150 MILLION FROM THE WORLD BANK, WHICH IS MEANT TO FINANCE THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (USMID)

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT)    (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Centenary Robert Franco, MP Kasese Municipality last week raised an urgent question on the delay by Government in fulfilling the terms and conditions of the loan agreement of $150 million from the World Bank, which is meant to finance the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) which Parliament duly approved. He also noted that some beneficiary municipalities notably Kasese were grappling with infrastructural decay. 

It is true that Kasese is one of the 8 municipalities that were added to the benefitting municipalities under USMID additional financing.

The programme was declared effective in April, 2019; to run for a five year period at a total programme funding of $360 million; of which, $25 million is a grant.

The programme is scheduled to end on 31 December, 2023. This is a programme for results. Therefore, funds are disbursed after a performance assessment to determine the funds to be allocated to each local government.

The first disbursement of funds from the World Bank was effected on 28 June 2019. Due to the delay in disbursement of funds, which came only two days before the closure of the Financial Year 2018/2019, funds were moved to the Financial Year 2019/2020 - last financial year. In effect, Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Financing’s (USMID-AF) first year of implementation was moved to the Financial Year 2019/2020.

Due to the absence of funds in the Financial Year 2018/2019, most of the programme activities were those that did not require large amounts of funds. They included preparing the local governments, especially the new municipalities; the additional eight municipalities – of which Kasese was one – to enable them be ready to absorb the new project.

Preparatory activities involved disseminating programme implementation arrangements, training municipality staff, identification of eligible infrastructure subprojects and commencement of procurement for engineering design of identified subprojects.

Procurement of services for engineering designs, environmental and social assessment of identified subprojects commenced in August 2019 and contracts were signed in January 2020. Engineering designs commenced in February 2020 with fieldwork. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the COVID-19 pandemic struck and was followed by a lockdown. This caused a delay of engineering designs for about five months. This delay has affected work in all the 13 programme cities, nine municipalities and eight refugee host districts across the board.

However, the implementation status is as follows:

    1. All engineering designs were completed in February 2021 and procurement of civil works for the designed subprojects was done for the 13 cities and nine municipalities in seven clusters.
    2. Civil works are ongoing in Arua, Jinja, Soroti and Mbale cities and Tororo Municipality. These are works that were fast-tracked, as designs were available from the previous programmes.

    3. Contracts have been procured and signed, for civil works in Mbale, Tororo and Busia. Works will commence soon. These are new subprojects identified during the second phase of USMID.

    4. For Lira City, Apac and Moroto municipalities, contracts are with the Solicitor-General for clearance. As soon as they are cleared, contracts will be signed and work will begin.

    5. Procurement has been completed and due diligence on best evaluated bidders for civil works in Gulu City, Kitgum, Kamuli, Lugazi, Kabale and Ntungamo municipalities has been completed and contracts are due for signature.

    6. Procurement for civil works in Mbarara City are still under administrative review, following an application by one of the bidders.

    7. For Kasese, Hoima and Fort Portal, two requests for administrative review were raised, so the contracts could not be concluded. The administrative review was escalated by an application to PPDA, which was dismissed without merit. However, one of the bidders still applied to the PPDA Tribunal for appeal. Around mid this month of March, the bidders withdrew the appeal to the tribunal and procurement will now proceed to contracting.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the delays have been largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the lockdown in the country, which has affected engineering designs and to some extent, delays in procurement, occasioned by administrative reviews. However, this has been addressed by carrying out engineering designs for all subprojects that will be implemented over the programme period. By doing so, each local government has now ready projects that can proceed to procurement of civil work contractors as soon as they receive funds.

The above delays notwithstanding, we are still on schedule to complete and achieve the programme objectives by the programme schedule closure date of 31 December 2023.

Madam Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Centenary for the intense lobbying he has done to draw our attention to the special needs of Kasese Municipality, resulting in its inclusion in the USMID-AF.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think you do not have a supplementary question, hon. Centenary.

3.09
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the elaborate statement in regard to USMID.

I would like to propose that one of the reasons why we are having those delays is the clustering. This clustering system also edges out some of the would-have-been competent firms, especially the local ones. The moment you cluster the procurement, it means that only the international firms, which have financial muscle, are the ones which are going to bid. If you realise, the tribunal is handling cases of foreign firms fighting in Uganda for contracts, yet if it was not for the clustering, we would probably have some local firms also competing favourably.

Therefore, in future, we should be considerate and avoid the clustering. If we approved this loan in 2019, it means we are already paying interest and the money to service those loans, which are not even being utilised. We, as new municipalities, for instance, will be penalised for not performing yet we have not been given an opportunity to even do the ground breaking. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any response, honourable minister, to an end to clustering?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we have carefully studied the issue of clustering versus individual municipality tendering and we have found that the biggest advantage is found in clustering. Clustering means you take four or five benefitting municipalities in a given area or region and they tender for services.

First, I will start with the disadvantage. If you do not cluster and you have given a relatively small amount of money, like US$ 20 million, to a municipality like Kasese, you will get no company with an amount of experience and ability to deal with the intricate nature of municipal roads that require special attention. No serious company will be interested in a US$ 20 million business.

However, if you cluster and have five of those municipalities and you have US$100 million, you will be able to interest the Sterlings of this world - the big players - to come and do those roads to the standard that we want. Small money attracts small players. When you are doing municipal roads, you need big serious players to be able to deal with the intricate nature of those roads. That is the rationale, Madam Speaker.

When I enumerated the reason for delay, I did not talk about clustering as one of the problems because it is not. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No. 4 -

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE THE PAYMENT OF EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS TO FORMER MEMBER OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION

3.13
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have mentioned, I am on instructions by Hon. Muzanira to present this motion to Parliament.

This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the payment of emoluments and benefits to former members of the presidential commission, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Legal Notice No.5 of l980 established a three-man presidential commission comprising H.E Justice Soul Musoke, H.E Justice Polycarp Nyamuchoncho and H.E Wacho Olwal as the titular head of state; 

AND WHEREAS paragraph 3 of Legal Notice No.5 of l980 vested all privileges, prerogatives, functions and exemptions enjoyed or exercised by the former President of the Republic of Uganda under the Constitution or any other written law in the Presidential Commission, effective l2 May l980;

AWARE that the Presidential Commission served the country from 22 May l980 until l5 December l980 when the country organised a national election and handed over power to the elected President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote; 

NOTING that section 3 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, Cap. 259 empowers Parliament, by a resolution supported by not less than half of the Members of Parliament, to authorise the payment to a former holder of the office of the President or the Vice-President of an allowance not less than two thirds of the salary of the President or of the Vice-President respectively; 

NOTING FURTHER that in 20l0, Parliament enacted the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act, which, under section 29, provided for the continued application of section 3 of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, Cap. 259 to Presidents and Vice-Presidents who ceased to hold office before the commencement of the 1995 Constitution; 

RECOGNISING that former members of the Presidential Commission held the Office of the President of Uganda and are entitled to the benefits enumerated under the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, Cap. 259 through a resolution of Parliament each financial year;

CONCERNED that payment of benefits to the former members of the Presidential Commission was last made in 2017 through a Resolution of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 

1. 	Government fulfills its obligations and pays emoluments and benefits of the following former holders of the Office of President under the Uganda National Liberation Front to their respective estates: 
(a) 	H.E Polycarp Nyamuchoncho
(b)	 H.E Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol and 
(c) 	H.E Saul Musoke

2. 	Government makes provision in the Budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for payment of emoluments and benefits of the three members of the Presidential Commission to the tune of Shs 4.5 billion implying a sum of Shs 1.5 billion for each of the three holders of the Office of the President under the Uganda National Liberation Front Government.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded.

(Motion seconded.)

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, the justification or explanation for the Shs 1.5 billion for each member of the presidential Commission and the timeframe of payment to the three-way shared presidency under the UNLF Government members, as earlier indicated - H.E Polycarp Nyamuchoncho, Saul Musoke and Wacha Olwol.

Madam Speaker, Legal Notice No.5 of 1980 put in place a shared presidency in Uganda. In particular, paragraphs (2) and (3) of the legal notice provide thus: “There shall be a Presidential Commission consisting of three persons appointed by the military commission, which in that capacity shall be the titular head of state.”

Subject to paragraph (4), all privileges, prerogatives, functions and exemptions formerly enjoyed or exercised by the former President of the Republic of Uganda under the Constitution or any other written law, are hereby vested in the Presidential Commission with effect from the 12th day of May 1980.

Narration
In the case of His Excellency Nyamuchoncho, the death of Captain Carol Busingye, who was a daughter of H.E Nyamuchoncho, was the one taking care of the former first lady. Captain Carol Busingye had brought the former first lady from Rukungiri to Kajjansi on Entebbe Road. This was in a bid to bring the former first lady near her. The former first lady is in Kajjansi even up to now.

Captain Busingye died in a helicopter crash on 11 February 2021 while flying an army helicopter. The death of Busingye precipitated the urge to ask for a resolution since she was the breadwinner. Therefore, her death gave rise to the resolution at this point in time.

In the case of the other two members of the presidential commission, both the families and their Excellencies, Saul Musoke and Wacha Olwol, equally need help because the two families have equally lost sons and daughters who were the breadwinners. Good enough, there is a law under which this Parliament is empowered to help and it is the law under which this motion has been brought.

Secondly, the length of time passed since the last resolution. The last resolution, Madam Speaker, was passed four years ago. It is worth noting that the applicable law, the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act, does not specify when or how many times a resolution of this kind can be passed. It is, therefore, as and when conditions of the affected former holder of the office of the presidency demands. 

If, for example, in January there was a need for specified eye operation for such an affected family, a resolution can be passed to get the money. If in June, there was another need for heart surgery, another resolution can equally be passed.  Therefore, since the last resolution was passed four years ago, paying Shs 800 million, the family has used it diligently and the money is finished hence precipitating this timely resolution.

Thirdly, the persuasive seventh schedule in the Act of emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act 2010. Ideally, this law is only applicable to former holders of the Office of the President who held office under the 1995 Constitution. 

The operation of this schedule, therefore, informs the choice of this timely resolution because if one looks at the routine monthly rights enjoyed under this law, one is bound to conclude that asking for money under the resolution after four years is surely justified. Therefore, each and every coin here captured is provided for under this law.

National historical reasons under this law 

Madam Speaker, last week, this Parliament celebrated 100 years of its existence. These three people played a role in the development of our Parliament. The three were the ones assenting to the laws passed by the then Parliament called the National Consultative Council; then chaired by the Speaker, Prof. Rugumayo. Therefore, we are picking from what they built. 

The three led this country at a very difficult time where one brain could not do it. That is why Uganda had to bring two judges of the highest court then, Justice Musoke and Justice Nyamuchoncho and Wacha Olwol, equally an eminent citizen, was added to the two to form the three brains in one to lead Uganda at the time.

The narration is also presented in figures in item 2, which I may not read but it is attached to the motion. I beg to move.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleague for this motion. However, I would like to report to the House as follows:

In as far as the law is concerned, The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister Act, 2010, does not cater for those past leaders. His Excellency the President gave a directive, through Cabinet to the Minister of Public Service, to make sure that all those former past leaders are given an ex-gratia payment. The ministry has done this effectively. 

I would like to report that the former presidents; Sir Edward Mutesa, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, Idi Amin, late Yusuf Kironde Lule and late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa have all got Shs 1 billion shillings ex-gratia payment; including the family of the late Okello Lutwa.

The three former titular heads, late Justice Saul Musoke, Joel Hunter Wacha Olwol, late Justice Nyamuchoncho got Shs 333 million each because. The three shared the Shs 1 billion. All those three have now died and so, I do not think it will be appropriate to leave out the others. 

I do not know whether the law is going to cater for former heads of state who died. They were given an ex-gratia payment through a directive by Cabinet. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Nevertheless, let us have the motion done, we give it to you and then, you advise us on how to move. I do recall that about a month ago, a Member raised here the issue of Mrs Madina Amin being homeless. Let us finish the motion first and then, you can tell us about her as well.

3.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. I would like to thank Hon. Tumuheirwe for moving it.

This motion touches the hearts of the people in Uganda and the three who have been mentioned. When we look at the Justice Polycarp Nyamuchoncho, Saul Musoke and Wacha Olwol, this is a representation of Uganda.

These people provided leadership at the time when Uganda needed them most during a crisis where leadership could only last for 68 days. This was when a president could say, Entebeewooma, literary meaning, “Power is sweet”. That is when Uganda came up with a formula to clear this leadership crisis. That is when a shared presidency was put in place. This consisted the three Ugandans we are talking about.

Just like hon. Fred said, the families are struggling. Part of the payment was made. It is only courteous that we do the needful and ensure that the rest is given unto them. The law provides that Parliament can pass a resolution to authorise payment to them. This is provided for in section (3) of the Parliament (Remuneration of Members) Act.

I beg to second. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion was tabled without information that these former leaders had already been taken care of. Our decision today will not apply retrospectively. If we take a decision today, we will expect the minister to act on it. 

Therefore, are we proceeding well to continue with this motion leading to a decision that these leaders should be taken care of and yet, the Government has already done so? There was no information and we now have it.

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish the motion and then the minister will table the documents if he has them. 

3.29
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rise to second this motion. I would like to thank hon. Betty, represented by hon. Fred, for bringing this motion to the House. Madam Speaker, I also thank you for finding space for this motion on the Order Paper. 

It is true that the three gentlemen offered service to this country. It is also true that they have families. Even if they are all dead, the families continue to live.

The general principles in our Constitution provide for pensions and gratuity to public officers who have served this country. It is not in dispute that the three gentlemen provided to this country good leadership at the time when the country was experiencing instability.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that when these three excellences led the country, they are the ones who organised the elections in 1980. If you have paid attention to some of the pictures in our gallery that show that we are celebrating 100 years, you will see the three. Behind them is His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. It can then be a fact that those three mentored the leader. We owe the country we have today to them because they prepared a leader who is leading today.

This was also the first time we saw a peaceful transfer of power. At that time, it was possible for them to be selfish since they had arrived on top of the country. However, after organising the elections, they peacefully handed over and President Obote took over for his second Government.

These families, as you have heard, the late pilot who died recently in a helicopter crash – May her soul rest in peace – was the one taking care of the widow. Similarly, we have survivors of the estates of the late Justice Saul Musoke and late Joel Wacha Olwol. They are suffering. 

This House is clothed with powers that as and when we feel that the facts are right and they should be held, this House can pass this motion.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore you that if you interacted with some of these families and saw how they are suffering, then you would realise that they need to be supported.

On the Shs 300 million figure that the minister has just mentioned, if you divide it by over four years, it barely comes to about Shs 5 million per month for them. If you go even deeper on the per capita basis to see how the survivors are living, you will find that we need to support them at this time. 

I would like to wind up by saying that we have leaders that continue to serve us today, but it is very bad when they leave behind their families to suffer. This is a bad example. Wacha Olwol’s family lives in my constituency in Erute County South. I interact with them and I know the problems they face. I kindly request the minister and Members to support this motion overwhelmingly so that they benefit. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

3.37
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion and I would like to thank the mover for bringing a proper motion before this august House.

Uganda has progressed because of the contributions of both past and present leaders, which are indeed very fundamental. Each of these leaders did what they could do to bring Uganda to where it is today. It is, indeed, sad that the bread winner to the former first lady, Mrs Nyamuchoncho, Capt. Carol Busingye, died in the helicopter crash while on state duty. 

On behalf of the people of Kioga – who I represent in this august House – and my own behalf, allow me convey my condolences to the bereaved family of Capt. Carol Busingye. Carol’s demise brings into perspective the state of families of past leaders, especially the titular heads of state that ruled this country under the Presidential Commission. 

Three weeks ago, as I travelled from Amolatar to Lira via Amach, I glanced at the home of His Excellency Wacha Olwol and it was quite dilapidated. I also had the opportunity to interact with the family members. I could see right away the deplorable state that the home of the former leader was in. These presidents can still be catered for. The motion before this House, once adopted, can enhance the welfare of these titular heads of state.

I wish to invite honourable members to support this motion and may it please you, Madam Speaker, that this motion passes. Thank you very much. 

3.37
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for thinking about the dead who have served this country. I would like to support the motion. 

As you are aware, we are blessed with large families in Uganda or Africa. Some of these members, who served our country, probably have over 15 children each. The money awarded to them in instalments is very little and when it comes through, you find this large family needs to share it. 

I urge this Government, as they want to support the past leaders, to give them something in advance so that it serves the deceased who are no longer with us. Thank you very much.

3.38
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion.

I do not think we need to discuss the importance of this motion and why we should respect our past leaders, regardless of their style of leadership. I know at every stage in our transition, we have experienced disaster upon disaster. Let us not judge our leaders, particularly now that they are not with us. I, therefore, would like to urge this House to have sympathy for their families – the children and particularly the spouses of the former presidents.

However, what I would like to ask the Minister of Public Service to clarify to me whether the Shs 1 billion per former President was actually given. Madam Speaker, you remember that when the President directed that a sum of Shs 30 million be given to Members of the first Parliament, the late Adoko Nekyon appealed to you saying that although he was a Member of the First Parliament, he never got the money. When the matter eventually came out, they found that they had given him less than what the President had directed. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to clear this. If Shs 1 billion was given, did it actually arrive in the hands of the family? We would like to know because we could have probably budgeted for the money and all of us are assuming that the money reached, when it actually did not. Can we first find that out? 

Secondly, when we are catering for aged people, it is important that we focus on pension and medical insurance because if you give somebody a lumpsum, it is the children or relatives going to manage this money and we do not know how far this money will take them. It is important that we take care of these people through pension schemes and medical insurance so that they are able to regularly attend to their health and also have some little money to facilitate other things in the home. I beg to request for that clarification, Madam Speaker.  

3.41
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know, as a country, that we have had problems in changes of government, but I would like to thank this Government for the fact that despite those problems, we have moved ahead. As we speak, past leaders are being supported in one way or the other. There could be situations where probably they are not supported the way they should; that is why such a motion is coming.

I support the motion but let it also be very clear to these families that when such an amount of money is being given to them - we hear of Shs 1 billion, which is shared between the three families. They should know what that money is meant for. I want us to reach a point where we do not have to keep coming to Parliament to plead for each of the families. What is due to them has to be very clear. 

I also want to be unkind to some of the family members. If the Government is very clear on certain things and you have it, I do not think we have to come back here and start to feel like you have not been supported, when actually, you have squandered the money. However, overall, I support the motion. Let everything be very clear right from the beginning so that the family knows and know that it starts here and ends here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. First, on humanitarian grounds, we should be able to see to it that as these widows age, they are helped. These are old women, grand mothers who in most cases, people tend to neglect and ignore. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Public Service, the finance ministry and the Government to take this seriously.

I just want to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Public Service, who was trying to object - I do not know whether he is aware that in 2018, after Parliament had passed a resolution for the payment, the Government was reluctant to pay. It took the families of Andrew Musoke and Nyamuchoncho to take the Attorney-General, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service and Permanent Secretary for the finance ministry to court. 

The court ruled that:

    a)  An order of certiorari is issued quashing the letter or the decision of 8 May 2017, by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Public Service directing the non-payment of the applicant.

    b) An order of mandamus issued directing the first respondent, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Public Service and third respondent, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to pay the applicants the said money, as per the resolution of Parliament.

    c) Court declares that the estates of the deceased former holders of the Office of the President of the Republic of Uganda are legally entitled to receive payments of the benefits under Section III of Parliament or the Remuneration of Members Act. 

    d) The application is allowed with costs against the respondents. That the decretal sum and cost shall from 8th month of the non-payment of all months due and attract the interest of 15 per cent per annum on that fraction left unpaid. Given under my hand and the seal of this honourable court on the 5th day of October 2018.

Therefore, I just want to know - because - they tried to appeal but this order was upheld. Therefore, we want to avoid this situation when we pass this resolution today and you are taken to court. These are just three families. The widows should really be taken care of. I just wanted to bring it to the attention of the minister on whether he is aware of that. I could not go into details but the minister may interest himself.

We do not want to see that happen. These are three families. If you do not want to go further, you can limit it to the widows. I do not want it to be taken like we do not regard these old women or because you want to treat them like that because they are women - is that why you want to treat them that way? Madam Speaker, I just wanted to give this information to the minister to have a human heart and see how we can take care of the former first ladies. 

It will be embarrassing when these old women pass on and they are brought here to lie in state. How much money will you spend on them, if they died in the state they are in? You have heard the circumstances of how those who were taking care of them passed on, especially the two who crushed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member who brought this motion and my colleague, the Minister, for the explanation that he has given. However, I am looking at a situation, where you are applying your mathematics of the past leader getting Shs I billion, and because these three people were acting, you divide the one billion amongst them.

Madam Speaker, I represent workers. If you send me on a mission as a Member of Parliament and give me per diem, as my entitlement per day, even though we go as five Members on the same mission, you will pay the same to each. 

Therefore, to make the equation and to respect those people who did that wonderful job, each should be given Shs 1 billion. That means the widows should be given their fraction and be treated equally. When all the three were acting as President, they were waking up in the morning, dressing like a president and taking action like a president. Therefore, the business of dividing into three does not apply. That is what I would wish to see being rectified.

3.49
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I stand here particularly because Mr Joel Wacha was our neighbour, when I was in primary one. We used to run through his compound on Mugwanya Road in Entebbe going to Lake Victoria Primary School. There were just two houses next to the school. He was a parent but we realised at the time that he was still someone very important in the Government and he continued.

I stand to support the motion and I think it is only fair that past leaders, having sacrificed so much leading the country selflessly should be rewarded, even if these benefits are post- humous. If he had been alive today, he would probably be in the late 90s or close to 100 years. It is very difficult at this age to have bargaining power. 

Considering that at the time when he had the capacity, he put in all for the nation, as his colleagues did, I think the three of them should be respected and given those amounts of money. It is unfair to give a third of what others get as a whole. I so submit, Madam Speaker.   

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members who have presented their views. However, I would also like to inform the House that about a month ago, when the Deputy Speaker was in the Chair, this issue came up and we were directed by the House to present a statement. Our statement is ready and it would give a clear picture of what happened.

First, the categories are many. We have nine former Presidents, five former Vice-Presidents, four former Prime Ministers, three former Speakers and two former Deputy Speakers. These were all not catered for by the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister Act, 2010. If we come out and say that we are only picking the three, the others will also open a Pandora’s Box.

Madam Speaker, the impression created by this motion was like Government has not done its part but I would like to say that some of these families have had challenges even in sharing the money. We have channeled some of the funds to the Administrator-General’s office because of the challenges like the big sizes, among others. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the House that we present this statement tomorrow so that Members can have a clear picture of the obligations Government has really undertaken. There was an issue from-(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I rise under a procedural matter. The minister is talking about bringing a statement in response to what was raised in this Parliament last week but we have a motion before us and we want the minister to first dispose of this motion, then he can come up with that issue because that was there before.

The minister is also aware that this motion has been on the Order Paper for a very long time. Definitely, he ought to have communicated to Parliament that he was already aware of this particular motion and that he was now going to bring a statement, which would take care of all the issues raised.

The very fact that he was not able to tag this motion to the other question that was raised, as a matter of procedure, I would like you to guide whether it would not be procedurally right for the minister to first dispose of this matter.

Then, the Shs 1 billion shared between three - he is now talking about the complication with the Administrator-General, which again raises greater fear that although we are being told that the money was released, it is possible that it was never released.

Why is he raising the issue of Administrator-General, on money which had already been given, and many of them had their spouses still alive. So, what happened?

Madam Speaker, we would like this matter to be dealt with, disposed and then, the minister can come with other issues. I beg to seek your guidance.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I had sought the indulgence of the House to give us tomorrow to present this statement because it is elaborate enough. It was given to us by the House, which plans for the business. As a ministry, we were given the assignment and our statement is ready.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you did not tell us that you are ready because if you were, you would be on the Order Paper. It is difficult for us to guess who is ready and who is not. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Thank you, for the opportunity to make this short intervention. When Parliament passed this motion, it was at a time when the budget had already been approved and it created some difficult situation for us, to look for resources for people who served this country at a time that we did not have it.

I think that probably, consulting with my colleague, the Minister of Public Service, it would be better for us to come and amend the Act and include those that are supposed to be included, so that we plan properly - because recently I met hon. Hajj Moses Kigongo who was a Speaker, NRC. He told me that him and Rt Hon. Butagira were neglected by the law that enumerates the privileges of Speakers.

I think it is important that my colleague hon. Karubanga; we work on amending the law, bring it here, so that we plan properly for these past leaders and sort it out once and for all.

Madam Speaker, we will consult with our colleagues and see the fine way of doing this rather than basing on motions every time we have to sort out this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in any event the motion is here, it has been presented and debated. I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKEER: Hon. Karubanga, I was also going to tell you that one of the former Speakers is about to sue the Government and it is a long time since we talked about these matters. 

I do not know when you can bring the law because this Parliament is about to end. I do not know when you can produce the Bill, take it for first reading and go to the committee. I do not see it happening before August or September.

You can bring your statement tomorrow but in the meantime, we have adopted this motion. Bring the statement, we shall look at it and give further guidance. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2019

3.59
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to state that I am withdrawing the National Health Insurance Bill, 2019 from Parliament under Rule 139 of our Rules of Procedure.

This is to bring to your attention that on 22 August 2019, the National Health Insurance Bill, 2019 was tabled on the Floor of Parliament for the first reading.

Following this, His Excellency the President held a meeting with the Ministry of Health and other key stakeholders from the private sector, the National Social Security Fund and the Insurance Regulatory Authority to confirm whether all key stakeholders were in consensus.

However, it came out that some key stakeholders from the private sector were still not in agreement with the provisions under part 5; contributions and benefits in the Bill and yet these were the core objectives of the National Health Insurance Scheme, to pull resources from various categories of the population and ensure cross subsidies.

As a ministry, I am requesting the House to allow us withdraw the Health Insurance Bill, 2019. The ministry, in collaboration with other key stakeholders, is undertaking further consultations and analysis of the premium, based on the interim actuarial study conducted by the Insurance Regulatory Authority in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, 2019.

We expect to re-introduce this Bill when this outstanding issue is concluded, to ensure universal enrolment of the population of Uganda under the National Health Insurance Scheme. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to draw your attention to the proviso “subject to the approval of the House”. So, let us hear the Members’ views on your request. It is subject to the approval of the House.

4.03
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I think you have read the rule correctly; it is subject to the House’s approval. I object to that withdrawal. The minister has stated the reasons - that the stakeholders were not on board. Of course, stakeholders cannot agree to everything. 

This matter went to the committee and all the stakeholders were consulted. Even before bringing the Bill here, my presumption is that the ministry consulted with the stakeholders in the process of producing this Bill. They were consulted; that is how the Bill ended up here. Unless the minister is telling us that they simply sat in the ministry and decided to bring the Bill, which I do not think was the case. A committee of Parliament is a place where all these Bills are processed and interaction with all the stakeholders is done.

Madam Speaker, I am here to say that Ugandans need insurance. We would not even be talking of the previous case of a former First Lady - it would have taken care of her ailments - if we had this in place. So, for the minister or Government to come at this time and say they are withdrawing, I think is being unfair to Ugandans. 

We should not be driven by profit-motivated stakeholders to derail and delay Ugandans from having medical insurance –(Interruption)

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague for giving me an opportunity to give this information. 

The information I want to give is that when this Bill was sent to the committee, thorough investigations and consultations were done. The committee interacted with a total number of 30 stakeholders. For this purpose, I want to inform the House that all the stakeholders that the minister has talked about interacted with the committee, including the Insurance Regulatory Authority, National Social Security Fund and others - a total of 30.

The committee reviewed relevant literature of about 17 pieces, including our Constitution and other literature. The committee also held regional consultations in southwestern, eastern and central Uganda and went ahead to do benchmark visits in some counties of Kenya which are doing well in this field, like Machakos, Kitui and Nairobi. In general, consultations were made.

I want to say that this was the hope that Ugandans had that even the poor can be assisted to access health services. We know that people are frustrated. They do not have good income and calamities can befall this country or even sickness in the family.

Madam Speaker, this is the information I wanted to give my colleague. I do not support the withdrawal of this Bill at this particular moment. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the information that the House has received puts to rest the concerns which the minister has stated, unless she can list for us those stakeholders who were not consulted. If the committee has listed 30 stakeholders whom they met and even held regional meetings, I do not know who those stakeholders are that the minister is referring to.

I know the minister is just one year old in that office, but I can see the former minister of that docket, hon. Opendi. Maybe she is the one who consulted and the current minister was not there. We would be able to benefit from them.

Madam Speaker, I thank the Members who have given information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from hon. Mukitale and then the former minister. If we agree, we do not need to say too much.

4.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The previous business regarding the senior citizens’ welfare is part of social protection and by and large, the health insurance scheme is also intended to ease some of these challenges. I would want to believe that Government is still committed in terms of having the will to tackle the challenges of all citizens in matters of health. 

This matter has been in Parliament for over 10 years - the debate about the National Health Insurance Bill. The two previous parliaments discussed this. So, when the Bill came, it gave hope to citizens that actually, Government is finally serious, and also looking at our neighbours who have already implemented this, it gave us hope.

It has already been stated that as long as the Bill has gone to the committee, it is at another level of consultation. If anybody did not do enough consultation at the initial stage of the Executive, the right place now is the committee. Even when we come back on the Floor of the House, after the committee reports the Executive can still make an input.

I am wondering why Government has had a change of heart. We are giving a mixed message - whether Government is committed or not. It cannot be now a question of some private sector stakeholders raising a complaint. I would like to plead with the minister and Executive that please, do not send a wrong signal and mixed message to citizens that Government is not after all committed to health insurance covering all the citizenry. 

Let whatever submission is pending – Actually, I would like to pray, Madam Speaker, that you put the committee on the Order Paper so that they report their findings so far. From what we have heard from the committee, a lot of work has already been done. So, it is at that stage when we can weigh.

Since there is a proviso that the withdrawal is subject to the plenary decision, I pray that the minister concedes. Actually, direct that the committee reports and at that stage, after listening to the report, the Executive can come in with whatever value addition they want to make. I so submit, Madam Speaker.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERAL DEVELOPMENT) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I spent eight years as Minister of State in the Ministry of Health. For most of this time, the Ministry of Health – by the time I joined in 2011 - they had tried to have a national health insurance scheme. It took us time to push this to where finally we were able to table the National Health Insurance Bill. 

There was wide consultation, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that now we are moving back because some people are complaining –(Applause)– because some insurance companies feel they were not consulted. At what point should they have been consulted? We consulted widely in the Ministry of Health and when we tabled this to Cabinet, we went back, consulted again widely and brought the Bill here. I believe the committee also consulted widely.

Madam Speaker, while we are providing healthcare to citizens and talking about free primary healthcare, we all know that most of the Ugandans still spend money from their pockets. Actually, the out-of-pocket expenditure is close to 40 per cent, which is quite high.

Therefore, this health insurance would go a long way in curing that situation by removing this under the table payment that is currently happening and somebody walks into a health facility and is able to get health services anywhere. We also know that the Government does not have adequate resources to put into healthcare. Therefore, with the small contribution from the citizens, we shall be able to meet all these health expenditures that the Government is supposed to meet.

Therefore, I would like to propose to the House that since the committee has gone a long way in consulting on this matter with all these stakeholders that you are talking about, I pray that we move on. Uganda is the only country, if I am not mistaken, that does not have health insurance in this region.

Ugandans have gone ahead to have their own small health insurance schemes at community level. This has started and we have a case study in Kinkizi, in Luweero and others where people come up with small monies that they put to be able -(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Hon. Sarah Opendi, for having your facts on the - the information I would like to give is that the Minister of Health has indicated that she is withdrawing because of complaints in part five. Part five is talking about contributions and benefits; can the former health minister and now minister for minerals, throw some light -

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the reason she is giving is weak. Therefore, the person with experience in the sector can also -

THE SPEAKER: Do not go there.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to request my colleagues to concede and we move on and if we reach a particular clause where you have objections, then we shall be able to listen and make adjustments accordingly.

Otherwise, it has taken a long time and we need to move and have a national health insurance in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. I put the question that the Bill be withdrawn?

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I direct you to go to the second reading. If the minister is not ready, can the chairperson report?

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I know that the House has been waiting for this, and I have taken note of all the Members’ concerns. I would like to beg that you allow me to go back and come tomorrow - (Interjections) - so that we can put our heads together. 

I know Hon. Opendi has been in the ministry for quite some time but there are a number of things that have since changed. Colleagues, I request that you allow me come tomorrow - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, your decision - which you have just made that we move to the second reading and that the chairman reports - cannot be challenged in the manner the minister is attempting. Is she, therefore, in order to challenge your decision the way she is doing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter has been on the Order Paper for a long time. A lot of work has been done and you know why you brought the law. The objectives are clear. If you are not able to state them, let me invite the chairman to move the second reading and then we move.

I am comforted that if there are objections, when the Bill goes to assent, the President has the opportunity to change. Therefore, let us proceed.

4.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I read the Bill, I would like to alley anxiety concerning section 5; can I just read?

THE SPEAKER: Do not go there. No.

DR BUKENYA: Okay. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Just move for the second reading.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I stand here to present a report of the parliamentary Committee on Health on the National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019. I have a copy of the committee report and copy of the minutes of the different meetings that were held and I beg to lay them on the Table, before I read.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, first move the motion for second reading. If it is seconded, then you present the report.

DR BUKENYA: I beg to move that “The National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it seconded? It is seconded. Proceed with your report.

DR BUKENYA: I will proceed with the report after I have laid the minutes as evidence earlier.

Madam Speaker, I am going to read an abridged version since we have copies on the iPads. I will not go through the whole report. The National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019 was read for the first time on Thursday, 22 August 20l9 and referred to the Committee on Health for scrutiny. 

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution on Rule l85(c) of the Rules of Procedure, the committee scrutinised the Bill and now reports.

Madam Speaker, I am going to read a bit of the background and skip the objects and the methodology.

According to the Ministry of Health (2018) Mid-Term Review Report for the Health Sector Development Plan 2015/2016-2019/2020, Ugandans spend 41 per cent of household incomes on healthcare and this lies within the catastrophic health expenditure zone for above the l5 per cent recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO). Thus, Uganda’s population is ranked highest in out-of-pocket costs for health in the East and Southern African region.

In line with Sustainable Development Goal 3, Target 3.8, many countries have introduced National Health Insurance Schemes as vehicles for achieving Universal Health Coverage through accelerating equity of access to health services and ensuring financial risk protection of the masses through reducing out of pocket expenditure on health core.

National health insurance schemes are internationally recognised as springboards for attainment of the fundamental right to health through ensuring availability, accessibility, acceptability, affordability, equity, equality and quality health services. 

Despite Government’s effort to increase the number and quality of public health facilities in the country, they are still ill-resourced to deliver on the demands that would come with the introduction of National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).

In October 2018, Uganda signed the Astana Declaration on Universal Health Coverage, which affirmed the tenets of Primary Health Care (PHC) that should be anchored in the National Health Insurance Scheme. 

This law is thus a great intervention in providing inclusive health coverage for the vulnerable people in cushioning them against the high cost of health care offered by expensive private health-care providers.

Although private health insurers and community-based health insurance providers serve to cushion their members from adverse effects of high cost of health in some parts of the country, they are not regulated. 

Owing to the above, the Government, through the Ministry of Health, recognised the need for a legal framework on health insurance as a complementary mechanism for financing health care and increasing equitable access to quality health services in Uganda, hence the National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019 was introduced.

As a financing mechanism, the law, once assented to, would achieve the pooling of resources, subsidisation of treatment of the poor by the rich, harmonisation of the prices for healthcare throughout Uganda and increased absorption of the health workers in the Health Sector.

The objects of the Bill are known in the Bill, which was received. The methodology is also outlined and the list of stakeholders interacted with is also outlined. 

I will now proceed to the general observations and recommendations where we found that the Bill was in compliance with the Constitution, international and human rights frameworks, it ensured multi-sectoral collaboration and it is well aligned with the National Development Plan (NDP) III. It is also well linked with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We recommended that the Bill be passed into law since its provisions are in direct agreement with various national, regional and international instruments and protocols.

We learnt from consultative meetings with community health insurance. We also recommended, as a team, that given the critical complementary roles of the private sector, the Bill should provide for the complementary role of the community health insurance in the national insurance law.

I will go to the specific observations. 

6.1 Definition of key terms, which are listed as accreditation, beneficiary, child employer, ingredients, quality assurance, health care provider and indigents. 

We recommended that all key terms used in the Bill should be properly and appropriately defined in order to avoid ambiguity. The terminologies existing in other legislations that have not featured in the Bill should be harmonised to avoid misinterpretation. 
The regulations issued by the minister should feature aspects of quality assurance from the quality of care.

On membership of the scheme, the committee recommended that the Bill should stipulate the aspect of membership with a view of having all citizens and residents insured under the scheme.

On functions of the scheme, the committee recommended that important functions of the scheme such as registration of members, designing of healthcare packages and issuance of guidelines should be included in the Bill.

On appointments of the board of directors of the scheme, the committee recommended that the relevant stakeholders should nominate persons for appointment to the board of the directors. The private sector should also be represented. The board membership should be limited to nine members. 

On the functions of the board, the committee recommended that the functions of the board of the scheme must be clearly outlined in the law and in the charter of the board.

On the powers of the minister, the committee recommended that the powers of the line minister should be limited to the appointment of the board and provision of policy direction. The chief executive officer of the scheme should be appointed by the board.

On multiple stakes in the scheme management, the committee recommended that the scheme should be hosted under the Ministry of Health with a multi-sectoral composition of the board to cater for all state stakeholders. The revenue in the reserve fund shall be invested as recommended by the board on approval by the minister.

On the need to regulate the private sector in health service delivery, the committee recommended that Government should put in place adequate regulation for private players in health and strengthen the public health system, which remains the first call for the vulnerable poor.

On the uncertainty of coverage of the informal sector, the committee recommended that membership to the scheme should be compulsory to all.

On contributions and premiums, the committee recommended that actuarial valuation or studies should form the basis of determining the initial premiums for purposes of affordability and fairness and in compliance with the existing legal frameworks.

On the selective accreditation of health facilities, the committee recommended that all health service providers to the scheme should be subject to accreditation to ensure quality and eligibility fairness.

On benefits packages of the scheme, the committee recommended that the minister should make regular modifications to the healthcare packages in the schedules that were attached based on the periodic valuations and availability of resources.

On the inconsistencies in the penalties for offences, the committee recommended that uniformity of penalty for late payment should be administered across board to ensure fairness among contributors of the scheme.

On the suspension of healthcare providers, the committee recommended that the misconduct of an individual should not be visited on an entire health service provider.

In conclusion, I propose that the Bill be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Health. Let us have your comments. 

4.29
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the report and the Ministry of Health for this Bill. 

My understanding is that we are coming to accept that there is nothing for free because when we look at the services we get from health and also in other sectors, there is expenditure that is attached to it.


Through this Bill, what we are trying to achieve is to ensure that even the poor are able to access better services. Therefore, I support the committee’s recommendation but we need to come up with the nitty-gritties; mechanisms on how we can pool our resources together.


I would like to cite the example of taxation where people are supposed to pay taxes but you find that it is the most capable people who try their best to evade payment of taxes. Now that we are going to pool our resources together, if this Bill becomes law and we want to achieve our target, I think the mechanism should be clearly explained so that we can have our input. 

Madam Speaker, we have different levels of health services but we also still face challenges at the parish level. I am seeking clarity so that I know how the people at the parish level are going to benefit from this mode of services or scheme. This is because the Ministry of Health is phasing out the health centres II, a very big gap we are battling with. 

We have been relying on the support given by volunteers - the village health team members. However, they still face a lot of challenges. People are asking about allowances. How is this new structure going to be manned when we begin to implement such methods, so that our people from the national to parish level are able to access this service? 

The last comment I would like to make is that this needs political commitment and acceptance that there is expenditure that the locals have to put in place for them to receive services. The emphasis we have been making, that our people are very poor and services have to reach them, has often failed us. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know if this issue of phasing out the health centres II was based on research because up to now, in my constituency in Kamuli, the demand for health centres II is going on. I do not know where they got their research from. 

4.34
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to uphold the National Health Insurance Scheme. 

As a country, we are signatories to international protocols such as the Maputo Protocol where each of our countries is supposed to allocate 15 per cent of their budget to health. Some of us thought this was a big step towards attainment of that budgetary allocation. However, at the moment, we are at seven per cent. 

Some of us think that if we carried on with the National Health Insurance Scheme, where the citizens have to pool resources, depending on their level of income, it would benefit us as a country. More so, it would also benefit the poor in the community - the indigents - because once we pool this money, it would be easier for them to access services that would not be in their reach. 

Sustainable Development Goal No. 3 is about ensuring the wellbeing for all and at all ages. We are now in an era of the coronavirus. If our budget went high this financial year, it would be because of the monies that have been allocated to fight the coronavirus. Prior to that, our budget was very low. 

How do we ensure the wellbeing for all at all ages if as a country, we do not come up with mechanisms of mobilising resources? Maybe our worry, as a country, would be bringing this insurance scheme on board at once, but we could even have it phased. For instance, we could start with the Government employees, whose salaries are directly drawn from the Consolidated Fund and with time, we think of bringing the private sector on board. 

Madam Speaker, in our health facilities, it is true that people pay money under the table. Those are the resources that we want to pool together so that we even avoid such tendencies in the health facilities. It would also help ensure that people get quality services. 

In some countries, like Kenya, they decided to pool the money together for a year. Some people may say that they do not have the entire infrastructure in the health system but if we pooled enough money in this basket, the board can sit and decide to have part of the money go to building infrastructure in the facilities and improving the maternity wards, paediatric wings and the rest.

Therefore, I support this initiative and I pray that we show good will towards the health sector. Cabinet should revisit the decision it had taken on this issue. Even during campaigns, when we moved in the communities, the islands and highlands are too much – (Member timed out.) 

4.37 
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report of the committee. When I saw that this was on the Order Paper, I was very happy. I only got discouraged when my sister, the honourable minister, said she was withdrawing it and I wondered why, since Ugandans have been waiting for this.

Madam Speaker, health is wealth. When you have a sick community, which cannot get healthcare, then there is a problem and you will always remain in the poverty cycle. 

I belong to the Committee on Equal Opportunities. We went to study the issues of equity in education, health and service delivery in one of the minority tribes in Kenya - the Masai. We were overwhelmed by the insurance programme in that place. It brings in everybody depending on the proportion of the contributions. The Governor told us that if somebody is poor and has got his goat, he brings it and one day they sell all those things to pool that money so that people have access to certain things. 

We cannot hide here and say that people in Uganda are not contributing money, because they are contributing a lot of money. Madam Speaker, just look at the case in Soroti when they operated the conjoined twins. The mother travelled from Amuria to Kampala and they told her to go back and let the children die; one died and the other survived. A lot of money went into that process. Supposing there was a national health insurance scheme, I think that would not have been a problem. 

I think Cabinet should know that we are thinking about the poor people and once our poor people overcome health situations, this country is going to progress. 

The minister’s talk – Already, the high class people have different insurance schemes and private sector is also the same. In Parliament here, we have an insurance scheme and so do Government institutions. Why are we worried if this can support even the poor of the poorest?

Madam Speaker, I support this because it is going a long way to support Ugandans down there. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.39 
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At this particular moment in time, I do not think the matter of a national health insurance scheme should be debatable. I do not expect anybody to say “no” to it. All of us must know the big problems out there. 

I would like to exonerate the minister in this ruckus. Hon. Nabbanja cannot hold this idea by herself. She is a member of Cabinet and I am sure she represented some view from somewhere. She is my neighbour and she likes promoting health. She has constructed health facilities herself. So, I think we should see her in her capacity as a minister representing a certain opinion and not hers. 

Madam Speaker, there are people that can make this project fail because some people are more privileged than others in this country. There are those that can manage to have a tooth extraction overseas yet our local mothers in the village do not have somewhere safe to deliver a baby for this country. 

It is on this platform, Madam Speaker, that I thank you for the kind of love you have for this country. Your ruling and guidance on this matter gives me hope that tomorrow my children and grand children will have a great future. Thank you for securing the future of this country.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is going to rescue Government because we have had a lot of pressure on our health system due to limited funding. It is equally going to rescue us, the politicians. 

Madam Speaker, tell me who has spent two days without being asked for or even supporting somebody to go for treatment in our respective constituencies? This is an opportunity for our local people to get equal treatment. We have a problem - medical quacks are mushrooming because people cannot afford medical care in a more understandable and probably from well-educated health workers and so, they end up going to the quacks that are cheap yet the results are more harmful than good. We are losing many people who go to these quacks thinking they are going to get cheap treatment.

With this in mind, I now suggest that we move a motion to go to the next stage so that we can pass this Bill as soon as possible so that Ugandans get something –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for guiding this House under the circumstances. As a new Member of Parliament here, I was put on health insurance but one of the Members told me a story that when you were introducing health insurance for Members of Parliament, there was a group that never wanted to join the scheme. Probably, it could be the same group that does not want Ugandans to be insured.

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, when you look at the quality of healthcare provided in this country, you realise much of it is concentrated in urban centres more so in Kampala. This is where you find good laboratories and physicians and the reason is simple; it does not make economic sense in rural areas.

However, once we have an insurance scheme, people will invest in healthcare with the hope of getting an opportunity to extend services to even the furthest person. 

I would like the Minister to appreciate that while her ministry tries to provide healthcare quite often, what they provide is always wanting even at Health Centre IIs and IIIs. What you provide is so insufficient. What about having a situation where we can have other healthcare service providers come through on insurance to treat people and they are sure to gain payment? I think this will be one of the key outputs of this Parliament to show that we mind about the people of Uganda.

The Bill talks about ensuring that whatever is provided to the rural person is of quality and that is what we, from the rural areas, are looking at. We want a Uganda where for example, a person in Kalwana Sub-county where I come from can access quality healthcare. The only opportunity we have is pulling resources where the poor and the rich can contribute to the healthcare scheme of our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.46
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, what better way can the Tenth Parliament have a climax than giving the citizens of this country a health insurance scheme law before it winds up business? I would even pray that the President assents to it before the State of Nation Address or before the Budget Speech.

This will enable us to assure the country that the Tenth Parliament has been pro-poor and focused on the Sustainable Development Goals; a Parliament that focused on participation and inclusion of everybody and a Parliament that focused on progressive contributory healthcare scheme where the richer pays more than the poor. Even if it was a tax, that would be a canon of a good tax. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for giving us that hope again as citizens.

Madam Speaker, it is also a good financial management system. It does not only fight corruption in our healthcare system - we have taken lessons from the COVID-19 period that the functionality of our healthcare system is wanting. The referral system is no longer working and by making this delivery mechanism review, it will change the whole ball game.

In addition, the board can do reviews every five years. They say the taste is in the pudding. We shall know when we taste it. After all, Uganda was about to become an odd man out in terms of not operationalising the health insurance scheme; neighbours are already moving ahead of us.

Madam Speaker, the challenge of this country and Parliament - I have refused to start taking roles which are not for a Member of Parliament. I would not want those coming in the next Parliament to become competitors of Government; a Member of Parliament cannot pretend to replace Government. Our role is to appropriate, to represent, to legislate, and do oversight. Therefore, by doing this, we are relieving new Members from again promising to procure ambulances that are not functional, very costly and sometimes very risky because that is not our role, in the first place.

I think the private sector should not gag - the private-minded persons in public offices should not - those who are speaking for the common man and I think the spirit of this Bill is to speak for the common man. We must stand proud to support it. 

I would like to encourage Government to have commitment in finding the related Government funding to make sure this works this time round so that we can give hope. Instead of discussing SAGE, we would rather discuss issues like healthcare insurance scheme. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of other honourable members to thank the committee for working out this wonderful National Insurance Bill. It is one of the Bills that I think should have come before.

I would like to allay our fears. I was a bit perturbed when I heard information that there was a proposal to withdraw this Bill yet this is something good for the communities that we represent.

Madam Speaker, the health sector is one of those sectors that are still wanting, in terms of service delivery to the people. It is even worse when we talk about phasing out Health Centre IIs that have been working with communities. When they are phased out and only Health Center IIIs are left, it will mean healthcare services are going to be very far from the people. 

I would like to give an example of an area in my district. The whole of Agirigiroi Subcounty in Ngora District does not have a Health Centre III. Now, you are phasing out health centres II but they have never seen a health centre II. Health insurance would be an opportunity for this community.


It is very perturbing when I look at the withdrawal of a Bill, which has been pre-tested and stakeholders were consulted. If you look at countries like Ghana and Kenya that are practising health insurance, it is working very well.

I implore the Government that I represent this House and the Government that I serve to take this Bill in a positive manner and look at it as one that is going to act for the interest of a common person -(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, we understand the minister indicated that she wanted to withdraw this Bill but this House passed a motion for it to continue and the minister has run away in protest. Are we proceeding well when somebody who is supposed to handle this is running away when we are handling such a very important matter?

THE SPEAKER: She did not tell me where she was going. Where is she? Where is her bag? (Laughter)


MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister will read the Hansard because we cannot force her to be here. That should not stop us from proceeding and doing what we have to do. I would like to suggest that we proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health moved a motion to withdraw the Bill but the House rejected the request. You requested her to move the motion for the second reading and she declined. In your wisdom, you can move on. We shall take notes and see what else we can do.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you. Like Members have said, I think it is very important for Government to take this in a positive way and appreciate the role of Parliament. 

However, I want to focus my presentation on the National Insurance Scheme Bill. Before I was interrupted, I was talking about countries that have done well in terms of national health insurance. It is the same thing that Uganda should have borrowed and I think we are moving in the right direction.

Now that the minister had proposed that this Bill be withdrawn, we pray that even when Parliament passes it, the President of the Republic of Uganda assents to the said Bill so that it serves the interests of the people and it will be addressing issues in regard to health. In case of any challenge, Government can always address them as we move forward.

Otherwise, this Bill is well supported on behalf of the people whom I represent in Ngora up to May 2021. It is for their interest and will be taken in good faith. Thank you.

4.56
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee for having presented such a good report. Many of us may not be aware of what is happening in the rural areas. We have a problem because of poor medical services to our people in the countryside.

Every day that I spend in my constituency, I get almost 30 people coming to me for money to go for medical treatment just because they do not have the money and the facilities in our health centres are very poor.

I want to appreciate the Government for the many health centres they have constructed but there are no drugs in those centres.

Madam Speaker, if the solution is an insurance scheme to help our people, then, let it be. The way the minister behaved gave me the impression that the Government was moving cautiously because they did not have money.

If need be, let the Government make an appeal to Ugandans for voluntary contributions to this scheme so that we can help our poor people who cannot afford these services.

One of the reasons the NRM Government is losing popularity in the countryside is because of the poor medical service delivery. I am sure that by passing this Bill, we are sending a gift to the people of Uganda. Wherever we went when we were doing our campaigns, people were complaining about lack of drugs in health centres.

I am of the view that we take a bold step to introduce this scheme, be able to help our people and make our Government popular because this has been a sticking problem in our administration. I support and I thank you.

4.58
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I request the Government to accept this Bill. Albeit the challenges, the Government still has latitude to improve the Bill.

Insurance schemes come with a lot of benefits and that is what I want to concentrate on, especially the use of ICT, which has more benefits in our health management system. The ICT will improve on data management. Insurance schemes work on tenets such as stratification, which will cause more investment in primary healthcare.

Before people get sick and go to hospitals, the problem starts in the community: how do they get information and which is the nearest place they will be able to get medication and what are the causes of sickness?

Once those are addressed, we will have fewer people going to hospitals and that becomes a plus when a health insurance scheme is being implemented.

It also brings sanity into our referral systems. These days, it is difficult for people to get treatment and improve. Some people in the villages give up treatment and resort to local medicine and consequently die because of poor referral systems.

A good referral system will improve on continuity of treatment. Insurance schemes emphasise performance. Performance in our health systems will be measured, feedback constantly given and, therefore, investment for money.

Worries about financing are unfounded. In this country, there is no free medical care. People in the countryside are paying dearly. It would be very good for a person to sell their piece of land or cattle when they are going to get value for money. However, a week hardly goes by - as a Member has already alluded to here – before a Member has to contribute a lot of money for medical care – (Member timed out.)

5.01
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

My concern is on the implementation. We support the principle but what is in the Bill right now puts all the burden on the salaried workers. I think workers are part of the stakeholders that have resisted the scheme. Workers of this country are already burdened with Pay As You Earn (PAYE), NSSF and now also we want to add the medical scheme.

I am happy that I have listened to some Members. They are talking about the constituency Members. At committee level, we shall maybe find a way of amending this so that every able-bodied Ugandan contributes to this scheme, so that the benefits cut across. Maybe we could take what hon. Asamo has mentioned - the Maasai model - that everyone should contribute, which is not in the law.

I would like to support –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the Member representing workers has read the Bill. The Bill provides for all able Ugandans to make a contribution. I know the Member maybe wants workers not to take part in this because they already have insurance schemes, where they are working from. 

I want to think that what the Member is saying is different from what is in the Bill. Is she in order, Madam Speaker, to insinuate that it is only targeting workers, yet the Bill is widely covering everybody?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall get to that when we go to committee stage, when we are studying clause by clause. If we find it stressful in some areas, we will see what to do. Let us proceed.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read through the Bill; I know they are talking of self-employed workers. My concern here is that it should be put in the law. Even though we are going to pay Shs 10,000, it should be in the law. It should not be optional. That is what I am praying for, and I am looking forward to when it comes to committee level. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.05
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. It was sad listening to the minister trying to withdraw this Bill because Ugandans have waited for very long for this health insurance scheme.

Indeed, as the former Minister of Health has confirmed, we have engaged widely. The Minister of Health was worried that a few of the employers have not been consulted but we consulted widely. In any case, you cannot have the support of everybody.

Madam Speaker, even in that Chair in which you sit, you ask those who want to say “Aye” and those who want to say “Nay” and we say what we want but those with the prominent voice carry the day. So, democracy is a game of numbers and we cannot have everybody. It is right and proper that we put this scheme in place. The few who are still objecting will be brought on board.

The essence of the scheme is contributory and to mobilise resources from those who have to those who do not have, so that those who have subsidise for the masses who do not have much. I do not think that the Rwandan citizens are more financially empowered than Ugandans. They started where we were but now, they have become more financially empowered because of having the health contributory scheme. Therefore, we would like to see Ugandans engage in this scheme and indeed, to request that the Government listens and we progress. It is only a healthy population that can engage in meaningful production for socio-economic development.

As Members have noted, our health facilities are in such a bad state and our people are still asked to pay so much money when they fall sick. They are asked for things like even surgical blades, gloves and plastic kaveera for women who are going to deliver. However, the essence of the scheme is that it would standardise the service and all these would be provided for.

Up to now, people are being asked to go and buy Panadol. Drugs are delivered to the hospital or health clinic today and the following day, people are being asked to pay. For medical examinations, people are asked to go and pay outside –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: This scheme will deal with corruption because the service will be standardised. There will be sharing of information through the ICT section, and it will enhance ownership. People will know that this is their scheme and their services and will be able to monitor and supervise these services and get quality services.

It enhances the self-worth and dignity of Ugandans, just as it has done for the populations surrounding us in the neighbouring countries.

Madam Speaker, I support this Bill and it should pass as soon as possible. The Government should not fear because the money will come from the people themselves. Thank you.

5.09
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the committee report.

Madam Speaker, as we are aware, any person who is healthy can do anything they want, and this is very important in human life. Let me give you a scenario. Two days ago, in Otuke, a truck carrying over 30 people got an accident and fell. Out of 30 people, eight died instantly. 

When we say that insurance is great - there are conditions in this country, where in rural areas, health centres are not well built and they do not have medical equipment. From Otuke to Kampala is 300 kilometres. Somebody who has a bone fracture has to be driven all the way to Mulago, and we, the politicians, are always being called to rescue our voters in the community. 

We have a big challenge in this country because people are very poor.
You find that somebody has not been examined well in a medical facility because he cannot afford; and just buys Panadol and starts taking it because he wants to get rid of that pain. This is all because he cannot afford to pay for the medication.

Therefore, I would like to request this Government to act because this topic would not sound well next year, or in the Eleventh Parliament. Thank you.

5.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A country is said to be developed if its maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate goes down. However, with the mortality rate very high as it is the case with us, then it means that we should do a little more in health than what we are doing right now.

For anybody saying that this Bill should not be brought now, what is the alternative to improve our health status? One thing we must know is that all of us here in Parliament are under insurance health schemes. Why are we denying the voters? We should not deny them getting onto the national health insurance.

Therefore, this Bill should have been prioritised a long time ago. I would like to thank the committee very much for working so hard to bring this Bill. We should pass this Bill in this Tenth Parliament and not wait for the Eleventh Parliament.

First, when we look at health centers I and II, they are not so functional and yet health center I is also very important, even when it does not have infrastructure. The infrastructure there is either a big home or under a big tree, where people can collect. This is where 	people will be sensitised about health education and also made to understand well the national health insurance. When we extend health education to people, this will make them very happy, instead of struggling all the time.

Leave alone we, Members of Parliament, carrying all the burdens and problems of health in our constituencies on our heads; we also want improvement in health services to our people because health is wealth. When our people are healthy, then they are wealthier because they will be engaged in productive activities.

As such, I am surprised that my honourable friend and minister whom I got to know when she was the secretary of health in Local Government - she was the secretary of health at our district, and so, she should be very happy to take on this; fighting for the health Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: You have a half minute to complete.

MS AOL: She was the secretary of health - when I visit Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, I feel so hurt. The last time I visited, I found that children suffering from sickle cells have to go and pay a lot of money in private clinics and private health facilities. I think that this Bill will come to address such issues because these sickle cellars are usually from very poor families.

Therefore, Members, I pray that we should go straight to ensuring that this Bill is passed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I was just looking at some publications and apparently, Uganda was one of the first countries to develop its 2015/2016-2019/2020 National Development Plan, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. SDG No.3 is good health and wellbeing. Therefore, it is part of our plan and we cannot afford to waste time.

I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to redraft Clause 4(a) to read as follows: “To develop National Health Insurance as a complementary mechanism of healthcare financing in Uganda.”

The Justification is that health insurance is not the only mechanism of financing healthcare in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 4 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 5, the committee proposes to insert the following new sub-clauses:

    1. Register members and beneficiaries of the scheme.
    2. Design and implement the health benefits package delivery mechanism.
    3. Formulate and issue guidelines on contributions, quality assurance and health service provider arrangements.

The Justification is to provide for other critical functions of the scheme.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 8, the committee proposes to replace it with the following: 

“Establishment of the board.” 
    1) The board of directors shall be the governing body of the scheme and be responsible for the general direction and supervision of the scheme.

    2) The board shall be composed of nine directors as follows: “(a) The chairperson appointed by the minister; and (b) Eight members.

3) 	The directors shall consist of:
    a. the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for Finance, the Ministry responsible for Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry responsible for Health or his or her representative not below the rank of a principal officer;
    b. Representatives from trade unions, the National Organisation of Trade Unions(NOTU) and the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions of Uganda (COFTU);
    c. A representative of the National Social Security Fund;
    d. A representative of the private health insurance providers;
    e. A representative of the Federation of Uganda Employers;
    f. A representative of the Insurance Regulatory Authority;

4) 	The Chief Executive Officer shall be the Secretary to the Board.

5) 	The Minister shall appoint the members mentioned in sub-section (3)(d) from among three persons nominated by the Uganda Private Medical Practitioners Association.

6) 	In appointing or nominating persons to constitute the Board, the appointing or nominating authority shall take into consideration the following:
    a. Qualifications of the proposed members of the Board;
    b. Professional rank;
    c. Competence and experience in medicine, law, finance, actuarial studies or health and social insurance mechanisms and any other relevant areas;
    d. Equity and gender.

7) 	For purposes of this section -
    a. “Nominating authority” means the head of the organisation from whom representation is to be made to the Board;
    b. The “appointing authority” means the minister.

8) 	The members of the Board shall be appointed by the minister on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in the instrument of appointment.

Justification:
    1. To have an all-inclusive board representing diverse disciplines and sectors of stakeholders.
    2. To ease administration.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be taking notes. This is a Government Bill and so, please, assist us.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, on the amendment 5, which states: “The minister shall appoint the member mentioned in subsection (3)(d) from among three persons nominated by the Uganda Private Medical Practitioners’ Association”; why don’t we ask the association to appoint one person to represent them instead of submitting three names to the minister? That association should sit and appoint someone to represent them; why do you subject them to the minister?

DR BUKENYA: The minister appoints all these members of the Board based on nomination. However, we thought that since it is a wider group, we could give him or her leverage to do the appointment to make it easy.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with my brother, hon. Patrick Nsamba that the association of medical practitioners can nominate their representative on the Board directly rather than nominating three and then the minister chooses one. In most of the laws that we have passed here that require constituency representation, they normally second one person. If the minister has a problem with that, he deals with one person rather than allowing him or her to choose among the three.

Therefore, we can amend that if the chairperson agrees to it so that we say that, “there will be a representative of the Uganda Medical association.”

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of the team, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can we have it reformulated?

DR BUKENYA: Hon. Nsamba, can you reformulate your proposal?

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete Section (5).

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. You do not need to delete Section (5) but change it to say, “The professional private medical practitioners shall submit one nominee to the minister” or something like that.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, they have already been highlighted in Section (3). They said, “The directors shall consist of the following…” and indicated a representative of the private health providers. When we delete Section (5), we lose nothing.

DR BUKENYA: Yes, it is redundant. I agree.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do we get that person?

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am suggesting that we could just retain that Section 5 but simply say, “The minister shall appoint a member as nominated by the Private Medical Practitioners’ Association.”That is all because they will have already come up with a member and the minister just appoints him or her without going for three.

MR BAHATI: In the formation we say, “The Board shall consist of the following...” we should only include; “...the representative of Uganda National Medical Association.” I think that is the point he wants to make. (Interjection) I meant “Uganda Private Health services providers.” It is already there. The subsequent proposal was just explaining, which I think we should delete and maintain the upper one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the presumption that the minister will write to the association and they give him a name?

MR BAHATI: That is the practice we have here.

MR KIBUULE: Madam Chairperson, since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development mentions of one, I remember that when this matter of the Board came before Cabinet, there were names seconded to the minister and others were rejected on grounds that they were not from the right association. Therefore, I see this one coming to this stage. 

If they had three, then the minister has room to scrutinise than nominating one who can be rejected. Remember, these come from different shades. We can have medical practitioners who go through ranks. For example, there was one who was rejected on grounds that he did not have qualifications and representing a bloc of the medical practitioners. Thank you. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We should be specific in the law. It is normally the practice. When we say, “a representative of the healthcare professionals”, that is what is stated here but it is a practice which we should not put in the law. 

Normally, because of the issue of gender, the minister writes to the different bodies and asks for two names so that we can accommodate the issue of gender. It should not be in the law. We should simply state what was said - a representative of the healthcare professionals - and we stop at that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want us to delete sub-clause (5)? Is that okay? Honourable members, the question is that sub-clause (5) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposes that we delete Clause l0(4)(c). The justification is: to cure the apparent ambiguity. 

Clause 10 is about the tenure of office and sub-clause (4) reads, “The Minister may, at any time, remove from the board a member…” Paragraph (c) says that a member can be removed for misbehaviour or misconduct, which is rather ambiguous. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 10(4)(c) be deleted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: The insertion comes after clause 12. The committee proposes to insert a new clause after clause 12, which reads as follows:
“Functions of the Board 

The Board shall-
(a) 	ensure the effective implementation of the policies of the Scheme;
(b) 	manage the Scheme in accordance with this Act;
(c) 	cause to be carried out audits of the funds of the Scheme;
(d) 	determine the mission and strategy of the Scheme;
(e) 	appoint, support and evaluate the Chief Executive Officer of the Scheme;
(f) 	ensure the proper management and protection of assets of the Scheme; and
(g) 	carry out any other function as may be necessary to meet the objects of the Scheme.”

Justification

            1. To provide for critical functions of the board. 
            2. To provide for the core functions of any board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposed that we insert a new sub-clause (7) under Clause 15 to read as follows:

“(7) The board may delegate any of its powers or functions to a committee established under this section.”

The justification is: to provide for delegation of powers

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

DR BUKENYA: Under clause 17 –

a) Replace the word “Minister” appearing in the second line of Clause 17 (1) with the word “Board”.

The justification is: to ensure that the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is appointed by the board and not the minister.

b) Delete the word “health” appearing before the word “insurance” in the second line of Clause 17(3).

The justification is: to provide for a wider scope of experience. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

DR BUKENYA: Under clause 18, replace the word “Secretariat” appearing in Clause l8(l)(b) with the word “Scheme”.

The justification is: to specify that the property of the scheme belongs to the scheme and not the secretariat.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 18 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

DR BUKENYA: Insert after Clause 19(3)(c) the following new sub-clauses:
“(d) 	Abuse of office;
(e) 	Corruption;
(f) 	Failure to attend three consecutive scheduled meetings of the Board without reasonable excuse; and
(g) 	Conviction of on offence involving moral turpitude.”

The justification is: to provide for other reasons for removal of the Chief Executive Officer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 19 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposed that we insert a new clause before Clause 2l as follows:
“Government’s Obligations in National Health Insurance 

Government shall -
(i) 	take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

(ii) 	ensure that all Ugandans have access to health services;

(iii) provide health facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them realise their full potential and advancement;

(iv) ensure that no child is deprived of medical treatment for any reason;

(v) 	take appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities realise their full mental and physical potential;

(vi) 	develop and implement the Scheme;

(vii)	promote awareness of the Scheme; and

(viii) provide adequate funding for the Scheme.”

The justification is: to provide for the continuing state obligation in the health sector in addition to introduction of health insurance financing mechanisms.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21

DR BUKENYA: In clause 21, the committee proposed as follows:
 a) Replace clause 21 (1) with the following:
“(l) Subject to this Act, any person who has attained the age of l8 years and who is a citizen and resident in Uganda shall be liable as a contributor to the fund in accordance with this section.”

The justification - to provide for persons liable to contribute as citizens and residents.

b) In Clause 2l(2), replace the word “Board” with the word “Scheme”.

The justification is that the scheme is responsible for collection and receipt of funds

c) To insert a new sub-clause immediately after Clause 21(3) to read as follows:
“(4) The Government will be liable to make contributions on behalf of indigents.” 

The justification is: to provide that Government pays for indigent persons

d) Insert a new sub-clause in Clause 21 immediately before sub-clause (4) to read as follows:
“(4) An employer shall remit fifty per cent of the member's contribution to the Scheme.”

The justification is: to ensure that the employer contributes to the employee’s health insurance costs. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that -

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the committee has provided for those who are not gainfully employed but I see this as one of the impediments because they are quite many. 

If we are grappling with SAGE where we have very few old people who are supposed to earn only Shs 25,000 and yet here, we have a clause that Government will pay for all those who are not gainfully employed. I see this putting a big burden on Government, which may be rendered redundant because Government may not be in position to pay for all that money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what do you say about that?

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, there are categories of people who are supposed to be catered for by the Government and those are the ones below 18 years, indigents and senior citizens. I suspect the category he is talking about is in that group and the responsibility of that group in the Bill is given to the Government to determine who is an indigent and make a proper description of who that person should be.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, this Bill has been with us for quite some time and no Bill is brought to this Parliament unless it has a Certificate of Financial Implication. Therefore, since the Minister was aware of all this information in the Bill and in the report, the issue of financial implications should have come before. I think this is a matter, which is taking us backwards. The Bill is already being processed; we cannot talk about financial implications at this stage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposes to insert the following new sub-clause before Clause 25(1): “A member of the scheme shall be registered as such, by the scheme.”

The justification is to provide for registration of members of the scheme.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposes that: 
    a. Replace the word “patient” appearing in Clause 26(4) with the word “contributor.”

The justification is that the use of the word “patient” is not appropriate since the Act makes arrangements with contributors and not with patients.

    b.  Replace Clause 26(5) with the following: “The Minister shall, by regulations made within six months of coming into force of this Act, make regulations to determine and register persons who qualify as indigents and a person so registered shall have access to the benefits specified in the Schedule 1 of this Act.”

The justification is that indigent persons should be determined and registered with immediate effect upon the coming into force of the Act if they are to benefit from the scheme.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

DR BUKENYA: Insert a new subclause immediately after Clause 27(4): “The Board shall determine a payment mechanism to be used to pay an accredited health service provider for services rendered to a beneficiary.”

The justification is to provide for the payment mechanism to be employed in paying health service providers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

New Clause

DR BUKENYA: Insert the following new clauses after Clause 27;

“Portability of benefits
    i. The benefits under this Act shall be accessible from any accredited health service provider in Uganda in accordance with the regulations issued by the Minister.
    ii. The Board shall prescribe the procedure for accessing specified health care benefits outside Uganda.”

The justification is to provide for choice of health service provider that was not provided for in the Bill.

“Choice of health service provider

A beneficiary requiring health care under this Act shall choose from the list of health service providers accredited to the Scheme.”

The justification is to provide for portability of benefits that was not provided for in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR BUKENYA: Inset a new Clause
“Funds of the scheme
    i. There is established the National Health Insurance Fund into which the funds of the Scheme will be kept.
    ii. The funds of the Scheme shall consist of: 
    a. All sums received by the Scheme in respect of -
    i. Contributions made by Government;
    ii. Contributions made by members of the Scheme;
    iii. Income on investment;
    iv. Fees, fines and penalties; and
    v. Interest on dues;

    b. Monies appropriated by Parliament for the functions of the Scheme;
    c. Grants received by the Scheme with the approval of the minister and the minister responsible for finance; and
    d. Any other money as may, with the approval of the minister and the minister responsible for finance be received by or made available to the scheme for the purpose of performing its function.
    iii. The funds of the scheme shall be held by the Board in trust for the contributors and the beneficiaries of the scheme and shall be administered and controlled by the Board in accordance with this Act.
    iv. All expenditure incurred for the purposes of the scheme shall be defrayed from the account of the scheme.”

The justification is to provide for the sources of funds for the scheme which were not provided for in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable chairperson, I think we have a standard provision because we no longer allow schemes to look for their own money. Isn’t it that all money is appropriated under the Public Finance Management Act? Minister of Finance, is that the position?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I beg your indulgence to give me the particular clause you are referring to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is (c)and (d).

MR BAHATI: “Grants received by the scheme with the approval of the Minister and the Minister responsible for Finance.” We receive and approve grants according to the Public Finance Management Act.  Maybe, if we said; “grants received under the scheme in line with the Public Finance Management Act.”

When institutions receive grants, they first have to get approval from us. The statement is okay but I do not know whether we need to put it in the law. (d) will not appropriate “any other money with the approval of the Minister and the minster responsible”, I do not think this is right.  What is right is grants and the others that I have stated here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do the grants also come to Parliament?

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we do not need (c) and (d) we go under monies appropriated by Parliament.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, the grants that the minister is talking about can be received but not directly by the fund, the ministry makes a request either through the budgetary system or through the supplementary system for approval by Parliament.

However, the scheme has no authority to receive grants and utilise it directly. It would offend the Public Finance and Management Act.

MR BAHATI: Then in that case, we allow the scheme to receive funds from source (a) and (b) and then, we stop there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, it is our practice that all monies must come to Parliament.

DR BUKENYA: We concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that sub clause (c) and (d) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28

DR BUKENYA: The proposal is to replace in Clause 28(v) the word “board” with the word “scheme.”

Justification: 

To provide for investment to be held in the name of the scheme and not in the name of the board and replace Clause 28 (iv) with the following;

“The revenue in the reserve fund shall be invested by the board in approval by the minister.”

Justification: 

To ensure that the type of investment is specified and not just any investment is undertaken. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32agreed to.

Clause 33agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35agreed to.

Clause 36

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, there is something.

DR BUKENYA: Insert a new sub clause immediately after 36(ii), saying (iii) The minister shall lay biannual performance of scheme report before Parliament.

Justification: To ensure Parliament regularly oversees the scheme performance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: Insert the following new clauses after Clause 36. “The financial year of the scheme shall be a financial year as defined in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015”

Financial management: (i) The use “this position, investment, disbursement, administration and management of the funds of the scheme including any subsidy, grant or donation received by the scheme shall be governed by a resolution of the board.

(ii) The Government of Uganda shall be the guarantor of the scheme. 

Compliance with the Public Finance Management 2015; 
The scheme shall comply with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 in the management of its funds.

Justification: 

To provide for financial provisions that were not provided for in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that - 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, is it necessary to state that that the scheme will comply with the Public Finance Management Act when the Act is already there and we have already provided that the scheme is a Government scheme and all public resources are managed under the Public Finance Management Act?

Is it necessary again to state in this law that it will comply with the Public Finance Management Act for emphasis or –(Interjections) okay, I thought we were bothering the books of the law but if we are not then we can have it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37

DR BUKENYA: The proposal is (a) Replace Clause 37 (i) with the following; “a Government hospital or a privately owned health facility may subject to accreditation be a health service provider as provided for under Section 38”, (b) delete Clause 37 (ii) 

Justification: 

    1. To make it mandatory for all health facilities to be accredited before enrolment as service providers of the scheme;

2. 	The quality of services and accountability is better guaranteed when all health service providers are subject to the same accreditation process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

DR BUKENYA: a)Delete the term “licensed person” appearing in the first line of Clause 31.

Justification: 

This is a consequential amendment and (b) delete the term “licenced person” in the second line 38 (ii). It is also a consequential amendment and (c) Insert 38 (ii) immediately after the word “pharmacy and drug Act”, the following words “Nurses and Midwifes Act, Allied and Health Professionals Act.”
The justification is: to include the other laws that regulate the health sector professionals.

d) Replace clause 38(3) with the following:
“(3) The Board shall, at least once every year, at all district and subcounty local council notice boards in Uganda and in at least three daily newspapers with wide circulation, publish a list of all the accredited health service providers.”

The justification is: to provide for the publication of the list of accredited service providers at national and district levels.  

e) Insert a new sub-clause after clause 38(4) to read as follows:
“A certificate issued under this section shall upon satisfaction of the requirements under this Act, be renewed every year by the Board.”

Justification

        1. To align with professional practice of renewal of certificate of practice; and
        2. To allow the scheme the ability to deny renewal of certificate if a provider’s services were unacceptable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: Insert new clauses after Clause 38 to read as follows:

“Application for accreditation

(1) 	The Board shall invite health service providers to apply for accreditation by notice through a medium that can reach all health service providers in Uganda.

(2) 	A health service provider who meets the minimum accreditation requirements may apply to the Board.

(3) 	The application for accreditation shall be in the prescribed form.”

The justification is: to provide for application for accreditation by health service providers.

“Minimum requirements for accreditation
The Minister shall, by regulations, prescribe the minimum requirements for accreditation.”

The justification is: to provide for minimum requirements for accreditation which were not provided for in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, maybe you need to remove the word “for” under (2).

DR BUKENYA: Yes, I noticed while reading. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please remove that word. I now put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposes to replace Clause 39(2)(b) with the following:

“(b) three other members seconded respectively by the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, the Pharmacy Council and Allied Health Professionals Council.”

The justification is: to clarify qualification requirements for the members of the Accreditation Committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that Clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

DR BUKENYA: The committee proposes to delete Clause 4l(3). The justification is that it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 41 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 42, the common administrative structure in our country is a district, yet here we are talking about regions. I do not know whether this will not cause challenges because a region is a very wide geographical area. I would rather we say that it will be through the local governments at the district level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I know the minister has a point but let the chairperson tell us his views.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chair, the ministry has about 14 or 15 regions in the country, which they monitor and supervise regularly and they have specific responsibilities. They take particular districts that are controlled at the regional referral hospital level.

We thought that for purposes of controlling the cost, we should first utilise the regions and then subsequently the districts, if that is manageable. It was mainly a cost issue that forced us to leave it at that level. Otherwise, we had a lengthy discussion on the districts and it looked like it would be difficult to manage.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, this is a contributory fund, so the members are going to be mindful of the expenses. You are aware that right now, we have 146 districts. If we are to start with 146 offices, you can imagine the cost because every office will need facilities to make it functional. It will be too costly to the fund. I think for now, a regional office would be appropriate. In any case, it is just for coordination.

Madam Chairperson, I pray that the minister concedes to that proposal.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Karubanga has a point. We are requiring our citizens to contribute and they are going to be in many numbers. If you have, for example, an office in Jinja, which is your regional centre, and somebody has an issue in Kamuli, imagine the expense you put on the person to move from Kamuli to Jinja.

We would rather adopt the proposal moved by the hon. Karubanga; if it was possible to have an office at the district in an affordable manner but perform the function of facilitating the citizens of Ugandans to address their issues regarding the scheme. Otherwise, if we put it at a regional level, it might not perform the function it is supposed to and it will even be more costly than having an office in an affordable manner. We have all the district health hospitals. We can have an office nearby so that if somebody has an issue, they can go to such an office rather than moving to the region.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about the structure of the regional hospitals? We have regional referral hospitals and I think they cater for issues in their regions.

MR BAHATI: They do for the other health services but this time, we are moving towards serving an individual who is going to contribute to the scheme. I think that the office, among other things, will attend to the issues of the contributors to the scheme, rather than offering health services.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, this scheme is just going to start. We are starting at national level but we know that there will be problems. Rather than have someone come all the way from Kabale to Kampala, at least establish regional centres, which will be reasonably managed financially and then later, we can roll out the scheme to the district level.

It would be wiser to start with the regional centers - unless you want the provision to indicate that later it will move to districts but I think it is unnecessary. 

Madam Chairperson, since I am holding –(Interjection) - it is still the same. Number 42: “The board shall, as may be necessary, establish regional health insurance centers,” – “shall” and “as may be necessary”. That combination of language – “shall” is mandatory and “as may be necessary” - we need the - (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, whereas what the minister is raising is quite important, that is administrative. The scheme, beyond what we state in the law, will be able to come up with mechanisms to serve the people. I do not think we can go as far as defining where and how they will put up an office at this stage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the certificate of financial implications was for regions and not districts. I do not think that we can even go there.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, the health system we are running is already using a referral system, which starts from a regional referral hospital. Also, Article 178 of the Constitution mandated us, more than 10 years ago, to implement regional Governments. (Laughter) We have now got cities and there are many other attempts at regional governments. 

Therefore, I would like to plead that we stay in the spirit of regional governments which we have been vying for, for long. It is a constitutional directive that we try to make these different regional peculiarities, which could even be medical in nature, that the delivery mechanism would well be checked at regional centres.

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add on what the honourable member has said. I would prefer we propose that we go for sub-regions. For a person from Masindi to go to Mbarara, when the regional office was to be there, it would even be cheaper to come to Kampala.

We can amend and propose that we go for sub-regions like Busoga or Teso because it will be more effective for someone to supervise that small sub-region.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us start with the regional referral hospitals because those regions are already there before we go to the smaller ones. I put the question that Clause 42 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

DR BUKENYA: Delete clause 43(e). The justification is that the measure is very stringent. For example, if you have a clinic at Parliament and the nurse misbehaves, the whole clinic is suspended from providing services yet it was individual behaviour.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 43 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44 

DR BUKENYA: In sub-clause 44(1) and (7), insert the following headings for the offences prescribed respectively and create clauses for each subclause accordingly.

a) Clause 44(1) be changed to Clause 44.
44. False statement

b) Clause 44(2) be changed to Clause 45.
45. Misappropriation of funds or property of the scheme

c) Clause 44(3) be changed to  Clause 46.
46. Interference with scheme duties

d)(i) Clause 44(4) be changed to Clause 47(1).
(ii) Clause 44(5) be changed to Clause 47(2).

47. Corrupt or fraudulent practice

e)(i) clause 44(6) be changed to clause 48(1). 
(ii) Clause 44(7) be changed to clause 48(2).
48. Liability of management staff

The justification is that this is the standardised way of providing for standalone offences provisions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

New clause 

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we insert a new clause after Clause 57.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a new clause? Okay.

DR BUKENYA: Community-based health insurance schemes

Nothing in this Act shall affect the existence and operations of the community-based health insurance scheme, save the minister may issue guidelines for the proper function of the community-based health insurance scheme.

The justification is to acknowledge the existence and give visibility to community-based health insurance schemes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, inserted.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule, agreed to.

Third Schedule

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, this frequency of meeting with the board – that is in (1). “The board shall meet once every two months or as often as it is necessary for the proper discharge of its functions.” When you say “or as often as it is necessary”, we are really opening it up. We have realised that many boards want to turn into employment and every sitting attracts a sitting service.

Therefore, I would rather we remove “as often as necessary”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we stop at, “two months?” – okay. Honourable members, I put the question that schedule three, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule three, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I believe there are no changes to the interpretation.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 2 is the one of definition of terms and accreditation. 

    a. “Replace the definition of the word “accreditation” with the following definition;

	“Accreditation” means the process by which a health service provider is verified and certified as a qualified and capable to provide health care under the scheme.”

Justification:
    1. To make it mandatory for all health facilities to be accredited before enrolment as service providers to the scheme.
    2. The quality of services and accountability is better guaranteed when all health service providers are subjected to the same accreditation process.

    b. Insert the following new definition of the word “beneficiary” immediately after the definition of the word “accreditation”. “Beneficiary means a person entitled to health care benefits under the Act.”

The justification is to provide for terms used in the Act but no definition provided for.

    c.  Insert the following new definition of the word “citizen”. “’Citizen’ means a citizen under the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap.66.” 

The justification is to provide for terms used in the Act but no definition provided for.

d. Replace the definition of the word “child” with the following definition; 
“’Child’ means a person under the age of eighteen years.”

The justification to maintain the constitutional definition of a child.

    e. Replace the word “and” in the definition of the word “contribution” with the word “or”.

The justification is that contribution is paid either by the contributor or by another person on the contributor’s behalf but not by both the contributor and another person.


    f. Replace the definition of the word “employer” with the following definition;
	“’Employer’ means any person or group of persons, including a company or corporation, a public, regional or local authority, a governing body of unincorporated association, a partnership, parastatalorganisation or other institution or organisation whatsoever, for whom an employee works or has worked or normally worked or sought to work, under a contract of service and includes the heirs, successors, assignees and transferors of any person or group of persons for whom an employee works, has worked, or normally works.”

The justification is to align the definition of “employer” with the current definition in the Employment Act, 2006.

    g. Replace the term “healthcare provider” with the term “health service provider” wherever it appears in this Act.

The justification is to provide for a more appropriate terminology as applicable in the medical field.

    h. Insert the phrase “or any other health facility that provides health services,” after the word “centre” in the fourth line of the definition of the word “health facility”.

Justification is to provide for a more appropriate terminology as applicable in the medical field and ensure that all health facilities are covered in the definition.


    i. Delete the definition of the words “licensed person.”

Justification is to provide for accreditation of only health service providers and not licensed persons.

    j. Replace the definition of “indigent” with the following definition: “Indigent” means a person who is deemed by the Board to be unable to pay a contribution and is registered as such.

Justification is for clarity.

    k. Insert the following new definition of the words “quality assurance’ immediately after the definition of the word “Minister”; “’Quality assurance’ means a formal mechanism set up to review and ensure the quality of health core provided to a contributor or a beneficiary of the Scheme.”

The justification is to provide for terms used in the Act but no definition is provided for.

    l. Insert the following new definition of the word “resident” immediately before the definition of the word “Scheme”. “’Resident means a person to whom a residence permit has been issued under the Registration of Persons Act, 20l5.”

The justification is to provide for terms used in the Act but no definition provided for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.
Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members – 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification before we move back to report. In clause 8, we are talking about establishment of the board. My understanding and experience is that when we are dealing with contributory funds, we do not run the board as we normally know it. 

We normally have a Board of Trustees because the money that is contributed is supposed to be managed in trust because we require fiducial responsibility from these members. Therefore, they are not ordinary members of the board. They take personal responsibility for anything that happens, which is slightly different from other boards.

I do not know why it is not here. I have read and seen that URBRA and NSSF were consulted. They should have come out with this recommendation.

I am not convinced why you have not used the word “Trustee” but preferred the words “Board of Directors.” It leaves out that element of fiducial responsibility, which rests on the individual. Therefore, it is not the fault of the board. If any individual does anything, which breaches the trust, then the person will be taken on. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I do not doubt the experience of Mama Cecilia. However, if you read the Bill, the Government is a guarantor. 

Secondly, we have several boards like the NSSF Board, which has trillions of money. It is not a board of trustees. I do not understand – does it have a board or trustees?  The point is that the Government here is a guarantor. So, you do not want to subject these members to a board of trustees. I do not understand the difference.

Madam Chairperson, maybe since you are a lawyer and we can see the acting Attorney-General here, you can advise us but I do not see the difference. As long as it is a board, recognised and has its functions clearly, I do not think that we should subject them to personal guarantee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the board members can be called upon when it is taking office to execute a trust of their responsibility.  I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to move the House. (Laughter)

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, that is right because she is the one who gave us the certificate. 

6.29 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2019

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Members, title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

Let me thank the acting Minister of Health for carrying out this duty on behalf of the Government, and the honourable members for their spirited fight to ensure that the Bill is enacted. If there are any changes, they will be done later. There will also be an opportunity, when it is taken for assent, for the President to give his views. So, let us move.

Honourable chairperson, do you have something to say? 

DR BUKENYA: Yes. Madam Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to thank you for having led us through this process. As you remember, before the Bill was brought, we had to first bring a private Member’ Bill, for which the finance minister denied us a certificate. Fortunately, the Government brought its Bill. 

I would like to remind members that health insurance has been funded by Parliament for the last 21 years, providing between Shs 3 billion and Shs 6 billion to the sector to develop the National Health Insurance Bill. At least, we have shown that we are able to put up something. Irrespective of the disagreements, we shall be able to sort out those smaller ones later. 

Madam Speaker, as much as the minister did not agree with us, the manifesto of NRM that we are ending this term talks about phased implementation of the National Health Insurance Scheme. It was also in the National Development Plan II, the National Development Plan III as well as the Health Sector Development Plan. Hence, it was difficult to fathom why there is dissent, yet even when there is dissent, you can sit and agree. 

I would like to thank the whole team that has braved the evening. I specifically thank the finance minister, who has stood in as the Minister of Health. I would like to also thank the members present here for the spirited fight they put up at the beginning and also for being part of this process. 

As Parliament, we have done our work. The challenge is to the Executive to see how we implement what Ugandans want. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me also take this opportunity to thank our committee for fulfilling their obligation to the population - looking out for their interests and ensuring that the necessary laws are put in place, notwithstanding the many hurdles that surrounded the National Health Insurance Scheme Bill. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, let us quickly go to item No. 7. We shall do item No. 6 tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED TO BORROW USD 15 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK, USD 10 MILLION FROM INTERNATIONAL ISLAMIC TRADE FINANCE CORPORATION, USD 20 MILLION FROM OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT, AND USD 20 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this motion was already moved when we were laying the papers. The chairperson and the committee have been doing some work and are ready to report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, National Economy -

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I am aware that members present have worked very hard to pass this Bill, which we have waited for years to pass - the National Medical Insurance Scheme Bill. 

I am particularly touched that the finance minister owned that responsibility to make sure that the Bill becomes a reality. The minister, on the other hand, failed to tell us whether we are going to make quorum. Even when we are battling with that situation, he has come in with another motion. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if we bring this fresh motion tomorrow, because we are exhausted and it is almost 7 o’clock? I am just seeking clarification. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think members are very happy after passing the difficult law. I will give them time to go and have an early dinner. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


