
Wednesday, 03 March 2010
Parliament met at 3.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
PRAYERS
(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 
The House was called to order.
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I regret that we have started late. We should have started earlier but ministers were having a Cabinet meeting deliberating on very important matters and they requested me to extend the time of commencing. I understood that the problem they are dealing with is an important one and I allowed them to complete it and that is why we are starting late. Otherwise, we should always start on time. Thank you very much.

3.23
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for granting me permission. I rise on a matter of urgent importance, and I am asking Government to take this issue up and explain at a subsequent time.

Most of us have received a copy of the East African Confidential, volume 1, No.1 dated 15 December 2009, which is published by the editor, Mr Cheeye. The lead article in the paper is “Murder most foul” and there is a photograph of the late Brig. Mayombo. 

Mr Speaker, I and many people were very close to the late Mayombo. I received a call from the family and they were saying that since the late Mayombo died, the media has been publishing a lot of information to the extent of even naming the alleged killers but to this date, Government has not come out publicly with detailed information regarding investigations on these allegations. The East African Confidential names David Senfuka. The article alleges that Senfuka was the one who planned and coordinated the poisoning of the late Brigadier. 

This man has a family and children and we want to avoid reprisal in the community. We do not want to have an irresponsible press. If Mr Cheeye has his own hidden agenda and hatred with this man, he should be called by the Police to substantiate such serious allegations. I, therefore, want to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain the action he has taken against Mr Cheeye or the alleged killer because this is not the first time such reports have been made. The Independent and the Red Pepper have made similar allegations. The paper alleges that David Senfuka has threatened very many people. This man also has a family and children. We want to avoid a situation where people are intimidated and harassed in society. We need truth and justice, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much. I thank hon. Ekanya for bringing this information to the attention of the House. 

The supplementary information I want to add comes in form of the public mind, and it is what in a Middle Eastern language would be called “the Arab Street”. This is the behaviour of the people on the street and what they think about some of the things that happen in the face of the ability of Government to act.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that a number of MPs, including myself, have had to be invited or summoned by the Police and subsequently sent to courts of law. I have had many cases in the last four years - I do not remember how many; I have lost count - over what I say either on radio or in the papers. A radio station by the names of CBS was closed purportedly for using its authorised mandate on the airwaves to allow individuals to say what Government thought was unfit for public consumption. These same members of the public, who are the consumers of this similarly good information from radio stations and newspapers, read all these articles and they watch with amazement. 

If you carefully read the editorial of the paper and you see the management of the paper, you would be surprised to note that these individuals have an inclination of belonging in terms of region. This has been my common language; it is a serious one and it is consistent. We fear that this thing is going to cause a problem. 

They continue to watch, again with amazement, how these reports go unchecked and the individuals who write them do not get invited to report anywhere. This creates the view on the streets again that maybe they are doing an assignment on behalf of a powerful organ either inside Government or outside Government but sympathetic to Government. 

This is the reason why I think it is important for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come up with a precise statement to clear the minds of the people and wash away this suspicion. Otherwise, some of us will continue to think that we are victimised because we do not belong to this side of Government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, it is really a pity that after we buried Mayombo, we still raise issues. It has taken too long to have this case settled once and for all. 

As usual, I will promise this House that let us go and dig out the stories and the reports and then we shall come to this House and give you the story the best way we know it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Can I beg for two weeks, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Two days?
 
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Not two days. 

THE SPEAKER: But if the report is there - 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Can I come here with this statement next week on Thursday, not Tuesday?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

3.31
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand on a matter of national importance. 

Yesterday we heard the message from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness about the disaster in eastern Uganda. Now we are now reading in the papers about more people feared dead or injured - a number close to 500. I suggest - I do not know whom to direct this concern to - that we could hold a national day of mourning and prayer for those people even before we wait for the numbers to rise to 1,000. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As you remember, honourable, yesterday we dealt with that subject. We said that we shall continue debating the subject because we had been promised a very comprehensive report. So, when the comprehensive report comes, we shall also consider that issue because that is when we shall be winding up this matter. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2003/04

THE SPEAKER: Apparently the owner of the report is not here. 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: We did present the reports pending debate in the House and adoption.    

THE SPEAKER: So, the position from the owner of the report is that the report was presented but we did not debate it maybe because we did not have copies of the reports. Now, are you ready to debate? If you are not ready with the report, can I put the question that we adopt the report?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report adopted.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2004/05

THE SPEAKER: This was also presented.

3.35
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We got these reports and I am rising to seek guidance on the way forward. I have read the reports but something that really caught my attention was in regard to the Kumi District local government accounts. 

According to the committee’s report, there were no responses received at all on all queries that were raised on the Kumi District local government accounts. The accounting officer had outstanding queries from the previous year of 2003/04. In 2004/05, what I see is that all the outstanding audit queries of 2003/04 had no responses. I want to find out from the committee whether the accounting officer of Kumi District did not appear before the committee. 

For those of you who have copies of the report, the recommendation that the committee gave was that they were deeply troubled by the disrespect shown by the accounting officer for not taking action on audit queries - and there were quite several of them, amounting to Shs 2.09 billion. As we speak, since 2007 that particular accounting officer and several other officers from Kumi District are before court in Kumi. 

It is a point of concern to us that if there are any improprieties on the part of any officer, I think prosecution should be expedited with a view of recovering the monies. Isn’t that possible? This is the case with Kumi but I am looking at other districts because they might be having the same problem as well. Isn’t it possible to refer some of such cases to the Anti Corruption Court with a view of expediting the prosecution in order to recover the money? Some of the monies that were not accounted for were as a result of incompletely vouched expenditures and irregularities in payments, missing vouchers, name them.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek guidance as to whether such cases cannot be referred from the magistrate’s court to the Anti Corruption Court that was recently established. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the chairman will help us on that, but they must have made recommendations. If we adopt the report, it means you approve the recommendations and those recommendations should be carried out. These public accounts committees are committees of Parliament; they report to us and once you have approved, their recommendations become effective.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I was the chairperson of this committee and I signed this report. I would like to inform hon. Epetait of our method of work. We used to have a timetable and we used to announce in the press which accounting officer would make submissions in respect of a given query by the Auditor-General. The committee would sit with staff from the Auditor-General’s office and go through the queries before calling all the accounting officers to pick our opinions in order to send their responses. When some accounting officers would not respond, the committee would go ahead to announce the second time. For those accounting officers who would not respond on time, the committee would issue summons to them. 

I hope you are aware that the accounting committees inherited huge backlogs, and I must thank the members who were on the Local Governments Accounts Committee during my time as chairman for working hard to help us produce reports for five years for all the districts and municipalities. I remember we usually started our meetings at 9am and they would go on till evening.

During that time we took a decision, in consultation with the officials from local government, the CID and the Auditor-General that if an accounting officer failed to respond for the first time, second time and to the summons, our recommendations were clear; we could indicate “No response”. The committee observation would then be that funds that were diverted from the source must be remitted immediately; the accounting officer should recover the funds and remit them to URA. In another sense, we could say, “The accounting officer should make good the loss”. 

The Constitution provides for this in our Rules of Procedure, but also the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act provides thus: “Any witness who does not co-operate and concurs in use of public funds contrary to established procedure should make good the loss.” So, after granting opportunity to the accounting officer of Kumi about four times and she did not cooperate, we applied the Rules of Procedure, the Constitution and the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act and took a decision in which we said: “No response. Our recommendation is that the accounting officer should make good the loss.” 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is clear. 

3.42
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the former chairman of the Local Government Accounts Committee for giving us that clarification. However, you know that we act on behalf of Parliament. This means that when we get any information regarding our activities as a committee, we report it to Parliament accordingly. It is up to Parliament to take a decision as to what to do by way of a recommendation to Government for implementation.

Since we took over this committee about two years ago, we have not come across such a situation. I would like to report that we have always had innovations in our committee sittings upon which we decided not to invite the accounting officers to Parliament and instead conduct public hearing from the accounting officers’ places of work. This will help to attract the interest of the community to what happens to public funds. Of course we do all that while bearing in mind our mandate as stipulated in Article 90 of the Constitution, which states in part that the committee has powers to compel a witness to appear before it to give evidence.

I would like to say that the situation is improving; it is not as bad as it was. I would like to assure the House that we are reaping results. We do not expect any of these cases coming on, Mr Speaker.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the look of things and given the fact that the recommendations are embedded in the report, I would like to beg that the question be put so that we can adopt the report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. I think the explanation is clear that once we adopt it, then the report becomes effective. The committees are committees of Parliament and they must report the recommendations to us. That is why once we adopt them, they become effective. So, I now put the question that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCE ON SELECTED ASSURANCES

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to present to this House the report of the Committee on Government Assurances. I believe members already have copies of the report.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will realise that this report was supposed to be presented in May last year; I will beg the indulgence of the members at some point. The Committee on Government Assurances –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiiza, I would like to know if you are going to read it verbatim or you have an executive summary to present.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, the report is not voluminous; I can be verbatim. Maybe I will first sort out the assurances before going to the recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: I am saying so because it is an 18-page report.

MS KIIZA: But it would be better for members to hear everything. I will try to be audible. 

The Committee of Government Assurances derives its mandate from rule 153 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. That rule mandates it to scrutinize assurances, promises and undertakings given by the ministers and other agents of Government in Parliament from time to time and report on the extent to which these assurances, promises or undertakings have been implemented.

The Committee on Government Assurances has handled several assurances and after that, scheduled field visits to make on-spot evaluations of the extent to which some of the considered assurances had been implemented. The committee in this report presents its comments on delays in implementation, the adequacy of actions taken and the extent to which the said assurances were implemented. As mentioned above, members can look at the terms and references for the tours we made as we examined the selected assurances.

Selected Sites of the Assurances

The committee has considered several assurances that were made since 2001 to-date. However, we could not finalise on all of them. We are yet to present another report for the same period. 

I would like to report that we were concerned with bridges, ferry services and roads. The bridges under consideration are: Nguse Bridge in Kibaale; Ngusi Bridge in Hoima; Nchera Bridge in Bushenyi; Agwa Bridge in Lira; Ora Footbridge in Nebbi District; Larop-Masindi-Kiyindi on Lake Kyoga and Albert Nile respectively; and Agora Bridge in Kitgum.


On the ferry services, we had Wanseko on Lake Albert - on Lake Kyoga between Rwampanga in Nakasongola District and Namasale in Apac District; on Albert Nile between Obongi, Moyo District and Maaji/Larok in Adjumani District; Kiyindi and Umi-Laropi.

On the roads, we visited rehabilitated feeder roads in Gulu, Amuru, Pader and Kitgum, the Kampala Northern By-Pass junctions on Hoima Road, Bwaise and south of Kyebando Hill, Bukoto, Kigowa and Nsimbi-Ziwome to the South of Kkulambiro Hill, Kiwatule, Jinja Road at Ntebetebbe opposite Nelson Mandela National Stadium commonly know as Namboole.

We also moved to Kisaasi to Bukoto Road, Old Kiira Road; Namugongo Road; on Old Kiwatule Road.
We then went to Awach and Abera in Gulu.

It should be noted that the Committee on Government Assurances was specifically interested in the extent of the work done, the time taken to implement the assurances and quality of the work done as mandated by the Rules of Procedure.

Bridges

In 2000, Government committed itself to rehabilitate selected bridges and a project code-named “0269 TR 23 (B)” was established under the Ministry of Works and Transport. Although it was specified that this project would cover bridges countrywide, a total of Shs 797.15 million was secured during the Financial Year 2007/2008 to only cover specific bridges of Agwar, Nchwera and Ora.

The Agwar Bridge in Lira

Agwar Bridge collapsed - as you can see from the pictures – after it was hit by a UPDF military tank in 2006. This was a foot bridge connecting Lira to Gulu through Aboke. The Ministry of Works and Transport, in conjunction with the US Army has already offered to construct a new bridge. A memorandum of understanding, by the time we visited the site, was yet to be signed by the two parties.

In addition to the lengthy procedure required to procure consultancy services to carry out geo-technological studies and design on the site, the new bridge is estimated to cost Shs 1.9 billion.

By that time, a temporary bridge had been constructed to save the situation as modalities for the construction of the new bridge were being concluded. Unfortunately, the time we visited the site the committee was informed that the budget of bridges for the ministry had never exceeded Shs 2 billion yet on average, a modern bridge would not cost that alone. The committee thus recommends that money be put aside to cater for the bridges that we have countrywide and to rehabilitate those where need may arise.

Observations

The Ministry of Works and Transport prefers to outsource technicians to carry out geo-technological studies and designs, to recruiting, developing and maintaining its own manpower. This is however, attributed to the financial incapability of the ministry to acquire and sustain multi-disciplinary technical personnel some of whom may not be frequently utilised. This practice, however, should be discouraged in order to build the capacity and create employment for our country men.


The Ora Foot Bridge

The Ora foot Bridge is located in Nebbi District. It connects Nebbi Town to Paidha and it is about 5 to 6 meters across the river. While the carriage way is about one meter and it is made of iron plates – though the bridge, by that time was in its final stages of completion, it was already operational. The cost of this bridge was Shs 243 million.

The committee noted with concern the cost of the contract, which was high yet did not reflect value for money.

Nchwera/Kyambura Bridge

Work on Nchwera Bridge began at the end of July 2007. Its construction was by Star Builders and Contractors and supervised by the Ministry of works and Transport. However, in 2008 the creation of the Uganda National Roads Authority led to the transfer of this supervision to UNRA.

The Scope of Work

Although there was some work pending on this bridge at the time we visited, the visible site was encouraging. The committee was also shown an alternative bridge as seen in the pictures named in the report being used by the residents while construction was still going on. 

Nevertheless, work stopped because certain activities had been omitted having not been initially budgeted for. This called for preparation of the variation report, which was expected not to exceed 15 percent of the original quotation before work could resume. Unfortunately, out of the Shs 700 million the contractor had only been paid Shs 200 million. And only one certificate of competition had been issued to him.

The committee was surprised that the contractor whose bridge was almost complete had been paid less money compared to those whose bridges were very incomplete. However, the ministry explained that the delays had been due to the subsequent delays in the transfer of supervision of the bridge from the Ministry of Works and Transport to UNRA.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, when we reached Nkusi Bridge in Hoima District designed to link it to Kibaale District constructed to replace the broken bridge as indicated in picture B below, we were told that work on this bridge had started in 2006 and was expected to be complete by end of the Financial Year 2006/20007. At the time of the committee’s visit, Members were informed that the amount of work done was 70 percent complete. The construction had been by Omega Construction Company.

Findings

It was reported that 70 percent of the expected work had been completed and in turn been paid for by the Ministry of Works and Transport. The committee was further informed that certificates of completion had been issued. However, despite the percentage of work allegedly covered, the committee was not satisfied with the work that had been done.

We also noted that though the work had started long ago, but by April 2009, it was still incomplete. We were told that an excavator had been placed at the site in January, but never put to use since then. 

Omega Construction Company failed to meet the given deadline. The committee was informed that the ministry encountered some problems with the contractor to the extent that at one time the contractor was given an ultimatum to finish construction of the bridge by 9 March 2009, which he did not respect. The completion on this bridge was behind schedule by that time by close to three years. 

The concrete on the bridge was seen to be rather weak while the bars were eroded. In this regard, Members were informed that the Ministry of Works and Transport had also at one time requested the contractor to re-do the work for which it was not satisfied but the contractor had not done so. 

The bridge is too narrow although its width was associated with the cost of construction. This implies that there could have been a mistake in the original design of the project.

Residents reported that even after its construction, during the rainy seasons this bridge still floods because it lacks breathers. Residents then resort to using boats at a cost of Shs 5,000 per person to cross a distance of about 200 metres from Kibaale to Hoima and vice versa.

The Nguse Bridge in Kibaale District
 
Nguse Bridge in Kibaale district was constructed but along the way, it collapsed and was reconstructed in August 2006 on the orders of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Findings of the Committee on the Project

The contract was awarded almost at the same time as that of Nkusi Bridge in Hoima district. The committee was satisfied with the work done and its construction was on schedule. 

Agora Bridge

The bridge is the only link between Kitgum and Pader. The bridge is poorly maintained and is disintegrating. It is suspected to have surpassed its lifespan, which could not be determined since the responsible engineers did not know the year when the bridge was constructed.

Apparently, lines of weakness have developed on the bridge posing a big risk to users. Bushes, silting by eroded soil and stagnant water were evident at this bridge. Whereas the roads were wide enough, the bridge was tiny and could not accommodate two-way traffic for both vehicles and pedestrians. 

The committee was informed that requests for funds amounting to Shs 15 million to maintain and open the flow of water had been placed and awaited response from the ministry. The committee therefore advises Government to expedite the process of releasing funds to arrest the situation.

Aswa Bridge

You can see it in the pictures. Formerly, this bridge had no rails but by the time we visited, the rails had been fixed pending the construction of a new bridge. Studies and designs had already been completed at the time of the visit and major constriction work was expected to begin in August last year. The construction of the bridge is estimated at Shs 3 billion although it is expected to increase in view of the current inflationary tendencies.

The European Union has undertaken to fully fund the construction of the new Aswa Bridge. 

The Selected Ferry Services

In 1997, Government assured this House that ferry services would be improved upon countrywide to ease water transport. Subsequently, a project was established in the Ministry of Works and Transport under the sub sector of transport code named IFMS 0267 TR 33 B entitled construction and improvement of ferry services. 

Work did not begin until 2007 when Shs 4.8 billion was planned and secured leaving no funding gap during the Financial Year 2007 and 2008 to cater for Laropi-Masindi port, Nakiwogo, Bukakata and Kiyindi ferry services.

The Kiyindi ferry was commissioned in 1987 by the Ministry of Works and Transport but at the time the committee visited in May, the ferry had not been working for the last seven months. One of its two engines was not working while the second engine was supposed to be repaired by June.

The Challenges: 
    • The staff operating the ferry had no office and quarters. 
    • There is no store for the ferry equipment. 
    • Lack of communication gadgets for the staff for example radio calls. 
    • There is no waiting room and no toilets for passengers at the docking site. 
    • Fuel for the ferry is picked by staff who use private means to bring it to the docking area. 
    • The concrete landing site needs to be reconstructed. 
    • There are limited life saver jackets for passengers on the ferry. 
    • The ferry staff is employed on temporary contractual terms. They requested to be employed on permanent basis.

The Masindi Port and Kungu Ferry Landing Site

Masindi port and Kungu landing sites provide a link between Masindi and Apac. These sites have an old ferry that has worked for 15 years as seen in those pictures. The two engines at the sides of the ferry work alternately that is one at a time. It also has a very temporary landing point that required Shs 2 billion, which would enable the works to begin.

Wanseko Ferry Services

On 28 September 1999, the Ministry of Works and Transport promised that in an effort to improve and emphasise water transport, the ministry would put a ferry linking Wanseko in Masindi District to Panyimur in Nebbi district. The ferry was put as promised but the residents of Wanseko requested this committee to request Government to alternate the ferry so that it can be able to spend certain nights in Wanseko other than spending all the nights at Panyimur as the case is at present. This alternative would then benefit both beneficiary districts equally.

Lwambanga Ferry Landing Site in Nakasongola District

Lwambanga I and II were the traditional landing sites to Namasale. Arising from the general assurance made by Government to improve all landing sites in the country, the committee took keen interest to establish the status of improvement of this landing site. 

It was informed, however, that because of the shallow water, this landing site was not recommended for construction of a modern site hence the Uganda National Road Authority does not have the above two sites in its plans.

Considering the technical obstacles given by the ministry, the Committee on Government Assurances would like to be advised whether to drop this assurance or whether to continue pursuing it.

Zengebbe Ferry Landing Site in Nakasongola District

The committee was informed that studies were conducted on this site three years ago to establish its suitability to hold a modern landing site. It was proposed that after the final review of water levels and procurement of a new ferry, temporary landing sites would be provided. 

However, the committee was informed that construction of a modern landing site could not commence then as the residents waited for delivery of a new ferry because UNRA was waiting for the procurement of the ferry, which ferry would then determine the design of the landing site. They would first procure the ferry and thereafter the design would be determined depending on the ferry. The committee was not satisfied with this explanation and requests that the ministry should consider the construction of the landing site with or without arrival of the ferry parts. 

The committee also learnt that two ferries were expected to be procured to serve Zengebbe and Namasale points, linking Lira and Soroti. 

Umi-Laropi Ferry Landing Site 

Umi-Laropi landing site links Adjumani to Moyo. The site has two ferries that are operational, one at a time. It also has a fulltime grader stationed at the site to ferry murram. 

We observed that a fallback position is available in case of heavy traffic and poor mechanical condition of any of the two ferries. This assurance was accomplished and the committee recommends that it should be closed.

Road Works

In 1996, Government committed itself to improve on the road infrastructure countrywide. A project to cover the whole country that was omitted in the ministry’s budget for years until 2001 was established in the Ministry of Works and Transport and it was codenamed IFMS 0308[TR 61(A)]. It was entitled, “Road Equipment for District Units.” 

This project was supposed to rehabilitate over 8,000 kilometres of feeder roads and to equip each district unit in the country with a minimum set of plant so that meaningful feeder roads maintenance work could be carried out to preserve investment so far made in the sub-sector. Priority was on the new districts of Pader, Mayuge, Kamwenge, Wakiso, Kyenjojo, Kanungu, Kayunga and Nakapiripirit.

Meanwhile, another project codenamed IFMS CODE 0274 [TR69 (B)] was established to cater for feeder roads’ rehabilitation in Northern Uganda especially in Gulu, Amuru, Pader and Kitgum districts. This project was intended to identify and expeditiously carry out road works on the identified roads and routes with the primary aim of facilitating the Army in its operation to quell insurgency as well as improving on communication in the area. In this project, 487 kilometres of main roads, 330 kilometres of feeder roads were to be improved upon and 180 kilometres of security track routes were to be opened up. 

Upgrading of Busunju–Kiboga-Hoima Road

Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima Road was supposed to be upgraded to class II Bitumen standard. A credit of Shs 27,216,008,012 an equivalent of US $15,718,440 was obtained from the International Development Association to upgrade Busunju to Kiboga Road to Bitumen standard under the Road Development Project Phase I. 

Observations

Parties responsible for implementation of the project: Construction of this road was implemented by the Road Agency Formation Unit under the employment of the Ministry of Works and Transport, while the project engineer was GIBB Africa Limited and the contractor was Sterling Civil Engineering Limited.

Scope of the works: The road begins at Busunju town in Mityana District and ends at Kiboga town in Kiboga District. Along the road, safety was ensured by putting up visible signs, guard rails in particular places and rumble strips. 

The road has been upgraded to Class Two bituminous paved road standard with a design speed of 80 kilometres per hour. The width of the carriage way is 6 metres with paved shoulders of 1.5 metres on each side. The carriage way has a 50 millimetre thick flexible asphalt surfacing. 

Comments on the Implementation Period

The committee learnt that on 7 February 2007, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the contractor signed a memorandum of understanding in which they agreed to extend the project completion period to 30 November 2007. The project was extended by another 1,305 days to a new 2,205 days. The new completion date then stood at 31 July 2007. 

This request for the extension of the completion period was backed up by fuel shortage that hit the country during the months of February, March, April and May 2007 and also due to heavy rainfall from September 2006 to June 2007 that significantly interfered with construction works. Other justifications for the request for the extension of the contract period included lack of bitumen, which constitutes a key raw material for the construction works. Nevertheless, satisfactory work was done. The committee, therefore, recommends to Parliament that this assurance be closed. 

Awach to Abera

Awach to Abera feeder road in Gulu is a 30 kilometre road that was upgraded to murram with the help of the Danish Development Association. It cost Shs 300 million.

The Northern Bypass

An assurance was made by the Minister of Finance in charge of General Duties, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana on Monday 7 July 2003 on behalf of Government, to begin construction of the Northern Bypass so as to reduce on the traffic in Kampala and to create other benefits that come with construction of roads. This project was financed under the sector Transport and Communications and the sub-sector was Road Infrastructure code-named TR 30 (IFMS Code 0268); under the title Construction of Kampala Northern By-Pass. It is located in Kampala District. 

The total planned expenditure on the project was US $63.589 million. The committee learnt that this money was secured, leaving no funding gap. Implementation of this assurance started on 20 May 2004 with civil works and the project was expected to end by November 2007. 

Observations of the Committee on the Northern By-Pass 

At that time the committee noted with concern the poor speed of Salini Construction – the contractors. The Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Nasasira, appeared before the committee and promised that sections of this project would be opened by the end of June 2009. Despite this assurance, by the time we visited the scene, the road was still closed to the public, as at 30 June. However, on 7 July 2009, the Uganda National Roads Authority issued a press release informing the public that the Jinja Road section had been opened and that UNRA was making preparations to open more sections of the road that were already complete by 31 July 2009. By that time, we were hoping that Government together with its contractor will live up to its promise. We are asking this House to advise the committee whether to drop the assurance or not.

General Observations:
    • The contractors of Kyambura Bridge in Bushenyi District should be recognised for the good work they have done, and we pray as a committee that the money to enable them finish construction of this bridge will be expedited.
    • The procurement process and technical studies take most of the time, hence delaying the implementation of planned activities.
    • The committee observed a poorly maintained marrum road connecting Apac District to Kungu landing site.
    • We also observed that there is hardly any modern landing site in all landing sites visited. There is either limited or no supervision of national landing sites and bridges by UNRA and the Ministry of Works. This was evident from the fact that UNRA and the Ministry of Works officials who accompanied the committee did not know the exact locations of many landing sites and bridges, yet in some circumstances certificates of completion had been issued to the contractors and great amounts of money paid out of the work done. So, we do not know how they were certifying places they did not know.
    • All contracts signed between the Government of Uganda and service providers should be availed to Parliament because Parliament has on several occasions failed to access certain contracts which would otherwise enable it to make its evaluation more effective.

Recommendations
    1. The committee wishes to recommend that breathers should be installed on Nkusi Bridge in Hoima District to reduce floods during rainy seasons, and to allow enough water discharge, hence avoid wearing away of the road.
    2. Challenges facing the Kiyindi Ferry should urgently be addressed. The ferries at Masindi Port and Kungu landing site should be replaced with immediate effect. 
    3. The committee also recommends that improved landing sites should be accompanied by a good access road network in order to encourage usage of the ferry services.
    4. Efforts to sign a memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and the US Army should be expedited to enhance replacement of Agwal Bridge.
    5. Supervision of work should be enhanced by both the Ministry of Works and UNRA in order to complete implementation of Government assurances in time.

The Northern Bypass had not been opened by the time we wrote the report and we were recommending that it is long overdue, and that it should be opened to the public for use. As we speak, it is already opened to the public for use. 

As a committee, we would satisfactorily say that assurance is not yet complete. The report is here for you, Members, to debate. I beg to move that this report be adopted by this House and that Government do take action on the recommendations herein.

THE SPEAKER: I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. I quite appreciate why you had to read the entire report because it is covering different subjects, and I also thank you that you have been able to cover the entire country.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. This report was produced in May 2009 and a lot of water has passed under the bridge since then. I would beg that you give me only this evening so that I prepare a comprehensive response. There are a lot of inaccuracies, which are in the report. There are many projects which have been completed and handed over. So, I beg that you give me this evening so that tomorrow I give a comprehensive report on all these issues.

THE SPEAKER: The good thing is that the chairperson, before she read the report, told us that it should have been read in May. It is true that many changes have happened and improvements have taken place. I think you have a point to update us with the present position.

The tendency would be to debate this report as it is, but there are changes already. In allowing him to give his presentation tomorrow, you can subsequently debate in light of the information that you will have received from him.

4.24
MS CECELIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I would like to find out from the committee whether they are coming up with other reports later on, because this particular report is only based on bridges, ferries and roads and yet there are so many other sectors that should have been reported on. For example, in Dokolo, I recall that when one of our Members crossed from the opposition to the Movement side, Dokolo was promised a girls’ secondary school and since then the issue has not been resolved and the school was even named Specioza Kazibwe. It has never started and I want to know what the Government is doing.

There are so many areas which this report should have covered. We want to know the promises that the Government has made in the health sector and other sectors and has failed to fulfil. I feel that this particular report is based on a very narrow area. So, I am urging the committee to broaden its work. 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is obvious the committee specified areas they were covering, and it is true that the committee is an existing committee which continues to report periodically to us. This time it has been roads, bridges, ferries and landing sites. The point you have made has merit and, therefore, the committee is advised to include other sectors. I thank you very much.

4.26
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): The committee has done a report on ferries and roads, and the honourable minister has said he is coming with some clarifications. Mine is on ferries. The President of Uganda issued a directive to the Ministry of Works to provide ferry services between Amuru District and Rhino Camp way back in 2007. As I talk now, there is no budgetary provision and we do not see anything happening. What I am saying is that when the minister is answering tomorrow, can he also come with something about the ferry services linking Amuru District to Rhino Camp in Arua District? I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, they are saying that you do not restrict yourself to what is in the report, but you can comment on other assurances that have not been fulfilled and also tell us the reasons.

4.28
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thought this should be made more clear to the minister. My brother, hon. Ocula restricted himself to bridges; but as the Shadow Minister of Works and Infrastructure, I know there are many other assurances that have been given on roads, railway, air transport, ferry services and bridges. 

What this House needs to demand of the minister is to come with a full report of all those promises given to the people. Unfortunately, I do not know where we start and we end because these promises keep coming. Probably it would be a good thing for you to guide the minister on where we are going to start from and end because promises are being made every day. Are those promises that were made yesterday going to be part of the minister’s report? I think it is necessary for us to be clear on what we are asking the minister to come with tomorrow. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I am seeking your guidance that perhaps you can allow Members to debate such that the minister can tomorrow – 

THE SPEAKER: No debating. Wait for a response and then you debate.

MR EKANYA: I want to thank the committee – 

THE SPEAKER: And congratulations on the new district –(Laughter)

MR EKANYA: If you congratulate my brother and Tororo has not got one and the people are hearing, they get disturbed –(Interjection)- I am seeking your guidance on the modus operandi of the report, and also thank the chairperson of the committee, because this is the first time in our Parliament to get a report from a Committee on Government Assurances – we really want to congratulate you and the committee Members. (Applause)

Assurance in lay man’s language is commitment, and according to the Commonwealth practice to which we have been sharing in the Speakers’ association, if Government commits itself and does not fulfill, then that Government has lied if it does not give satisfactory information. If Government does not do it, in other Commonwealth states, it attracts sanctions. 

I, therefore, want to seek your indulgence that you support the committee to do serious research so that the next report they produce should come with sanctions where Government money has been released and officials have abused Government commitment. So that our people - there are, for example, those elders from the honourable Speaker’s constituency in Kyanamukaka who participated in the World War and Government has assured this country year in and year out that they will be paid their money. Those elders have sold their cows, land and some of them have died and yet they have spent a lot of money and not received any money to date. Such kind of Government assurances which Government does not honour is a serious matter. 

I want to urge the chairperson of the committee to look at some of these very serious assurances and come up with recommendations so that we can even censure ministers in charge of this sector who come and commit Government and they do not live up to it. I seek your guidance and thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to influence the committee since you have told them about the practice and it is up to them to decide on what to follow.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/2009

THE SPEAKER: The report was given and it is now the opportunity for the shadow minister to respond and then we can have a debate. 

4.33
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Oduman Okello,): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, our views in response to the report of the Committee on National Economy are contained in a document that is being circulated.

Introduction

We thank the committee of the National Economy for their analysis on the performance of the economy and debt sustainability. The report was two-fold: the performance of the economy over the last financial year and debt sustainability. 

1. We agree with most of the recommendations and observations and in particular, that:
    a. Commercial lending rates remain high. This has been at the centre of our debates. 
    b. The trade balance is worsening every day and year.
    c. GDP growth rate for the Financial Year 2008/09 averaged 6 percent and was contributed by mainly the services sector which accounted for 51.2 percent of GDP. 
    d. There was only a slight improvement in the agriculture sector with a declining performance in the cash crop (read coffee) sector. When we talk about the cash crop sector, we are largely talking about coffee. 

2. We further support the committee’s recommendations that: 

    a. Government should maintain a soft monetary policy until the economy recovers from the economic downturn.
    b. Government reduces its role in the financial markets through use of monetary instruments to mop out excess liquidity. 
    c. Government ascertains the actual value of investments made and their benefits to Ugandans.
    d. Government undertakes reforms in the power sector management with the view to having one efficient institution to manage power supply.
    e. Government makes public oil production sharing agreements. We are repeating this over and over. 
    f. Government seriously considers redeveloping railway transport.
    g. Government rationalises and clears all domestic arrears.
    h. Government sticks to the debt strategy to curb the escalating debt.

Mr Speaker, while the recommendations are good, the committee reminded Parliament that on several occasions, similar recommendations were made to Government by Parliament, but no actions have been taken. Non-compliance with parliamentary recommendations by the Executive has made Parliament appear as if it is just a talking shop in the eyes of the public, hence a wastage of taxpayers’ money.

All we hear is infighting among the Executive over matters of harvesting oil and sharing the proceeds without regard to the wishes of the citizens on the matter.

Government must, therefore, style up and implement parliamentary recommendations.

Performance of the Economy

Performance of the economy can be measured using:
(a) Financial indicators like GDP, interest rates and balance of payments. 
(b) Comparing one year’s performance with another such as 2008/09 vs. 2007/08. 

However, in order to holistically measure economic performance, you must put into perspective the following five important attributes: the driver of the economy, the period, the targets, the baseline and the statistics.

The driver: to perform any task, you need a skilled driver. The economy is the task and the driver is the NRM Government that took power in 2006. (Interjections) In assessing the performance of the economy, we are assessing the performance of the NRM Government who are the drivers. A conclusion about the performance of the economy must, therefore, make reference to how well or badly the NRM Government has performed.

The period: the mandate of Government is for five years; that is 2006-2011. We should now, therefore, be measuring performance of the economy over the last three years; that is 2006 to 2009 for the assessment to be meaningful. Any continued reference to 1986 for any economic argument today will simply be misleading the public. (Applause)

The target: in measuring performance, targets must be clearly stated upfront. For example, what Ugandans will achieve by 2011 and what the value of NRM Government is to Ugandans in its five-year rule by 2011. Lacking such clear targets is like playing a football game where there are no goal posts. 

Further, whereas financial targets are necessary, they are not sufficient as they do not directly relate to the improvement of the welfare of citizens. Non-financial indicators such as the following must be used to measure welfare: levels of employment or unemployment, poverty levels, inequality in income and wealth, maternal and child mortality.

The baseline: having decided on clear targets, we must know what the status of these indicators was in 2006, yester-year 2007/2008, this year 2008/2009 and then how that performance is projected to hit or miss the target for 2011. (Laughter)

The statistics: to achieve the above, Government must have credible statistics. The credibility of our statistics is at stake. Government chooses to paint the picture it wishes using the data it chooses. 

In our budget response, for example, we used the price deflator to show you that Uganda’s GDP per-capita today is only US $294 as opposed to US $440 as Government had painted. Government deliberately dodged to respond to this serious anomaly.

Recently, Ssezi Cheeye, also quoting a World Bank report - he is not the author – concluded that, “Uganda’s official rate of GDP growth is suspect. While Ugandans are told that economic growth has averaged eight percent for many years, the World Bank report put Uganda’s GDP growth for 2006/07 at an average of 2.9 percent. You wonder; if the economy was growing at impressive rates of 6-9 percent, why have poverty levels remained undisputedly high in rural areas? Why is the current growth pattern raising income disparities? Who is benefiting from the growth? Why has Uganda’s debt stock increased to 20 percent of GDP over just two years and after heavy debt forgiveness? Why has Uganda not made any visible progress compared to economies like South Korea, Mauritius and Malaysia, which have more modest rates of economic growth?” 

The only conclusion is that statistics have been made up and, therefore, it is not possible at all, to talk about meaningful economic performance measurement.

If the above five attributes of performance measurement are not clearly laid out, we cannot hold the NRM Government accountable for any results for the economy. As such, Government continues to mislead the public to believe the economy is doing well using selected and unreliable financial indicators.

Despite its efforts to reduce poverty through PEAP, the majority of the population do not benefit from Government interventions. 

Income distribution is highly skewed with the poorest 20 percent of the population controlling only 6.6 percent, while the richest 20 percent benefit from 50 percent, thus widening income disparities. 

Further, an estimated 31 percent of the 30 million Ugandans still live on less than one dollar per day clearly showing that growth has not translated into substantial poverty reduction. But why, the conclusion can only be that someone is eating away the growth by creating linkages in the circular flow incomes or wealth, (read corruption), or the growth has simply been cooked up. 

On our case, both factors are clearly at play –(Laughter)– how then has Government managed to sustain the false impression that the economy is doing well? Government has perfected this art by hiring the services of international public relations companies to paint a good picture outside Uganda. For example, MS Hunton and William PLL of UK and M/S Whittaker were hired by Government at a whopping cost of Shs 1.3 billion and Shs 547,500,000 respectively to do exactly that. 

Civil society groups have also since discovered that Government manufactures impressive macro economic statistics to create comfort zones for political leaders and other development partners. Their reference is at the annex of the report. However, the true state of the economy is now getting clearer to Ugandans and Government is now finding it more difficult to paint a different picture.

In this regard, we now thank His Excellency President Museveni for sincerely admitting and also informing his generals at Kimaka Senior Command College, three months ago on 21 November 2009 that, “Uganda’s economy is in paralysis and unable to deliver the desired rapid transformation in people’s lives as earlier anticipated and reported by Government”.  We welcomed this apology from Government. (Applause)

Some critical points for thought:
    A) According to Uganda Investment Authority, land investments of US $1,963,417,100 for financial year 2008/09 were expected to generate some 45,422 jobs. That is in the committee’s report on page 17. This means that Government planned to spend Shs 86 million to recreate just one job. We wonder whether these are prudent investment decisions.

    B) In Uganda, for every one percent growth in GDP, employment increases by only 0.14 percent. The employment growth rate was reported to be highest in the services sector and lowest in agriculture for the last 15 years from 1992. And agriculture’s contribution to GDP declined substantially yet the sector still employs over 75 percent of the population with majority in subsistence non-wage employment. The reference is a publication by Ministry of Finance; details are in the reference sheet. We wonder why there is no proportionate growth in employment with growth in GDP, if it is not for leakages in the economy as already discussed above.

    C) Although the services sector currently contributes about half of the GDP, its contribution to total employment remains insignificant. That was said by the Ministry of Finance; the details are in the references. The Ministry of Finance, therefore, now confirms our view that growth in our GDP arising mainly from growth in the services sector will remain irrelevant to employment creation in Uganda.


    D) A cross country examination of the relationship between growth and poverty established that one percent increase in agriculture GDP leads to 1.61 percent increase in the income of the poor, while the corresponding values for manufacturing and services sectors are only 1.16 percent and 0.79 percent respectively. Details of that research are in the reference sheet. If we genuinely want to cause GDP growth with a corresponding growth in incomes of the poor, doesn’t this tell us clearly where to invest, that is, in the agricultural sector?

    E) The primary goal of economic growth is a reduction in absolute poverty. However, if such growth is associated with inequality, then it leads to rising poverty and this is not new economic theory. Our poverty levels and people welfare cannot improve when we have the highest dependence burden, being the number of dependants per worker at 1-12, which is the highest in the world, compared to 0.84 for Kenya, 0.85 for Tanzania, 0.87 for Sub Saharan Africa. Reference is World Bank Report. This cannot improve when our public policies still favour and enrich a few powerful people and regions at the expense of the poor and disenfranchised population. Therefore, our economic growth will remain irrelevant to poverty reduction unless and until we redirect focus to substantially increase real investments in agriculture and productivity.

Recommendation

The NRM Government should account for its time in Government. It should demonstrate its resolve to fight poverty by publishing its target results on employment levels, on poverty levels and income inequality for the period 2006–2011. We also recommend that further election decisions should be based largely on economic credentials of a Government and its stewardship of the economy. (Applause)

Debt Sustainability

Mr Speaker, one honourable member once told this House that in African culture, a woman does not simply borrow salt from a neighbour unless the matter is given a painful nod by the man. Doing so without authority would lead to a fight and a possible divorce. Borrowing is painful because it exposes the man’s failure to provide as the head of a home. It is one of those painful decisions to be made by a man and when salt is borrowed, it must be felt in the vegetables at supper. There can be no better analogy.

Unfortunately, our economic managers here do not have the African sense of shame to borrow. They are at their best when borrowing, saying it is sustainable and will be properly spent without explaining misuse of past loans. This excessive appetite to borrow money that benefits a few people at the expense of the rural poor must be tamed.

Members will recall that no sooner had Parliament passed the Budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010, than Government tabled several motions to borrow money now totalling to over US $631 million. This unprecedented speed of borrowing will only mortgage the future generations and definitely crash this country again into another debt overhang unless it is checked now. It is possible to develop a country, and this is a serious statement, it is possible to develop a country without relying on borrowing. We take loans as development money meaning that if we do not borrow then there will be no development. That is a wrong impression created; China did it. We recommend harmonisation and rationalisation of Government borrowing and debts.

Conclusion

The Opposition is concerned about the will of Government towards implementing parliamentary recommendations and its motive in displaying wrong data on the economy drummed up with public relations. We are also concerned about the sense of responsibility by the NRM Government to account for its time as drivers of the economy and its motive in endless, reckless and wasteful borrowing of unwanted loans without showing value for money.

Research has discovered that this economy has been declining steadily since 1996 but it is only pampered by false statistics and obscured by public relations. To have an economy with one of the highest GDP growth rates in Sub-Saharan Africa but remain one of the poorest countries in the world over a very long period of sustained economic growth, is a historical record and baffles everyone. We have told you already that the cause of this is greed and “cooked” statistics. Ugandans yearn for an economy that can improve their welfare and distribute incomes equitably. 

This can only be achieved when they have a Government that is fully accountable and resources entrusted in their hands which the NRM as a government have proved not to be. This could also be addressed if Parliament increasingly asserts its independence so as to effectively check on the apparent excesses of Government. 

The onus now remains on Government to demonstrate that it is fully accountable. Otherwise, as of now, the writings are on the wall on the performance of the economy and their sustainability is very clear for everyone to see and we believe that all those who are true to themselves have already seen. I thank you, for your kind attention. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman, for this reply. The debate is open but some information which I am inclined to give the House is that Parliament as an institution has already decided to facilitate the shadow ministers so that they can do their work to their best and there is an item to facilitate them for research. I am saying so because, for instance, in the conclusion and earlier, it was a question of “cooked” statistics. I think with this facility, when the shadow ministers are making their statements, they will have the correct statistics to contradict the “cooked” statistics. When you say they are “cooked” and you do not have your “uncooked” ones, then it becomes a problem. As a policy, Shadow Ministers are facilitated for research.

This is only for information, it is not for debate because I am in charge of the policy and this is a fact.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I want to thank my colleague for the report and I would like to suggest that if we are to all contribute towards nation building, we should make sure that we share reports before we bring them here.

For example, the Leader of the Opposition should be privy to a report which is going to be presented to the House so that without wasting time, he comes with a response and likewise the Leader of Government Business should be privy to such reports. I am remaining with no alternative but to request for more time to go and prepare a response to this report because there are really issues which have been presented where I will need to consult the documents we have so that I come maybe tomorrow afternoon -

THE SPEAKER: You mean you have just got the copy of his response?

MS NANKABIRWA: I have just got the copy today and I do not know because there are issues whereby Ssezi Cheeye has been quoted; such authorities, I also need time to go and consult with my technical people in the ministry and we write a response justifying what we have given so far. We have ever informed this House of some of the issues which the Opposition is insisting that they are just cosmetic so we can go and dig deep and find justifications. I beg to request.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I just want to clarify that we did not simply keep away the report from the good honourable minister but we were responding to a report of the Committee on National Economy. When that report - actually they were two reports; when those reports were presented, the agreement here in the House was that to facilitate debate of the report of the committee, we would have to make a response at some stage and then debate opens. This is where we are at. I was not responding to a paper or a report by the minister but she has made her point.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Mr Speaker, the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy reported on behalf of Parliament but the shadow minister is making a response as a shadow minister and pointing fingers at Government and its institutions. So, it is naturally fair that Government should go back and also consult the institutions where fingers are being pointed and we also come back and defend our position as Government. 

One such big allegation has been directed to a legally constituted institution of the state which is the custodian of all the statistics that we all depend on, which is a very serious statement that we must go back and ask the Executive Director of the Bureau of Statistics to justify this allegation. We beg as Government that it does not do any harm because this is a report of our national economy that affects all of us both in Government and in the Opposition. Thank you, Sir.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I seek clarification, Mr Speaker. This is a response to two reports and now the Government side is asking to respond to a response. If we go this way, the Opposition will have the right to seek permission to respond to the response to the response to the response. (Laughter) I simply do not know where Parliament will end if we are to take that route? If you are in Government, I would rather that you are ready all the time because this is the report of the figures of your reports; you should get up and talk about it. If you do not know how to be in Government, get out. (Laughter) 

    THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the position is that a report of a committee of Parliament was presented on the status of the economy. It was not an Executive report but a committee’s report – our parliamentary committee’s report. That report is apparently talking about the performance of Government in running the economy.

    The Shadow Minister in charge of Finance which is the economy has responded to the parliamentary committee’s report. He is not responding to the Government’s report. (Applause) And in this one, you see that the Executive is alleged to have hired people to hire figures. So what I think the honourable minister was saying is that there is a need to look at the two reports; the parliamentary report and the Shadow Minister’s report and also make their response. 

     But I think the problem has come because the Rules Committee has not finalised the rules as to how the Opposition side should be conducting its business within the committee. I would think that while they were discussing the performance of the economy in the committee where the shadow minister sits as a member, these issues should have come up in order for the parliamentary committee to consider because they could have bought the idea that the figures which the government was giving were “cooked”. But now this has come up and, therefore, the Executive wants to respond to the entire combined report of the shadow minister and the parliamentary committee.

What the country is interested in knowing is not the scores of one side against the other but the actual position. So, since the Government is asking for time to prepare so that we have three documents; we have the official committee’s report, we have the shadow minister’s report, we might as well, in fairness, allow them that time to go and prepare and then we combine and debate. We shall not be losing – maybe we may lose in scoring but the country will benefit in knowing the truth. 

MR EKANYA: Whereas your guidance is full of wisdom and should be the way forward, the minister needs to withdraw her statement based on these facts.

THE SPEAKER: Which statement?

MR EKANYA: The minister has alleged here that because she got this report today, she is not ready. If the minister, as you have ably advised, is seeking time to respond to the committee’s report and also this one, that means that the Minister would have been ready with the response to the committee’s report because it was tabled here some time back but she is not even ready with that. So, she is using excuses of this report to ask for time to respond to the committee’s report. Therefore, I think that to really give justice based on your advice, the minister should withdraw her inability to prepare for the committee’s response and seek time to respond to both the committee’s report and the one of the shadow minister so that we have fairness and justice.  

MR MUKITALE): Mr Speaker, the motion before us is to adopt the committee report and I am happy that you have brought out the procedural issue that this is a committee report and that the shadow minister, my colleague and friend, is only responding to that report and has raised issues addressed to Government. The clarification I am seeking is that I thought that the Minister’s response would come after the Members’ debate so that Members raise issues from the report -

THE SPEAKER: No, you see chairman, you made your written report and comments and the shadow minister has also made his but now the Executive also wants to make its comments so that after responding to some of the comments you made and he has made, we debate. What do you lose? 

MR MUKITALE: I agree entirely with that, Mr Speaker. The only thing I am saying is that -

THE SPEAKER: You should improve because the Opposition side should facilitate the committee of Parliament in making its report. While in the committee you should discuss the figures so that you can improve on the report. Okay, let us give him time. Are you ready tomorrow? Okay, we shall therefore allow the minister to respond on Tuesday and we shall have a full-fledged debate. We, however, appeal to the minister, if possible, to give us his written response in advance.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Speaker, still on that issue, as you are aware, the committees are made up of both Government side MPs and Opposition members and in most of these reports, you will find that even members of the Opposition have signed these reports. Now that the members of the Opposition have signed that report, isn’t it an indication that they are in agreement with the report and the figures therein? 

I am also seeking guidance because if the shadow minister comes and disputes what members of the committee have confirmed and disputes the figures - I don’t know how you look at it. Isn’t it -

THE SPEAKER: I think this procedure has not been clear and that is why the Rules Committee was tasked to go and look into how business in the committee should be conducted. If the Opposition has a position, it should first be discussed in the committee and if there is dissent then we can handle it. I think that is what it was but the Rules Committee – where is the Chairman of the Rules Committee? Anyway, we have decided that on Tuesday, we will continue with full debate on this matter.

Therefore, the next business plus this one will be - we adjourn to tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 04 March 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)
