

Tuesday, 2 March 2021

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to inform you that we shall be having a brief sitting today. We have suffered a tragedy in our home. However, I wanted to address a matter which the House needs to know, relating to a supplementary schedule we passed a few weeks ago. 

Subsequent to the passing of that supplementary schedule, I received formal complaints that- 

One, in respect to one of the requests for compensation, the land has been inflated by 254 hectares. 

Two, although the presentation indicated that one of the beneficiaries was receiving a second payment, she had never received even the first payment. Therefore, chances were that the second payment was also not going to reach her. 

The third one is also related to inflating the quantum. 

These are matters which we thought we should first inform the House about. I have also informed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we are unable to process the entire supplementary schedule. I will be asking him to move a motion to temporarily halt that part of the supplementary. I will also be establishing an ad hoc committee to investigate those allegations so that we can get to the bottom of this. That is why I had to come despite other things. 

We have some good news. Despite the challenges of COVID-19 - difficulties in travelling, training and exposure - our children, the Hippos, the under-20 football team of Uganda, have given us reason to smile. I see the Minister of State for Sports here. They have reached the finals of the Under-20 Africa Cup of Nations. (Applause) They are going to play Ghana in the finals. 

In 1978, we played Ghana and we lost at the finals but we are praying that these young people finally make it. We would like to commend them, congratulate them and pray for them. Even the under-17s are doing well. They are also marching hard and fast in their contest for the Under-17 Africa Cup. 

Honourable members, this is March. It is the time when – after every two years - we must make our declarations to the Inspectorate of Government under the Leadership Code Act, 2002. Filling the forms commenced on 1st of March and will end on 31st of March. You are supposed to fill them online. 

Honourable members, you know the risks of not filling those forms. I would like to ask you to do the needful. If there is any Member who has difficulties with filling these forms, please go to our ICT department on the third floor of North Wing, so that you can be assisted to fill the forms and ensure that you meet the deadline. 

We have, in the public gallery, members of the Uganda Red Cross Society who are here to observe the proceedings of this House. We welcome –

    1. Hon. Stephen Tashobya, Treasurer, Uganda Red Cross Society;
    2. Mr Robert Kwesiga, Secretary-General, Uganda Red Cross Society;
    3. Mr Alex Luganda, Legal Advisor, Uganda Red Cross Society.
(Applause)

3.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate our team. We watched this match on Kenya Broadcasting Corporation (KBC) instead of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). Uganda Broadcasting Corporation was instead showing us Hollywood films. 

However, the procedural matter I am raising, Madam Speaker, is that last week, you directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring the list of people whom Members are calling “missing persons” but they have in fact been abducted and arrested. Up to now, nothing has been done. We only see the spokesperson of Uganda Police communicating through Uganda Media Centre as usual. We have not got an answer about the people who were abducted, and others are still being abducted. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for us to know why the minister is not giving us the list? If he has failed, I am ready to provide the list of those people who have been abducted. (Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the missing persons has become part of the political and security vocabulary of this country. 

We read in the media that the list has been forwarded to the Minister of Internal Affairs. This matter centres on the constitutional rights of the citizens of this country. This Parliament swore to defend and protect the Constitution. The matter of abduction and disappearances at the hands of state agents and operatives is such a critical matter that we cannot afford to have any further delays in having the list forwarded. 

Not should the list be forwarded, but we need tangible action taken on those abducting the citizens of this country and answers as to when those abducted persons shall be arraigned before courts of law, among others. 

The information I am giving hon. Ssewungu is that this matter is of extreme public importance not only to the people around Kampala but even to us in the rural areas. We are victims and we are looking forward to a very categorical explanation about the whereabouts of these citizens and the actions being taken to have them regain their freedom. 

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, I would like to say that if the minister is not ready to produce the list, I am ready, as I have always done, to bring the names of those people and tell you where they are. 

People should respect this Parliament. When you gave the directive, the member from Onyee was saved from being detained - up to court. If the minister has failed, I seek leave from your chair to bring the list. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. When you ordered last week that the list must be produced, one boy from my constituency told me that he watched you very boldly talking about this matter.

The boy narrated to me how over 200 of them were arrested and taken to a place in Mabira Forest during elections. He further said that while less than 20 managed to escape, they do not know where the rest are.

Very many Ugandans have disappeared and I am sure the police must be feeling ashamed; that is why they are taking their time to produce the list. Let them produce the list. If some of them were killed, let them tell us clearly so that the parents and their families take care of their bodies. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable members, in today’s New Vision, the President invited all the district and regional police commanders. According to that story, there is still a clash between security agencies.

Police is complaining about being accused of not doing their work and yet it is the Army that has these people. Let us do that. In the Daily Monitor, there is a story about a one, Kasaato, a member of the National Unity Platform, who was arrested, detained, beaten thoroughly and later released.

When you give me an opportunity, I will avail you the list showing you those who arrested them and where they are, if the minister procrastinates on this matter. Thank you.

3.11
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker, it is a very touching matter that this Parliament has to express concern about the disappearance of people whom we represent in the House. However, we have learnt that you lost your only daughter although you have boldly come to chair the House. 

I know that this is not a motion but I think since you are the head of this institution, the head of our family and we are here as a family, I formally request for your permission to allow the House to stand and observe a minute of silence in honour of your departed daughter.

This is not a personal matter. When you lose a member of the family, we all feel pain. I know that while you are bold, very courageous and taking it as a mother, you are also human. Some of us who see the way you sometimes conduct your affairs feel the pain. 

Therefore, I would like to formally request that you allow the House to observe a minute of silence upon the death of your dear daughter. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the young lady is called Alitwala. Let us stand up for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to express my deep condolences and sadness upon the death of your daughter. As a mother, I feel it and I am sure very many mothers here are feeling the same. (Interjections) The fathers are complaining. I think it is unfair to leave out the fathers since they are the ones who take charge. I would like you, at an appropriate time, to give us a little bit detail of what happened to our dear daughter. Also I request that you let us formally know what arrangements are in place to enable us stand with you, as a family, during this sad moment.

Some of us who are Christians know that once you are born, death is just in waiting but at the same time, when death occurs to a child of that age, we all feel upset and sometimes ask; “Lord, why did you take this one when there are many people in our midst who ought to have gone yesterday?”
We definitely feel very saddened and ask the Lord to comfort you and the family during this sad moment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Members, for the concerns. As I indicated in my opening statement, I expected this to be a short meeting. I have come because there is an important matter on the Order Paper, which we needed to handle, relating to the supplementary expenditure schedules that we passed last week. After this business, the other work will be done another time.

However, we shall be having a funeral service tomorrow in Kamuli at our home at Mbulamuti, starting at 12.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

3.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssewungu raised a very important matter and it is not the first time. The Prime Minister is here - it is ugly for us to just be reading stories in the newspapers concerning the Police and the UPDF fights. They said they are not the ones responsible, even when it comes to releasing the list. 

The Commander-in-Chief directed this to happen but it is now two weeks down the road and they have disobeyed this directive. Who are these people? Was the President being honest when he directed those people to publish the list? What do they want the public to have in mind? If the Commander-in-Chief directs and you do not fulfil - if the President is serious, he should swing into action to discipline the officers who did this.

The boxer who was killed - the President apologised and said that he knew that it was the security people - but up to now, the family has not heard about these officers being arrested and paraded. The family is yearning for justice but nothing is happening. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister should take charge. Despite the death of your daughter - and may her soul rest in peace - you have come here because of the way you feel about this country. 

The matter you raised, of alleged fraud by some people in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we had raised it here; and we want to thank the Chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission because when she realised that we were about to pass that, she ran very fast and sent a letter, through hon. Mbwatekamwa. 

Due to the way the Government put up a spirited fight, you can now see how ugly it is going to turn out. Thank you, for taking a bold decision to stop that payment despite what happened to your family. Otherwise, by tomorrow, if we had not come here, the money would have been paid. 

That ad hoc committee you are proposing should dig into this matter and establish which people took the first payment. How many acres were they? Who has inflated it? I am being told that even the one for the church –(Interjection)– The man refused the money.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we would like to uphold you for the decision you took, despite what has happened to you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope we are not reopening the matter. (Members rose_) No, we shall have an ad hoc committee to look at that.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, they should not also get that money for compensation of the church. It should not be released because the person who demolished the church, Dodo, said there was no valuation report and he never asked for that money. He was wondering how that money came about before giving a valuation report.

Remember, Madam Speaker, I resisted that money here and even asked Hon. Beti Kamya the same question. So, as you raise issues about the other money that you have stopped, still, the money for Mr Dodo is illegitimate because he never agreed with the ministry and there is no valuation report. He said his land is more valuable than the money they wanted to give him. This is in the news and we can produce the evidence.

We pray that this one should be given more attention as well. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: If I got you right, Madam Speaker, I think you said all that money for compensation – for the six names which were given here – should be halted until the committee produces a report.

THE SPEAKER: All of it.

MR OKUPA: I remember that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal had, in her minority report, even raised these issues. So, we want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for that.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in my minority report, I had raised all those issues and I was very pained that somehow those who drove the matter on the Floor were able to persuade Parliament to approve that particular allocation.

Madam Speaker, I had put it in my minority report and the chairperson of the committee and a few others were able to pause – I was not allowed to present the minority report! All these facts would have been brought before you.

Now that we have realised that it was a mistake, I will definitely dig out the information and bring whatever details I had dug out before.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware that – of course when that matter first came up, there were objections. That is why we sent it away to the committee, first, to review and give us a report. So, the House decided on what was brought from the committee.

However, it is good that we have been able to identify the loopholes and they will be handled. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you while at the same time sympathising with you on the death of our daughter.

Madam Speaker, a while ago, resulting from a matter of public interest that was raised by Hon. Ssewungu, colleagues here have made additions - I was also about to get up to tell this House that my nephew, Victor Bukenya Balikuddembe, has been missing for the last two months.

Even in my constituency, a number of people have their young people disappearing each and every other day. In only one week, in Mukono, we recovered a nearly-dead young man from Kyaliwajjala, who was dumped in Mukono. 

Two of my constituents were arrested by people claiming to be enforcing curfew and their veins, in particular, were targeted and slit. They were tied with ropes and left to bleed. One of them, as we talk right now, is still unconscious.

The point of procedure I am raising is that, given the importance of that matter, recalling that even in his book Sowing the Mustard Seed, the President, who is the author, said that never again should any person disappear in Uganda. 

He even went ahead to say that when he was young, when his mother would look for a needle in the home, they would put out the carpets, chairs and light the candle until they would find a needle. By saying that, he was saying that it was not fair for Obote’s Government to cause the disappearance of Ugandans. 

After guiding us very well, Madam Speaker, colleagues have moved very fast to another very important business. However, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that we first exhaust the matter concerning the disappearance of our people, the murders, detentions, persecution, witch-hunt and even extortion?

In Mukono, I have a businessman who was arrested and they told his family that: “If you tell Nambooze, we shall kill him. Otherwise, organise Shs 5 billion if you ever want to see him again.” These things are happening.

Madam Speaker, you have always been good to us. I am not saying this because you are seated there but I am talking about something I really believe in, that you have been good to us. By and large, this House has helped Ugandans to solve issues.

I think, Madam Speaker, that it would be very important if you would, please, allow people to raise these matters and also allow Parliament to come up with a resolution, as an answer to Hon. Ssewungu’s matter of national importance. When that time comes and you grant it, I will also return here and tell you the number of people who are missing in my constituency.

He also said that he has a list. Where Government has no list, we cannot throw away the list of the Opposition, Madam Speaker. I beg that this matter be revisited. I agree that the issue which is on the Floor right now is very important but –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are really diverting this House. Can I make a ruling on the issue by Hon. Ssewungu, please? We are now moving everywhere.

Honourable members, it is true that since we resumed Parliament, there have been complaints about missing persons. His Excellency the President demanded that those who have the lists should publish them so that people know where their family members are, which has not been done.

When we last sat last week, we asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring the list, both from the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force, to lay them on the Table. However, in the absence of that, I want to ask those members who have missing people to produce a list and present it here and then we ask the Government to account for those people. That is what we can do at this stage because it is the easiest way to handle it.

3.30
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am very sorry about the loss of your dear daughter. I would like to convey my sincere condolences to you and the family at large. 

Madam Speaker, under normal circumstances, you are hurting because of the loss of your daughter; so, you should not be sitting here but because you love your duty, you are here. However, we have a Deputy Speaker, who should help you when you are either busy or you have problems. 

I would like to find out what happened to the Deputy Speaker. I have not seen him for a long time. Is he on leave? Where is he? He could help you at this difficult moment. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You will see him. (Laughter) Can we move to item No. 3 on the Order Paper?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AMENDING THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.4 AND ADDENDUM 1 AND 2 TO THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 4 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra):  Madam Speaker, I am moving this motion under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

“WHEREAS on 11 February 2021, Parliament considered Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 4 and Addenda 1 and 2 to Supplementary Schedule No.4 for the Financial Year 2020/2021, and appropriated supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/20 21;

NOTING, however, that Parliament has received a petition from Mr Michael Obongomin contesting the allocations made to –

(i) 	Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, for the benefit of M/s Ephraim Enterprises totalling to Shs 3,802,500,000 as compensation for compulsory acquisition of land by the Government of Uganda for Ndeeba Church of Uganda; and

(ii) 	Vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, for the benefit of Mr Mugisha Geoffrey, totalling to Shs 1,494,000,000 as compensation for compulsory acquisition of land; alleging that the land belonging to Mr Mugisha was inflated by 256 hectares and the value for M/s Ephraim Enterprises’ land was inflated by Shs 2 billion; 

APPRECIATING THAT there is a need to examine these allegations to avoid any probable loss of public funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves to amend its resolution dated 11 February 2021 on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 4 and Addenda 1 and 2 to Supplementary Schedule 4 for the Financial Year 2020/2021 by deleting the following allocations-

(i) 	Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, for the benefit of M/s Ephraim Enterprises, totalling to Shs 3,802,500,000 as compensation for compulsory acquisition of land by Government of Uganda for Ndeeba Church of Uganda; and 

(ii) 	Vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, for the benefit of Mr Mugisha Geoffrey, totalling to Shs 1,494,000,000, as compensation for compulsory acquisition of land.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A while ago, you took a decision, as Parliament, to establish an ad hoc committee to look into these matters and the minister was here while you took that resolution. When the minister hurriedly comes here to amend without the information of a committee of Parliament-


THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Nsamba; the minister is assisting the House. I informed you that there have been complaints about this this component. It is part of a bigger supplementary. What the minister is asking us to do is to remove this part and proceed with another. That is what he is doing.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The setup has nothing to do with this. We have to submit the supplementary we passed to the Government. All he is saying is that we present the one which has no issues; that is what he is saying.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. You will realise that there are certain procedures that must be followed, if the Uganda Land Commission is to acquire any land.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, that will be presented to the ad hoc committee. All we are saying is that we stay this payment and the House will investigate. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Out of the six people -

THE SPEAKER: You arrived late; I mentioned this in my opening statements. I said I had to come and deal with this despite the tragedy in my home. The minister is just assisting us to move properly. 

3.38
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that the minister is formally withdrawing and I stand here to second that withdrawal. However, I would like to seek clarification from the minister on addenda 1 and 2 of the supplementary schedule. I do not know whether the two add up. Otherwise, the motion should capture the total amount for the six beneficiaries. 

THE SPEAKER: These are the ones that had issues. We are following the petition and this is what was contained in the petition. The details will go to the committee. I, therefore, put the question that this House do adopt the motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk can proceed with the other items of the supplementary budget so that the other ministries can process their resources. We shall set up the ad hoc committee and I will inform you about the composition. 

Honourable members, let us just handle the matters of national importance and the other work will be done tomorrow. 

3.39
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, allow me join my fellow colleagues, to first of all, extend a message of condolence for the loss of our dear daughter, Sheila. 

I rise on a matter of national importance. As we all know, COVID-19 has caused a lot of problems, not only to us but across the world. The matter of national importance I am raising concerns Malaba, which is the main entry point of most of our cargo, in terms of both import and export to this country. It also serves as the main “artery” as far as revenue collection in this country is concerned.  

We have two gates in Malaba; the main gate used by the commercial business persons and trucks, which cross into Uganda and back to Kenya, as well as the small gate, which is the communal gate. Due to COVID-19, the gates were closed. When the Government resolved to open the gates, the main community gate that serves the central business district of Malaba has remained closed to date.

I would like to demonstrate to this House and all those that are watching us here, what Malaba looks like and the danger Malaba is headed for when the small community gate remains closed. This is how the Malaba border looks like – 

THE SPEAKER: But this is not on the Hansard.
 
MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, it might not be on the Hansard but just for purposes of explanation. Let me use this to explain what I am talking about so that you can understand the pain that the people of Malaba are going through because of the closure of the community gate. 

Malaba is the only border that has the Malaba Town, which is the central business district, beside the customs point. Unlike other border towns, where you exit the main customs area and then meet the town ahead, Malaba has its town therein. 

Madam Speaker, those who created these borders found it convenient that Malaba should have a small community gate, which is used by the local community that come to the market and carry out their businesses and they do not have anything to declare in the customs areas that are gazetted. 

The closure of this gate has slowly but surely started to impact on the community of Malaba, Tororo County and maybe, the whole region in general. This is because all the food brought to Malaba for consumption of those across and otherwise is depleted and they are now getting into trouble, let alone their businesses. 

My prayers and those of all people that love Malaba and Tororo County in general are; Government – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, raise your concerns. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, before he relays his prayers, I would like to say that the spirit of the East African Federation is being killed on the borders of Eastern Uganda. What my colleague is lamenting about here happened during the COVID-19 times in Busia. This has reduced trade between Uganda and Kenya. The people of Malaba are suffering. It has encouraged people to pass through bushes because their only community roads – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the prayer, hon. Angura? 

MR ANGURA: My prayers are: 

    1. That Government moves very fast and helps to open the community gate, where people without goods or need to be cleared pass, enroute the official main entry point where people always pass and have passed since time immemorial. 

    2. That Government provides temperature guns, in case there is fear that those coming from Kenya or going to Kenya have challenges of COVID-19. Let temperature guns be provided at that point so that people go on with their businesses normally. 

    3. The sooner this is done, the better for us.  

Madam Speaker, I had two issues of national importance; the second issue is that you may recall that we travelled to London as a team that had been appointed by the Government to verify the boundaries of Tororo County and West Budama. 

Despite all that we have raised to have the boundary report presented here on this Floor, and later on have the Ministry of Local Government come up with a motion here for alteration of Tororo boundaries to create another district out of it, preferably West Budama District, to be called Nagongera, it has faced challenges. I would like to remind you that sometime back on 5th May, you ruled here that the minister comes after 15 days to bring a motion –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the Member on the Floor to give us information on matters of closure of the border? He uses that avenue to bring up a very controversial matter at a time when the Speaker has made it clear that she is mourning but she is here to deal with only urgent matters, which have been brought to our attention? 

Is the honourable member in order to stir our emotions and start talking about matters of Tororo, dividing it and creating districts? This matter has been outstanding for years but he has decided to bring it today. Is this honourable member in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the Prime Minister examine the issue of the community border gate at Malaba, because it was following the COVID-19 directives that the gate was apparently closed? 

On the issue of Tororo, let the Government, please, conclude this matter so that it gets off our arena. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to just give information to the House because I have been following up the issue of the small gate. I visited Malaba on 21 February, which was a Sunday, to avert a pending demonstration by the business community that was scheduled to take place on Tuesday. 

I contacted the Minister of Health because that gate was closed when Government closed the borders. The Minister of Health said that they have since re-opened all the border areas and I should follow up with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

I have been in touch with the minister and on Tuesday, 23 February 2021, she wrote requesting that the gate be opened. I thought that I should give that information because we are only waiting for the directive from the Ministry of Health to the authorities at the border to have that border reopened because a number of businesses - the place is just a deserted area. We all know that Malaba has been the gateway to this country from the east and most of the people have lost their livelihoods.

When I visited that day, there were even women who had been arrested and locked up in police cells because they failed to pay up loans yet their businesses are closed. I am following up the matter; I hope the Ministry of Health should be able to resolve this matter within this week. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also extend my condolences to you. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the plight of the small and medium enterprises that have been affected during the COVID-19 period. The Government had promised to give a stimulus package to business people but it appears it has only been giving it to big companies.

We did pass money here through a supplementary budget; Shs 1,000,000,000,000 was supposed to go to the Uganda Development Bank to assist these enterprises. During the budget, the honourable minister did provide Shs 4.9 trillion to assist the small and medium enterprises and other companies to jump-start their businesses. However, this has not been done. I request the ministry of finance to come up with a statement of how it intends to assist the companies that have been greatly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we ask the Prime Minister to take this matter seriously? We have repeatedly, on the Floor of this House, on behalf of the people, asked where the stimulus package is and not got answers. It is very urgent. The Prime Minister should ensure that the ministry of finance comes to inform the country where the stimulus package is. We can give him one week because it is a long outstanding matter.

3.51
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go out to you. I rise on two issues of national importance: First, is about the new curriculum for the senior one students. The Government, before COVID-19, introduced this curriculum developed by the National Curriculum Development Centre. This was to begin with senior one.

After that announcement, we had the COVID-19 pandemic and schools were closed. They had only trained few teachers on how to handle the new curriculum. The trained teachers were supposed to go back to their schools and train others, which did not happen. 

How are schools going to implement the new curriculum when the senior one class begins school next month? Right now, schools are confused on whether to continue with the old curriculum or with the new one, which has impacted a lot on the teachers and the students. Now it seems we have two different curricula that we are following. The ministry of education should come out and explain whether the curriculum that was introduced and was affected by COVID-19 is still in place or we are using the old curriculum before the schools open for senior one. It is a big challenge because up to now, the ministry has not done training as far as the new curriculum is concerned.

The second issue is about Islamic Banking. We passed the Islamic Banking law but up to now, almost five years down the road, we have not seen it operating.

The Prime Minister and the minister of finance have been explaining that everything is now okay for the Islamic Banking products to hit the market. However, up to now, we have not seen any of that kind and yet during the COVID-19 situation, Islamic Banking could be the best solution as far as our economy is concerned. May we know when Islamic Banking will hit the market and what has delayed its implementation?

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Education commit to respond to any of these?

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to express my sincere condolences to you and the family upon the loss of our dear beloved Sheila. May her soul rest in peace.

I thank the Member for raising that concern and I am glad we all appreciate the challenges that have resulted because of COVID-19. We are all aware that the ministry has already produced a programme on how the schools are going to - we have staggered the reopening of schools. Senior ones are not yet in school. 

However, we already trained teachers who are supposed to teach the senior ones with whom we are supposed to implement the new lower secondary school curriculum.

I would like to allay the fears of this House –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Minister, did you train all teachers on this curriculum or you only trained those in government-aided schools? Could you clarify that before you proceed? Inform this House that you trained all secondary school teachers on this curriculum or you only trained trainers to train.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we had a lengthy debate on that issue in the last session.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we had that debate but remember, Members objected. Later on, the minister came and gave a statement and Members conceded. However, what is in the field is that teachers were not trained. In addition, when you go to Government schools, it is a select few. Those who were meant to train others are the ones who were trained. That is why I am requesting the minister to tell this House in my presence –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I would not expect my brother to intimidate me. (Laughter) The truth is that we came here as the ministry of education and explicitly explained to the House the situation. At that time, we made it very clear that we had trained trainers who were going to help in the training of the rest of the teachers. You would not expect all the teachers throughout the country to assemble in one place and be trained. All we did was to train trainers who were supposed to go to the districts and train the rest.

Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssewungu knows it very well that senior ones are not yet in school because of COVID-19. Therefore, what you need to know is that the ministry of education is in charge and you do not need to worry. We are going to do our work as we are supposed to do it because at all costs, we have to implement the lower secondary –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are still waiting for commencement of Islamic banking after making the law. 

Honourable members, I do not know whether schools have been operating. Obviously, they have not been operating - how could they train during the lockdown? Schools were closed. Were they training in the trees? 

3.59
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of concern for the people of Kassanda who are depending on the gold mines in Kassanda. 

There is a looming eviction of the people in the mines following a presidential directive where the President of Uganda ordered the eviction of the people who depend on the goldmines in Kassanda. 

I have been before this House several times speaking about the management of gold mines. In 2017, all people who were depending on the gold mines lost almost everything. They lost their property and livelihood because they were living in the mines and depending on the same. 

The lifestyle in the mines - there are those who do mining, there are also those selling food and other items like materials for building - everything; it is a market. When Government came in 2017, they razed everything. Nobody was allowed to pick anything. The army came and everybody moved empty handed. They lost their machinery and everything. 

Having known the order by the President to evict these people, my prayer is that this Government should be a pro-people government and know that that is our people’s livelihood. 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR OSHABE: We desire that if there are any procedures going on, they should be managed properly so that people do not lose their property the way they did. 

The President wrote that 30 per cent of the available mining areas should be allocated to the local people to do their mining but up to now, that 30 per cent is nowhere. Why does Government come where people find their livelihood and wants to relocate them?

We are going to sue Government for compensation because last time, people were never compensated for the monies they lost. People invest money in these mines. 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR NSAMBA: I would like Government to care about the people who are earning their livelihood there and stop that directive to evict them from their livelihood. 

THE SPEAKER: We have the minister for minerals here. Could you respond to that issue? 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) Ms Sarah Opendi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother, the honourable MP from Kassanda, is speaking generally. He is not specific. 

Recall, about three weeks ago, there was a report presented here by the Committee on Natural Resources. The 30 per cent of the mining area that he is talking about that was supposed to be given to the local people who were evicted earlier in 2017, I did report on that. That the Mubende United Miners Association (MUMA) was actually granted a license following a negotiation with the owners of the exploration license. 

Secondly, I have been on this Floor – 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Mubende organisation also cover Kassanda? 

MS OPENDI: Yes. Kassanda was part of Mubende before. So, that is the name of this association. 

The other issue that has been a thorn and you are aware of Kisita Mining Company. When we grant a mining license to a company, we must respect it and give that company the right to enjoy and do its business without interference. 

We have been having challenges in this mining area. The shareholders initially had their own challenges when the majority shareholder then, the Mawanda family, decided to get a new shareholder because they could not afford to procure all the necessary equipment so that they could do the mining. 

Last year, in January 2020, these two people who were wrangling entered into a consent agreement. Of course, their challenges were then resolved and they re-entered their mining area. 

The Police Minerals Protection Unit denied them entry into this mining area. I tried to intervene and it became a challenge to me as well. 

Before COVID-19 came in last year, we went there with the Anti-Corruption Agency and URA, a team of us and we ordered all the people that we found there to leave the premises. They all left. They asked us to give them time. They carried their equipment and left. 

As we were in the lockdown – I do not want to call them mafias – but some people went and re-entered this mining area that belongs to a company. Having them out of there became a challenge because they were armed. They even came to the office and told me – I do not want to go into the long story. 

Following that challenge, His Excellency the President convened a meeting last year in August. Having heard all the issues around this, the President found that the company, Kisita Mining Company needs to be given its chance to do the mining. 

Following that, I would like to state that we are working closely with the people on the ground to give them time to leave on their own before the company can come and take over this mining area. The lease is about to expire and that is the process. 

I would like to state that nobody is going to be harshly evicted. We have met the people who are mining on the ground. We have sensitised them and asked them to leave by 31st March. That is our position. 

4.08
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, condolences from Buliisa, Bugungu in particular and Bunyoro in general, on the loss of our dear princess. 

I would like to thank you for allowing me raise a matter of national importance in regard to the plight of the flood victims. The internally displaced people of Butyaba, Walukuba, Bugoigo, and Wanseko, the four sub counties of Buliisa District on the shores of Lake Albert as reported from May last year to December.

Madam Speaker, Butiaba Health Centre together with the boat was submerged and for the last nine months, there has been congestion at the primary school because it is a bigger facility. 

For the last few weeks that we opened Primary Seven classes, school children are sharing the congested health centre and they are not observing the Standard Operating Procedures. The other classes are coming. Our first prayer is that with immediate effect, all the affected schools and health facilities, including Masaka Primary School in Wanseko, which has now become a landing site because the canoes are at the school -

The President directed that people should not go back to these areas. We would like to request that Government immediately provides a solution for all these flooded schools.

The second prayer is that the communities in all these areas have found refuge in areas where Government revoked titles and evicted armed herdsmen many years ago. They do not have public facilities and to make matters worse, there is now the looming eviction.

You may recall the land that you helped me with in 2010 when the President directed a moratorium against registration of land in Buliisa. In 2016, the minister implemented it because it was by a Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development instrument. Unfortunately, the titles were revoked. To date, courts of law are ruling in favour of revoked land titles. You saw, last week, that Uganda Prisons in Buliisa got an eviction order. If Uganda Prisons can be evicted, what about these communities?

There is a saying that if a dog can chase the one with a bark cloth, what about the one with a skin of a cow? Our prayer is that Government communicates to the Judiciary so that the status quo of the people who lived on this land before the fraudulent land registration in 2010 is maintained.
 
Government, to-date, has not given a resettlement plan for these people. We have used that space to settle our people, the farming season is beginning with expected rains and we are worried.

Finally, the 50 square kilometres now under water is a wetland, a breeding ground and NEMA has a say. We request that Government, in the spirit of the gazettement law, compensates us in the neighbourhood of Bugungu Game Reserve with the same land as the law requires so that people can settle in. I beg to pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This issue has several legs; the first one has to do with the issue of disaster and the need to rescue infrastructure there as well as the people. So, we invite the Prime Minister to examine the situation in Butiaba and Wanseko and work to remedy it.

The second one relates to the Judiciary. Honourable member, you may have to present judgments, which can be relied upon for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to examine what the courts have been doing. It may be difficult to just say – Please, present the judgments here so that we can ask the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to look at them and discuss with the Judiciary.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the Uganda Prisons in Buliisa has an eviction order coming from court and I think that they are trying to set a precedent. The moment the Government prison is evicted, the people will automatically -

THE SPEAKER: Produce that judgement, which relates to the land where the Government Prison of Buliisa is so that the minister can take action.

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged.

4.14
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I am raising is that of recent, the Ministry of Education and Sports advertised for head teachers. Among the people who applied for those positions were head teachers who have been acting for 10 to 15 years and with the necessary qualifications.

Some of them have a Masters Degree in Education and they have served for more than seven years. It is a pity that none of the acting head teachers who applied for these posts were successful. Many people were head hunted from outside the districts and the assumption is that they were too qualified to fit in those positions. 

The concern of Ugandans is, if someone has been acting for all those years with the necessary qualifications, does it mean that someone who has been heading a Government institution for all those years is incompetent?

Could the minister in charge of that docket make a statement to inform the House on the criteria they followed in recruiting the competent head teachers while those who have been acting could not be considered? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to present the names of the schools so that the minister can focus. If you do it generally, they will be required to do a census. I have also received complaints from three schools in some parts of Uganda but it is important to assist the minister to know.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: With your guidance, I am going to compile a list next week. Thank you.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I beg to inform this House that like my colleague has raised, it is true that recruitment is going on but this House needs to know the kind of recruitment and the standards that are followed.

First, we are going to recruit on promotion as well as recruit those who are on probation. What hon. Mbwatekamwa is talking about are those teachers who have been on the so-called probation. 

I would like this House to appreciate that there are about 83 seed secondary schools where recruitment is taking place and these are the head teachers and teachers who have been in those schools working on probation. 

These are community schools where parents have been contributing salaries and so, Government came up with a programme to recruit these teachers and give them first priority.

In order for one to qualify to be on the list of those who may be recruited, you must have worked for 12 years but if you are in a seed school, at least an opportunity is given if you have been working for seven years.

However, having worked there for 20 years does not give you the qualification if you do not have the right papers. For one to become a head teacher, you must have served as a deputy for at least three years. Secondly, you must be holding a Masters Degree in Education. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, some people are advocating for members who do not hold a Masters Degree in Education. If you hold a Masters Degree in Business Administration, for instance, you do not qualify, even when you have a Masters degree.
I think that has to be very clear.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the kinds of complaints I received from the different parts of Uganda did not fall in that category. The complaints I received were that people from different parts of the country had been imported into those schools and the teaching staff who had been there at the start of the schools have not been considered. That is the complaint.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I was going to talk about that as well. I want to give an example. In Kyankwanzi, in one of the secondary schools, Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa raised that complaint, where the local leaders there had brought in other teachers who have not been teaching on probation in that school.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that the commission, straight away, halted the process. I want to request colleagues that if there is that kind of issue, let us know as the Ministry of Education and Sports. We shall be in position to act.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I appreciate your ruling that we get the names of those particular teachers and we shall help the House to appreciate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Workers’ MP is here.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to inform the minister that there is a circular that was sent out and it has general guidelines. Part 4 says, “Applicants on Government payroll will not be considered”.  That is what I raised last week. It means that if you have been a head teacher in that school, you are supposed to have initially been a teacher on the Government payroll. Now, a teacher on Government payroll – 

They are also recruiting head teachers but this implied that the head teachers who were already on the payroll in those seed schools cannot apply to be head teachers. I do not know what the minister has to say about it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think bring specific examples so that the minister can actually address it. However, if you talk in generalities, it is difficult to answer.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: No; I was citing a circular which came from the Education Service Commission and it was –

THE SPEAKER: Attach it to the schools where the complainants are, so that they can address it.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: The complainants are in Ndorwa East –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think they were more. Can you put them in writing, honourable members, so that we give them to the minister? Please, let us have them written so that you can pass it on to the minister and she looks at them specifically.

4.22
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Condolences to you and the family upon the loss of your beloved daughter.

Madam Speaker, I am raising a matter of national concern about the increased cattle raids, especially in areas bordering Karamoja and particularly Katakwi District.

There are rampant cattle raids now because of the dry spell and the areas which are affected are:

    i. Magoro Sub-County;
    ii. Ngariam Sub-County;
    iii. Okore Sub-County;
    iv. Palam Sub-County;
    v. Guya Guya Sub-County;
    vi. Okulonyo Sub-County and
    vii. Ongongoja Sub-County.

Madam Speaker, last week, the Karimojong shot a UPDF soldier with an arrow and bow. That soldier is called Imongit Francis, RA 200930. He is currently admitted in Soroti Hospital in very bad situation. 

My prayer is that the Government should recruit and deploy the Local Defence Units (LDUs), who are knowledgeable about the geography of the area and also who love and know the value of a cow to an Itesot.

Secondly, we have a security road there. Can I read the places where the security road joins? The security road starts from Amuturunyo, Okulonyo, Amendera, Olilim, Iising, Amadalimojong, Aleretuk and Angiisa.

Madam Speaker, since these Karimojong fear these cameras, this security road should be patrolled and these cameras be installed so that they are deterred from crossing into the people’s land.
Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know the member has asked for the LDUs to be recruited but I thought we have the Anti-Stock Theft Unit. I do not know whether they are still there. 

Can we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to address the situation at the Katakwi-Karamoja border, as reported by hon. Koluo and report back to this House in a fortnight’s time? 

The Minister of Works and transport should examine the situation concerning the security road, which, again, hon. Koluo has mentioned in his prayers.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, mine is simply to request that Government sustains the disarmament. There should be a policy of continuous disarmament of these cattle raiders. I think that is a problem which is haunting Teso. The guns seem to be coming back to Karamoja and this insecurity is swelling. 

How I wish that the minister really comes to do something and tell the House what they are doing about disarmament. Something is going wrong again.  

THE SPEAKER: Who was doing this? It was the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should come and update the House on the programme for disarmament which had been ongoing and where it has reached, in view of the increased rustling in the area.

4.26
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised here a matter of national importance, concerning a circular that had been issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports as guidance for the reopening of schools. In particular, Madam Speaker, I talked about schools in my area, one of them being Bishops Senior Secondary School Mukono, which has a population of 3,000 students.

In the circular issued by the ministry, the minister demands that any given school in Uganda should decide either to be fully boarding or fully day. In the circular, it is provided that it is no longer allowed for a school to have both boarding and day sections.

Madam Speaker, what has happened, particularly in my area, Mukono Municipality, is that all Government-aided schools have chosen to become boarding schools. Where parents had to pay Shs 350,000 in fees, they are now being asked to pay Shs 870,000.

They are also being told to provide their children with all the things they will need for four months because visitation is –

THE SPEAKER: Please, what are your prayers? You know that that matter was asked last week.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, my prayers are that the examination time is here with us. The head teachers have sent away children yet parents cannot afford these new orders especially because they made the expenditures on pupils and students to be so high yet all of us have been under lockdown. Parents also do not have the money.

My prayer is that the minister withdraws the circular that forces schools to be only boarding or day schools only. This is going to affect children of the poor. Additionally, you find that even the head teachers themselves who have been given these instructions do not give parents time to discuss them; they just issue orders.

I am of the view that these orders, if they at all must be observed, should start after the UNEB exams for which people will have paid but are being sent away because of school fees. Schools are demanding fees for last year yet they did not teach anybody. This is very urgent because parents are crying out from all places and I wish to see - not that the minister is there -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we gave the minister time to come and answer that question. However, before the minister comes you are now adding more questions.

Honourable minister, we would like you to answer those questions; they have been outstanding. Let us know when you will speak to them so that we do not continue getting the same issues. They are important and they are being repetitive now.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde): Madam Speaker, first and foremost, last week hon. Nambooze raised quite a number of concerns. I would like to inform the House that we are ready to respond. We have the issues but because we are not on the Order Paper, we thought that maybe you would give us time to respond. Otherwise we are ready to respond.

Anyhow, in a nutshell, in order to probably allay the fears of the public on the issue she is raising and which is very pertinent, we do appreciate the challenges we are going through due to COVID-19. The circular she is talking about was the initial guidance. It was issued by the Ministry of Health. However, when we started reopening schools in a staggered manner, we have come up with new guidelines by the Ministry of Health. 

In those new guidelines, it has been made very clear that if a school, by the way, if it is a Government aided school and it is a day school, it means it doesn’t have facilities for a boarding section. 

Therefore, it is very wrong for any school to begin forcing parents especially when those parents who take children to those schools have indicated that they do not have money. I would like to make it clear to this House that it is very wrong - and we are going to follow up on that school she has pointed out and even other schools - if a school was both boarding and day, that school should have both the boarding and day wings without mixing up. We have made that very clear.

However, on the issue of day schools, they must not force -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you say that you are almost ready, we shall formally put you on the Order Paper so that you can fully answer these questions for Members to ask more questions.

4.32
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam speaker, my concern is about the Ministry of Education and Sports but since the ministry is ready to come back either this week or next week, that is now sorted.

However, regarding schools, the ministry should be serious because schools have already opened for senior three and five students. How can a school accommodate 4,000 students in its boarding section if it was not an already boarding school? The ministry should help to combine all that in one report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, today we are supposed to do limited work. The matters from item four onwards will be reflected on the Order Paper. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 March 2021 at 2.00 O’clock.) 

