Tuesday, 16 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to ask you to join me in welcoming the following distinguished guests to the Parliament of Uganda. We have Her Excellency Madam Tobeka Madiba-Zuma, the First Lady of the Republic of South Africa. (Applause) She is also the Vice-Chairperson, Forum of African First Ladies Against Breast and Cervical Cancer. We have Rt Hon. Julie Mphande, The Second Deputy Speaker, Parliament of Malawi. (Applause) We have Princess Nikky Onyeri, Founder/Executive Director, Princess Nikky Breast Cancer Foundation, Republic of Nigeria. (Applause) We have Hon. (Mrs) Theresa Mwale, Deputy Minister of Health, Republic of Malawi. (Applause) We have Hon. Dr Molefi Sefularo, 	Deputy Minister of Health, Republic of South Africa. (Applause) and several distinguished participants of the 3rd Africa Annual Breast Cancer Conference from Burundi, Egypt, France, Italy, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States of America and Zambia. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Today, we also have in the gallery, 12 scientists from various disciplines who are pairing with MPs in order to foster mutual understanding of science and technology issues in this country. They are under Uganda National Academy of Science MP Scientists Pairing Scheme. The 12 scientists are: Dr Joseph Kyambadde, Mr Arthur Makara, Dr Eugene Kinyanda, Dr Sabrina. B., Dr Monica Bereho, Dr Owori Wadrinde, Dr Henry Wamani, Dr Moses Kigozi, Mr Stephen Balinandi, Dr Joseph Oonyu, Mr William Kidega, and Mr David Mfitumukiza. You are most welcome (Applause)

On a sad note, I wish to inform you that our former colleague in the Sixth Parliament, George Kayizi Tebigwayo, who represented Budiope, passed away and burial will be on Thursday. Let us observe a moment of silence. 

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister? Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT, 2009

2.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to present and lay on the Table the Local Government Finance Commission Annual Report of 2009. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The report stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequently report to the House. 


ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ABOUT CERVICAL AND BREAST CANCER

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE) (Mrs Janet Museveni): Mr Speaker, hon. Members, our special guest, the First Lady of the Republic of South Africa, ladies and gentlemen. It is an honour for me to be given this opportunity to address this august House concerning a very grave matter, directly touching the lives of at least half the population of this country – the women – and adversely impacting on the well-being of most families in Uganda. This is the issue of maternal mortality generally, but more specifically, the issue of breast and cervical cancer.

I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker, for seeing it fit to have this session so that this House can be up-to-date in their information on this important matter. 

As Members are aware, Uganda committed itself to achieve Millennium Development Goal 5, along with other member nations of the United Nations body. According to this MDG, Uganda is expected to have reduced its maternal mortality figure by 75 percent between 1990 and 2015. Even though we have moved from the figure of 500 deaths per 100,000 live births in the year 2000, Uganda is still finding it difficult to achieve this target or even to reduce its maternal health statistics to a more reasonable level because of our socio-economic environment and the level of development of our health system. 

Uganda’s maternal mortality ratio has remained high, currently estimated to be at 435 deaths per 100,000 live births. This ratio translates to about 6,000 women dying every year due to pregnancy related causes. 

This grim picture is made even more complicated by the increase in cases of cervical cancer and breast cancer. Cervical cancer is the top most cancer among women followed by breast cancer. In a global context, let me just mention that cancer is a global problem accounting for 12.5 percent of all deaths worldwide, which is a greater percentage than is caused by HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria combined. 

Furthermore, it is projected that by 2020, there is likely to be 15 million new cases of cancer every year and 70 percent of them will be in developing countries, where our economies are least prepared to address the growing cancer burden.

I believe, that is why, the Deputy Speaker found it necessary to sensitise this House because ‘forewarned is forearmed’, as the saying goes. 

With regard to cervical cancer, the facts are quite bad. Each year, there are more than a quarter of a million deaths from cervical cancer in the world, and over 500,000 new cases occur currently. The good news is that most of these new cases can be prevented. The World Health Organisation projects that without immediate action, the global number of deaths from this disease will increase by nearly 80 percent by 2030, mostly in low and middle income countries.  

Here in Uganda, cervical cancer is the leading cancer diagnosed in women and in most cases it is diagnosed late. Over 80 percent of the hospital beds in the gynaecological ward have cervical cancer patients that are waiting for treatment. 

Today, the cause of cervical cancer is known and the disease is preventable. We know also that early cervical cancer can be diagnosed cheaply and pre-cancer can be treated with success. Therefore, there is no good reason for our women in Uganda to continue to die from this preventable disease. Every woman has a right to a life free of the threat of cervical cancer, and every girl should be offered an opportunity to prevent cervical cancer from attacking her body. 

The virus that causes cervical cancer is known as a Human Papilloma Virus or HPV. Cervical cancer can be prevented though vaccination with two newly available vaccines against the virus that causes this devastating disease. We also know that the vaccine is most effective among adolescent girls. Therefore, vaccinating adolescent girls will reduce the incidence of cervical cancer in the next generation. This can only be achieved if we implement widespread HPV vaccination among our young girls. 

I am happy to inform you that PATH International, a development partner, and its local chapter, PATH Uganda, has funded and successfully carried out a demonstration project with a very high success rate in several schools in Uganda. The results of this demonstration project will help us in planning for the rapid expansion of HPV immunisation services. 

In addition to introducing HPV vaccination, it is essential that screening and treatment of early pre-cancer are considered as key elements of cervical cancer reduction strategies. Scientists have developed low cost strategies that would help screening women and identifying the early signs. We are now beginning to take advantage of these new interventions to improve the health of the women of Uganda.

As some of the Members may be aware, there are already a number of screening initiatives in the country, but these are few and far between, and many of them are still not well coordinated. Recently, a few more district health facilities received equipment donated by PATH International to begin screening and treating women.

Honourable members, perhaps I can also share an experience I have been personally involved in. Last April, I launched screening and treatment services that were donated by PATH to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, in my capacity as a patron for the Safe Motherhood Initiative of the Ministry of Health. Subsequently, I was happy to learn that so far, more than 1,000 women have been screened and those that required treatment have been treated and they have become better.

The Ministry of Health and other stakeholders have now developed a comprehensive strategic plan for cervical cancer prevention and treatment. This strategic plan will provide a framework for continuation of these efforts so that we can reach all the girls, women and families in all the districts of Uganda. It is my hope that this plan will be supported by Parliament and even our development partners.

Honourable members, this special session today gives us an opportunity to throw the challenge to us, as policy makers, but also as fathers and mothers of young girls, and as husbands and heads of families, to ensure that the efforts so far made in Uganda in the area of immunisation against cervical cancer, are enabled to continue and cover the whole of Uganda in the shortest possible time. 

Currently, the high cost of the HPV vaccine is the huge barrier to universal access and coverage of this important vaccine. Unless costs decrease, availability of, and access to the HPV vaccine will remain low in Uganda, as it will in most of our developing countries.

In July last year, we, the African First Ladies, had the honour to be graciously hosted by my sister, the First Lady of the Republic of South Africa, who is in this House today, to attend the Second African Conference on Breast and Cervical Cancer. At that meeting, a Forum for African First Ladies Against Cervical and Breast Cancer was formed and I had the honour of becoming its first chairperson. (Applause) 

I am happy to see that the First Lady of South Africa has come to represent us at the Third African Conference on Breast and Cervical Cancer being held here in Kampala. Through this Forum, we have set up a lobby for this cause and a network that enables us to know what new developments are taking place in Africa South of the Sahara. Last year, we lobbied the Board of GAVI and requested them to consider ways and means of making the HPV vaccine affordable to African countries. We were assured that the Board would table our request at their board meeting of November 2009.

I believe that each of us here in our respective capacities as leaders, policy makers, parents, husbands and wives, can do something or should be doing something to make a difference and to avert the looming menace of the projection of millions of our women to die in the coming year.

We know very well that these two diseases are preventable and controllable with early screening and treatment. We can act to put to an end this unnecessary suffering and loss of life in Uganda.

I am happy to note that a strong lobby for maternal health already exists in this House and I salute my colleagues for spearheading it. I would like to invite the participation of all of you, especially the male Members, so that together, we can defeat this enemy for the wellbeing of our people of Uganda.

I thank you for giving me this opportunity and listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Minister. Hon. Members, before we proceed, I would like to request you to join me in welcoming to the House, Her Excellency, the former Vice President of Uganda, Dr Specioza Kazibwe, who is with us today. (Applause) You are most welcome.

This afternoon, we also have pupils of Little Muheji Primary School, Nansana in Wakiso District, who are also with us today. (Applause) You are most welcome.

3.12
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, for her statement on cervical and breast cancer.

I thought I needed to add my voice, especially as a student of public health that this threat is for real, and our readiness as a country, is extremely lacking.

The honourable minister talked about the need for vaccination. The exposed population; the most risky population are rural women. The causative factors are associated with behaviour intentions and actions – multiple sexual partners; frequent pregnancies - so, it has to do with awareness on prevention and it involves constant screening, which is called PAP smear tests. But most of our rural health centres, I doubt if any, can carry out those tests.

This, therefore, tells you that the rural population of child-bearing age or even perhaps past that is highly exposed and at risk. Therefore, given this statement that reinforces the need to discuss cervical cancer, its prevention and control, I think the Minister of Health should tell us the capacity they have, especially the need to scale-up the services to the rural areas –(Interjections)- We have precedents in the House where the Speaker has allowed us to make some comments on ministerial statements; I think it is not strange. Let us not dwell on technicalities, but rather on substance.

My concern, therefore, is that this statement should motivate all of us; should provoke discussion on what framework and interventions we are putting in place to make sure that accessibility to control, counselling and screening is really there for our rural women. I thank you.

3.14
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Janet Museveni for this statement. (Interjections) You are not going to intimidate me.

I want to thank you, hon. Janet Museveni, for your address. This is what we have been discussing for quite some time in the Eighth Parliament. We have been talking about giving money to Ministry of Health - to the tune of 15 percent of the total budget. The Abuja Declaration talks about the rights of women to access health services, which access is limited by inadequate resource allocations to Ministry of Health. As a result, there are no services; no equipment to diagnose both breast and cervical cancer; and there is lack of mobilisation. All this revolves around funding.

We know very well that both breast and cervical cancers are among the leading killers of women of the ages of 35 and above; and if we do not control cervical and breast cancers, we are going to lose many more women.

As a woman Member of Parliament, therefore, I would like to continue calling upon Government to allocate more resources to the national budget. I would like at least up to 15 percent of the national budget allocated to Ministry of Health, so that more resources are allocated to reproductive health services i.e. cervical and breast cancer treatment, which are all reproductive health programs. 

Unless we tackle issues of women and reproductive health, we are not going to move forward. If we do not allocate resources to women and reproductive health, we shall have women with ill-health who will not be able to contribute to our economy of Uganda; it is the woman who contributes to the economy through agricultural produce and work done at home. Therefore, if the woman has ill-health, she will continue to be sickly; and a sick mother means sick children; a sick home; a sick family; and a sick nation. So, we need to make sure that the women of this country are allocated the right resources to ensure that their health is taken care of.

Some people are saying, “no”; but may I know how many of you lost their mothers when still young; or have seen an orphan in your neighbourhood who grows into a responsible human being without the support of a responsible family? There is no child who will ever have another mother when the mother dies; but a child can have another father when the father dies. (Laughter) Yes! I want to tell you, honourable members, that even if you are a father in Buganda, it is only a mother who can tell the father to her child. (Applause)

I am calling upon our government and Parliament, especially the Social Services Committee that the time is now for us to look into the budget allocations of the Ministry of Health, to ensure that 15 percent of the total budget is allocated to health services. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, today is a unique day, because in the gallery, we have pupils of Progressive Infant Primary School, Masajja. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.20
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also wish to thank the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, who is also the First Lady of the Republic of Uganda, for her enlightening address on breast and cervical cancer.

I have personally been touched by the magnitude of the people, especially when the statement is related to 6000 mothers dying in a year; this is rather high. So, as a country and as a people, we have no reason whatsoever to claim we have made strides in development, when on the other side, an average of 6000 women die every year. It is a shame to us as a country.

I do vividly recall that many times, members of parliament have stood on the Floor of this House to decry the large numbers of people who lose life due to preventable diseases like cancer. Many times when we eulogise about our dead colleagues here, we call upon Government to take action. Today, I am happy we are talking about cervical cancer when there is no dead body lying in this Chamber.

Mr Speaker, in this statement, there has been an assurance that there is a ray of hope that this disease will be preventable with vaccines that are available. However, the biggest challenge we have as a people is to make this vaccine accessible to the ordinary person. (Applause) I would like to add that I am happy that this statement was not made by an ordinary Member of Parliament, but by the First Lady of Uganda. This being an action that has the support of the first ladies of Africa –(Applause)- it is not enough for us, as Parliament, to lament about resource allocations. We have been in this House long enough to know where important decisions are taken –(Interjections)- Yes, and I am quite sure that the first ladies who are behind this noble cause have got the ears of the people who can determine the fate of countries –(Applause)- and the continent.

For the case of Uganda, when it comes to budgeting – my honourable colleague, Jane Alisemera has just said that Parliament should raise the budget for Ministry of Health to 15 per cent. However, I would like to say this Parliament cannot do that and I have reasons for saying this.

Before budget proposals come to this House, they are already pre-determined by MTEF. You and I have nothing to do. The MTEF is determined by the H.E. the President, who chairs Cabinet –(Interjections)- Yes! That is how governments work. It is Cabinet that determines how MTEFs are arrived at; it is not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with its technocrats, and it is not Parliament.
 
Our appeal to the first ladies of Africa –(Mr Kubeketerya rose_)– when it comes to issues of financial and public service management, I am an authority. (Laughter) I know what I am talking about. 

So, my humble appeal to the first ladies of Africa and in particular, our Uganda First Lady, is to go and sweet-talk the powers that be –(Laughter)– so that this issue can be contained. 

As Parliament, I believe we mean well for this country. Whenever it comes to policy matters, we are always there for this country and we will do all it can and within our best abilities to ensure we come up with pro-people proggrammes; the Executive, however, has to help us in terms of resource allocations, to enable us transform this country.

Mr Speaker, when we say this disease is preventable and bearing in mind the age bracket of women who are susceptible to contracting it, and with the UPE Programme in place, I think we can reach out to a large number of our girl children and early mothers. And if the vaccines are availed, we will be able to carry out specific programmes for the girl children at all levels. This will help them to develop immunity by the time they mature into adulthood. 

Unfortunately, in Uganda we have had a dark past – GAVI funds meant to fight tuberculosis, malaria and HIV/AIDS and related diseases are a thorn in our feet. After we accessed this money, it disappeared in thin air. And action that should have been taken against suspects is now history; nobody is even talking about what went wrong with that money. (Applause) 

So, whereas we are happy that this noble action has been already pursued by the first ladies, I hope and it is my sincere hope that we will be in a position to curb corruption in this country. It is corruption; we have a marred image before the international community to the extent that such a noble appeal may be doubted as to whether donor money can be used to fight cervical and breast cancer. 

They will also doubt whether we have repented as far as the first allocation to us to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis is concerned. You know, before you get onto God’s altar, you must have clean hands. Let us have clean hands by making sure the loopholes of corruption are closed. This will enable the international community to consider our begging hand.

Thirdly, let me talk about the HPV vaccine. Is it possible for Government to make a deliberate effort to subsidise this vaccine to enable people access it? This is important because most of our women live in rural areas and are virtually poor. They cannot even afford the cheapest drugs in our hospitals. My appeal is that Government should come up with an affirmative action aimed at making sure the vaccines are easily accessible and affordable by our people. Otherwise, time and again, we will continue to have those who are affluent suffering from headache and malaria, travelling out of the country for medical check-ups when we have a cancer institute, which if well equipped with medical personnel being properly remunerated, we would be able to have the brains to attend to all of us from here –(Applause)- and that way, we would be able to cut down on costs. (Applause) But if we have an ill-equipped cancer institute with no drugs - the personnel of my friend and father-in-law, Hon. Stephen Mallinga, the Minister of Health, are not there and have all run away for greener pastures. At the end of the day, what happens to the ordinary Ugandan like Wadri and my friend hon. Nathan Byanyima? They will die from here –(Laughter)- Yes, they will die from here. (Laughter) 

So, let us, as a country, come up with programmes and specific activities that can attract manpower. We have the manpower; it is here. But the flight is because of poor remuneration and other things. Otherwise, I wish to most sincerely thank the First Lady for her address. I hope she will seriously take my passionate appeal to her to go and talk the language –(Laughter)- so that the MTEF of health is raised and then we can all get treatment here.

I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

3.31
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, I also wish to take this opportunity to thank hon. Janet Museveni for supporting women’s health. 

It bothers me that up to now when His Excellency the President asked for the Safe Motherhood Roadmap, we vividly worked on it and the technocrats helped us cost it. But for the last two financial years, it has not been financed. Now, we are talking about cervical and breast cancer and we are hoping that there will be some action by both the Executive and Parliament. It is disheartening. 

It makes me ask why the first ladies of Africa are coming up with such an initiative. This spells out deficiencies in the first bedrooms of Africa? (Interjections) Why? I want to give a very clear example in our country.

What is our priority now? Do we, as Parliament, know the ranking of the health budget? We are not even near number two. What is the actual budget of health in this country? Let us face it. What is the budget and what is the commitment to reproductive health and issues related to cancer?

Many of you who have visited the cancer institute – do we even provide a quarter or a third of the budget of that institute? As a nation, we do not. We are talking about funds of only UShs 11 billion to run regional referral hospitals. As we talk now, there are only two screening machines for over 30 million people. What are we talking about?

And we are saying all these glamorous initiatives are going to be donor-dependant. The question is, “Where is our priority as a country?” Are we investing in the health of our people or we are investing in things that do not promote the health of our people? 

I want to ask some questions and I am appealing that we answer them with all the honesty they deserve. One; how much money did we spend on advertising CHOGM? If we translated that into machines for screening, how many machines would we have afforded as a nation? Two; what is the priority or priorities in the Ministry of Health when it comes to the budget? 

We have one mobile van, which was a donation. How much commitment has our country put into investing –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sorry I have to interrupt. Our distinguished guests have a programme and they are leaving soon. I suggest that we curtail our speeches and also remember that last week, we decided to have a special session for discussing health issues in this country. This is part of it. Continue, but just curtail your speech so that our guests can leave.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To draw your attention to the seriousness of this matter, we need to appreciate one thing. As long as we do not put our priorities right, we shall always come up with very glamorous statements and hope that in future, things are going to change. No. Things must change right from here where the cooking is done. Simply take it.

We know how much the presidency costs African governments. I will cite an example. We procured a presidential jet at UShs 90 billion. Have we ever considered putting UShs 90 billion into the cause of cancer in this country? That jet carries one person plus the entire itinerary it is supposed to go with. 

How much do we invest in the health of women and even men, because there is also prostate cancer? Instead of bringing up this rhetoric, it is my humble appeal that much as the African ladies are in place to help us, they must do the real bedroom dynamics to ensure that budgets are placed correctly where they belong.

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We must put the record in order. Right before us, we are speaking about deficiencies or problems of addressing the problem of cervical and breast cancer. How are the deficiencies, in the First Lady’s bedroom, connected to the shortcomings in addressing cancer? 

We should put the record in order. If we were to go in everybody’s bedroom, how many skeletons would we unearth? (Laughter)

The onus is on us to correct this record that what she said in quotation, “The deficiencies in the First Lady’s bedroom,” should be - 

Mr Speaker, is she in order to have used that phrase?

THE SPEAKER: Well, to avoid interfering with the privacy of people, I rule her out of order. But she says she has finished. It is out of order.

3.38
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the first ladies of Africa for carrying the mantle of fighting and eradicating this killer monster. Specifically, I want to congratulate the First Lady of Uganda, for being elected the first chairperson of this forum.

I am happy that the first ladies have recognised that this killer disease is taking away women’s lives. In Masindi, since I started the campaign of informing the women and the public about this monster, cervical and breast cancer, and trying to sensitise them about how they can detect it and how they can prevent it, I realised that many women out there are suffering. They do not even know the disease they are suffering from; they even do not reveal it to the medical personnel. 

I want to ask the honourable Minister of Health –(Interjections)- what procedures and strategies they have put in place to try to help these communities, especially those districts which are hit so much, like Masindi, in  trying to get them know that the disease is there and that they can take certain steps to mitigate it.

Most of these referral hospitals do not even have the services of checking - Pap smear services. The women in Masindi have to board buses to come to Kampala and on reaching Kampala; they may not even access those facilities. So, we need to be serious when talking about this disease.

The First Lady pointed out the issue of the high cost of the HPV Vaccine. I want to observe here that the lives of Ugandans are more valuable than the high cost. If we were serious, the high cost of the vaccine would not be an issue. But we need to be committed and help the poor women who are suffering. 

The mode of transmission of this disease is well known; it is through sexual intercourse – who carries the virus, it is the men –(Interjections)– yes, it is on record. That is one of the modes of transmission. I stand to be corrected by the scientists here. 

The second mode of transmission is through poor sanitation of our latrines; and these are some of the things that the Ministry of Health could deal with –(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the minister who made the statement has just moved out of the Chamber. So, the Minister of Health – since the debate started, the Minister has been quiet –

THE SPEAKER: Let me help you. The statement we received was not a ministerial statement; it was a statement made by a Member. It is true the person who made the statement is a minister, but this particular statement was not a ministerial statement because her ministry is not about health, but Karamoja. 

In our Rules of Procedure, under Rule 41, a Member can make a statement, which is not a personal statement, but a statement on something which is of public interest. So, that is how this statement was made and that is the rule under which we are debating it - because it is affecting all of us. So, it is not a ministerial statement, although made by a minister. 

But as I have said, we have to curtail this debate. It has generated a lot of interest because of the seriousness of the disease; but we have agreed that sometime next month, we shall assign a day when we concentrate on debating the issues of health; but Members can make comments and that ends it. She needs not reply. But your views will go on record and the Minister of Health is here and taking advantage of what you are saying to get capacity on what you are saying. So, please wind up.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the mode of transmission, I would like to urge my colleagues, the Members of Parliament and other local leaders, to support the ministry in trying to educate the communities, especially on the preventive measures; the mode of transmission; and on early detection of these diseases. 

Lastly, when we lost hon. Okullo Epak, Members noted in their eulogies that Asbestos sheets are one of the causes of cancer in this country. But it is sad to note that some of our schools in this country are still using these Asbestos sheets and yet we thought when we made the recommendations, the ministers would help these people; they should implement what we resolve here. 

Last week, when we were travelling to Bududa, we were surprised to see a school which had Asbestos sheets and yet we believe this school houses very many children. All these Ugandans are prone to developing cancer.

The ministers need to help the Ugandans. If we do not implement these regulations even after a Member has died and our realisation that the cause was Asbestos sheets – (Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that it is not only that school that has Asbestos; most of the girls’schools built in the 1960s have Asbestos tiles – Tororo Girls School, Kyebambe Girls School, Mary Hill High School – all those have Asbestos and remember we are talking about the health of women and the dangers of Asbestos. Thank you.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, at this point, I would like to ask the Minister of Education to inform this House, how many schools still have Asbestos sheets. This will help us to make a follow-up and when we are appropriating resources, we should re-roof them. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.48
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the First Lady for this statement. This paper spells out the causes of cervical cancer and it can be prevented mainly through vaccination. 

In this regard, Ibanda District had the privilege of being one of those districts in which pilot studies were carried out to vaccinate the young girls, especially those in P.5. I remember it was in Ibanda and Nakasongola districts. The problem which I wish to bring to the attention of the Minister of Health is that we had hoped that they would keep vaccinating girls in P.5 in the subsequent years. But it was done only once and they ended there. 

So, I am wondering, when this programme will roll-out to the other districts, and how do we address this gap, because those who were in P.5 are now in P.7 and in between, no vaccination has been done.  

Secondly, through the First Lady, I would like to extend my appreciations – Ibanda has been one of the beneficiaries of this equipment donated by PATH, for the testing of Cervical Cancer. I wish to express my thanks, and I have been in touch with the people of Ibanda and the administration of Ibanda Hospital, and they assure me that they are training the personnel to make sure this machine is put to adequate use. I thank you.

3.51
MRS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ who have thanked the First Lady for the address which was passionate because listening to it; it showed the passion the First Lady has for issues of maternal health.

I also want to thank the First Lady in absentia because of her tireless effort as the champion of safe motherhood in this country. This is not the first time she is coming out, but she has come out now and again to talk about various issues and to advocate for improvement in this area. I am glad that we took off this time to talk about maternal health and this is not the first time we are talking about it. 

Listening to this statement, it gave us information that Cervical and Breast Cancer, like all other maternal illnesses, are detectable and at the same time can be prevented if detected early and we take necessary steps to treat the symptoms.

The statement talks about a strategic plan which the minister has developed, but I am concerned because this is not the first plan which the minister is developing to improve maternal health. We already have a roadmap to accelerate the reduction of maternal and new born mortality, and nothing has happened and now there is another plan!

When the First Lady was giving a report, I looked at the Minister of Health and he was just putting up his arms as if he is already resigned to the problem. This is an issue of priority. Unless we prioritise women’s health - because most of the diseases which affect women are preventable; it is only a matter of priority. He has done it again -(Interjections)- it is a matter of where our priorities in health lie -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I was not putting up my hands in resignation. I am putting my hands up whenever an honourable member makes a point, which is relevant. That is what I was appreciating but it was misinterpreted by the hon. Member for Mityana. (Laughter)

MRS SSINABULYA: Thank you, hon. Minister for appreciating the issues we are raising. The major issue is that we want to see Government and the Ministry of Health coming out strongly to invest their monies in areas which can improve maternal health, for example, an area like family planning. We know that family planning can improve maternal health; if women do not have so many children close to each other, it can prevent Cervical Cancer but we are not seeing increased investment in family planning. 

The issue is not about the strategic plan which has been developed, but the issue is financing the strategic plan such that we can see an end, or at least a reduction in the maternal illnesses and the maternal deaths. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us balance it up by getting another honourable lady Member of Parliament. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you can make your contribution. Please, you will bear with me, hon. Banyenzaki.

3.55
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this very important statement. Indeed when the First Lady was made a minister, I am one of those who were very scornful because I thought it demonstrated a very high level of nepotism. But now I am beginning to see the benefit of that -(Laughter)- of that nepotistic behaviour through the contribution of the First Lady. 

First of all, it has just come to my attention today that she was actually elected the first Chairperson of the First Ladies’ Forum. We need to congratulate her on this because that puts Uganda at the frontline in trying to push our case. (Applause) 

However, I have a few questions to ask about this statement. Indeed, it is a special statement and a special session; do we call it a state of the nation address? (Laughter) This is really addressing issues that affect the nation. Is this a state of the nation address? I do not know how to categorise it. I just want to be educated on that issue.

THE SPEAKER: I have said this before. The person who made the statement is a minister but she was not making a ministerial statement. A ministerial statement is made by a minister on affairs of his or her portfolio. But our Rules of Procedure allow any Member like you or any other to make a personal statement that is on your agenda as a person, but then you can make another statement on a matter of public importance and this is the category of this statement. It is a statement which is made under rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. Definitely, that puts this statement at a very high status because it is not from an ordinary Member; it is coming from a Member who is the First Lady in this country. So, we take it with a lot of seriousness and, therefore, I want to draw the attention of the House to Millennium Development Goal No. 5 which is centred on mortality rate in this country.

The rate at which mothers die in child birth is still very high according to this statement. But that is not enough. You know that Millennium Development Goal that talks about poverty affects women most and even the Cervical and Breast Cancer is killing women at a very high rate because of poverty? The women are not in a position to access the medical services that are required of a mother. I think these are issues that the Government should take at a very high level and address at a very high level.

I am really surprised that during this time that we are discussing the budget allocation and asking for additional funding, the issues of Cervical Cancer and high mortality rate have not come up in the statement. So, I would like to know why this issue has continued to be ignored by people who are supposed to be helping us. 

Mr Speaker, I am very grateful to my sister for having launched the pilot project to address this issue in Mbarara. If it were me, I would have launched it from Karamoja. If it were me, I would have launched it in Arua. If it were me, I would have launched it in Mbale. If it were me, I would have launched it in Kisoro. If it were me, I would have launched it elsewhere -(Interjections)- so, I was just saying that I appreciate -(Interjections)- I am not contradicting that statement. I am saying that I do appreciate but I think that the women of Karamoja would have been more helped than the women of Mbarara because the women of Mbarara are more exposed in terms of education, welfare -(Interjections)- they are more informed so -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, would you be courteous to her so that she gives you the information? 

MRS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I started this as a piece of information. The hon. Member of Parliament who has just spoken represents Ibanda District and [MRS OGWAL: “Mr Speaker, I thought she had raised….”] and she categorically stated that the trial is in Ibanda District and not in Mbarara District. I would like to make that correction. Thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: I did not accept information. I thought she was raising a point of order. (Laughter) Your information has not helped us at all; at least it did not help me. Let us move to the women who are more deserving. This is what I am saying. This is the national spirit which we must promote; the patriotism spirit which we are trying to promote. Let us go to the people who are more deserving. That is what I am saying. (Applause)

I am definitely upset to learn from this document that there has been a strategic plan which has already been worked out by the relevant ministry concerning this very serious issue -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: The information I want to give hon. Cecilia Ogwal is that yesterday while we were in this workshop the institute of cancer which was in Gulu was closed. This issue of giving services to the most deserving is very important in the sense that even as I speak, Kabale Hospital has no surgeon. I got the information that any person for surgical treatment has to be brought to other hospitals like Mbarara, but the women who are the most deserving in such areas are not getting this kind of services. So, this is the information I want to give.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, for that information. I think it is high time we looked at issues with a bit of seriousness as leaders in this country -(Interjections)- It is okay. I mean, the people of Dokolo may not need as much help as the people of Karamoja. I am really speaking with a lot of emotional concern. This is our national concern and really I am very happy that the President has come up to promote the policy of patriotism. How are we going to promote the policy of patriotism if we are so inward looking and if we only look at our own areas?

Mr Speaker, you are presiding over this institution and people are looking at you and us as the people who should speak for them and this is an opportunity where I am asking the ministry concerned, “Where is that strategic plan?” I have not seen it and I am a Member of Parliament. I am just reading about it for the first time and you are not going to tell me that I am so ignorant that the document has been placed in my pigeon hole and I have not read it! 

This is such an important matter; if that strategic plan had been circulated to Members of Parliament, the women Members of Parliament would have known the contents of that strategic plan from the first paragraph to the last paragraph. We want to know if it is there and if it is, can we have it? Can we have a look at it? Can we budget for this important sector that will take care of the health of women? We want to know.

I want to end by saying that unless we declare universal accessibility to medical services as we have tried to address the issue of education, it is useless for us to just be discussing an issue and we -(Interjections)- you know parliamentarians like talking; it is good to talk. It is good to continue condemning the Ministry of Health and it is good to continue to hear that Mbarara is benefiting already and Dokolo has to wait for another 100 years. It is good to talk, but we want to see action and that is what I am asking for. We are here to budget and to help Government to put your plan into budgetary plans so that at least the people of Uganda can benefit from the polices. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the First Lady and the first ladies of Africa for the initiative they have taken on the cause of Breast Cancer and Cervical Cancer. 

I would like to correct one impression: The impression of maternal mortality. Maternal mortality is defined as the death as a result of pregnancy and the rate is calculated per 100,000 live births. It can be either direct or indirect. Direct maternal mortality means the cause was as a result of pregnancy such as bleeding, infection or obstructed labour. 

It can also be indirect. Some conditions can get worse during pregnancy and that is an indirect maternal death. For example, Diabetes and respiratory infections can cause indirect maternal deaths. An accident, if it extends up to 40 days -(Interjections)- after the termination of pregnancy - if a woman has delivered a baby and dies within 40 days as a result of a car accident after delivery that is a maternal death. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, in the statement delivered by the First Lady, it is very clear that she stipulates that 6,000 mothers die per year due to maternal mortality. Is it in order for the honourable minister to come and distort information which has been statistically and ably presented here in this House? Minister of Health, are you trying to tell us that you are so ignorant that you do not know these figures and you need to be corrected by the First Lady? 

THE SPEAKER: No. What I understood from the statement of the minister was that he was becoming technical in the sense that the subject matter of the First Lady’s statement is not about maternal health - well I am talking about my understanding. He says Breast Cancer and Cervical Cancer are not categorised as maternal health. It is a different category. That is what he was saying; I am not technical in that area but that is what I understood from what he said. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker for the right understanding. I now come to Cervical Cancer. For a long time we have known that the people at risk are people who get married very early, those with multiple sex partners and have too many children. But we now know that there is a factor, which is transmitted and all those conditions we are describing are people who are at risk of getting the Human Papillomavirus (HPV) transmitted to them. 

To correct the hon. Member from Masindi, actually the Human Papillomavirus can be transmitted by both women and men so long as there are multiple sexual partners. If you sleep with so many men -(Interjection)- now, what do you want me to say? If a woman has sex with too many men, then she is likely to pass on the infection of the Human Papillomavirus from one man to another. If a man has sexual intercourse with too many women, he is likely to transmit the Human Papillomavirus from one woman to another. So, the transmission is both ways. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what the hon. Members here are interested in knowing is how you control the disease but not whether it is maternal or not. They are interested in how you can reduce the spread of the disease. 

DR MALLINGA: Hon. Awori thinks that there should be no sex but I do not think so. (Laughter) What we are doing now - we know that early diagnosis and picking up the infection early either through a pap smear or what they call gross inspection of the cervix - the cervix is cleaned with acetic acid and then somebody who is trained looks at it grossly. He can see changes, which are eventually going to develop into Cancer and when they see those changes, they can be treated by what they call curial surgery. Curial surgery is applying a very cold tip to the area of the cervix which is affected and since -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the effort with which the Minister of Health is trying to explain. I think what he is explaining is so technical that I have been trying to keenly follow. I would request that procedurally, he would be asked to give us that written explanation so that we can follow it and probably be able to explain to our constituents on the procedure of taking precautions. Because if he gives us the technical explanation and without any written document and yet we are not all technical, how shall we be able to carry the same technical explanation to our constituents? I would request that the minister comes with that technical explanation to the House and we benefit from it as well as our constituents. I thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my colleague seeking guidance that whatever the Minister of Health says here is transcribed on our Hansard, which Hansard we regularly get and can be used in the constituency. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: What we really need to hear from the minister is about the strategies of reducing this.

DR MALLINGA: I was coming to that, Sir. There is a way of detecting Cancer of the cervix early. So, what we are doing is to try and roll out throughout the country, and we have started teaching nurses how to detect the changes in the cervix, which are likely to grow into Cancer of the cervix. 

We are in Mbarara Hospital teaching nurses and other technical people to observe the cervix. We are at Mbale Hospital; we are at Soroti Hospital; we are at Nakasongola Health Centre IV; we are at Ibanda Hospital; we are at Itojo Hospital and we are at Mulago Hospital teaching nurses. We are starting and we are going to roll out the programme all over the country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, isn’t it the appropriate time to conclude this debate so that we wait for the general debate on the Ministry of Health? 

4.17
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I have a proposal that even as we prepare for that general debate, may I request the hon. Minister to prepare a statement on our state of readiness as a country in countering the problem of Cancer? He has thanked the First Ladies for their initiative but what is the initiative of Government from the Ministry of Health which he leads? What is our capacity? 

You have heard Members of Parliament saying that we have only two X-ray machines among a population of 30 million; is that the position? And why isn’t the minister budgeting for us to have enough equipment? Is Gulu Hospital Cancer Institute winding up or has it closed? Why is the ministry closing? Are we failing to provide resources as a Parliament? Can the minister come up with a comprehensive statement so that we can respond meaningfully as a Parliament? 

MR OKUPA: I just want to find out from the minister, towards the end of last year and at the beginning of this year in January, there are people who came to Kasilo County in Apapar Health Centre IV that they were screening for Cancer and were charging the women Shs 10,000. May I know from the minister whether this was a team from the Ministry of Health or not? Because this matter was raised to me by the women of Kasilo that they were being charged 10,000; I just wanted to know from you?  

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, the problem I have is that as I start to explain, I am interfered with. What hon. Dombo has been asking is what I was going to tell the House -(Interjection)– I said, we have started to teach nurses at certain hospitals how to screen for Cancer of the cervix and we are eventually going to spread it throughout the country; that is what I have said. And I was also going to tell them that in those hospitals, which I have mentioned, we have a special machine for detecting Cancer grossly - that is by looking. 

But also, we are teaching what hon. Tumwebaze mentioned. He mentioned something about the pap smear. A pap smear is an alternative to gross inspection. In a pap smear, you take cells from the mouth of the womb, put it on a slide and it is fixed and sent to a special person called a cytologist who reads it. By looking at the cells, he can tell whether there are cancer cells in the early stages or not. We are going to make it part of the programme of teaching nurses during training that they will be trained to do pap smears all over the country -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, I would like to seek clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t we end this debate? We shall continue with it when we have the special session, and this will be one of the topics we shall deal with. Okay, a special case.

4.22
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that special consideration you have been giving to the expecting mother. I remember last week when we came here to discuss issues of maternal health, the special session that was put before the House was for issues of maternal health. Today, the minister is saying that Cervical Cancer is completely different from maternal mortality. I do not know whether in that special session he will handle maternal mortality and maternal health, and whether he will combine it with the issue of Cervical Cancer. 

Secondly, the other issue that I wanted to know is, we all know that prevention is better than cure. As we go for the issues of the pap smear and all those other initiatives which we are really desperately looking forward to, the Member for Ibanda asked a passionate question - which you are just tactfully dodging - that on the onset when we were launching the Cervical Cancer issues, we went to primary schools and there were two pilot districts. You did it once and you stopped at that. We are saying we are rolling out but we have not touched any other person. Are we waiting to first carry out the pap smears before we continue with the prevention vaccine?

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to the issue of vaccination. (Laughter) The First Lady mentioned - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the consensus is that we end this debate and we wait for that special session. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, if you could allow me, let me just explain vaccination. The First Lady told us that we have approached GAVI to provide the vaccines so that all the young girls in the country can be vaccinated against HPV, and we are in the process of negotiating with GAVI to make the vaccine available.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much hon. Members for your contributions, but we shall continue with the general debate on all these issues very soon. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

4.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for this opportunity to make a statement of personal explanation under rule 44 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

In November 2009, I was approached by Rev. Mushabe of Kinoni Church of Uganda in Lubaale Parish in Lwemiyaga County that I represent in this Parliament, with a request that I spearhead a fundraising drive for the church. He also informed me that some other members of the church had wanted the fundraising to be led by hon. Sam Kutesa. I then agreed with Rev. Mushabe that since hon. Sam Kutesa takes precedence as a minister, and also since we were looking for money for the church in the constituency that I represent, hon. Kutesa would be invited as the chief guest and I would attend as the area Member of Parliament and together we could contribute to the church – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ssekikubo, our Rules of Procedure are that when a personal statement is going to be made, a copy has to be given to the Speaker by 11.00 a.m. I do not want to stop you from making your personal statement. What I want you to do is to make your statement tomorrow because I saw what you have given the honourable members and a big percentage of your statement is hearsay. The best you can do is to edit your statement; remove anything that you did not hear or see by yourself. Actually, it should have been a shorter statement than what you have given us.

When you give a statement that is controversial – because our rules say it should not be controversial because somebody will say, “This is hearsay”, and then the process will not move well. So I appeal to you that tomorrow, I will give you an opportunity to make a personal statement that does not involve hearsay matters. You cannot say that you are going to skip this since you have already given a statement to members, which contains hearsay matters and this is against our rules. So, please, go and edit and write a shorter statement that does not involve hearsay and then you will make your personal statement tomorrow. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I agree with you, Mr Speaker, only that if I had proceeded, this was just a mere preamble of what happened but I was obliged and members needed that background of how it came to be. Essentially, I wasn’t touching – 

THE SPEAKER: No, what I am saying is that it is a personal statement, nobody should interrupt you. You should come and read a statement, which is really in confinement with our Rules of Procedure. It should be the first or second item on the Order Paper tomorrow. 

Hon. Members, on your Order Paper there is an adjustment that I have to make because of a very serious incident that has happened at Makerere University and the Minister of Internal Affairs has requested me to give him space on the Order Paper so that he can officially tell us what has happened. Therefore, I am allowing him to make a statement. 

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, yet another unfortunate and sad incident has taken place at one of our institutions of higher learning, Makerere University, and I thought I should come and give you a brief of what exactly took place. As Members of Parliament, you don’t have to pick it from the press. So, I asked the Speaker, belatedly though, that I should come and give you these facts as I know them as of now.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity so that I can fill in Members of Parliament of what took place in Makerere last night. 

The Makerere Guild presidential election campaigns are on going. Yesterday, Monday, 15 March 2010 at around 2300 hours, the agents of a candidate called Teira went to God Is Able Hostel at Kikoni-Makerere for campaigns. It is said that while the campaign was going on, one Ignatius Nyongesa, a Kenyan third year B.Comm (External) student, who was an agent of another candidate started shouting the name of his candidate, Mr Kamau. 

As he was doing that, he was holding a bench raised up in his arms and he attempted to bang a vehicle belonging to a student who is not in his camp. Another student by the name of Brain Amwoga, a Kenyan in first year doing a Bachelor of Laws and also a resident of God Is Able Hostel got hold of him to stop him from banging the vehicle. During that scuffle, a security guard by the name of Richard Hafasha who had been deployed by Snow White Security Company, a private security organisation to keep guard at the hostel, came out to intervene. 

It was during this intervention that Richard Hafasha released bullets, which injured three students namely, Ignatius Nyongesa, Brain Amwoga and Amon Mugezi, a Ugandan student. The three were rushed to Mulago Hospital where unfortunately Ignatius Nyongesa and Brian Amwoga passed away while Amon Mugezi is still admitted in the Intensive Care Unit. 

As we were here, I received further information that he has just undergone surgery and things seem to be working on nicely. They said the security guard, Richard Hafasha, has been arrested for interrogation. 

Government highly regrets this unfortunate incident and wishes to convey, with deep sorrow, condolences to the families of the deceased and assure the public that it will do all in its power to ensure that justice is done. 

To this effect, inquiries have already been opened and I want to assure this House and the country especially the Kenyan public where these students happened to be coming from that appropriate actions guided by the findings of the inquiry will take place. I thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Kyanjo.

4.34
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): I thank you. I also wish to thank the hon. Minister for your prompt statement. I thank you for being prompt because in the past we have read stories in the newspapers and heard rumours over the radios, some accurate and others inaccurate. But for you to come and present this statement to the House, I thank you for that. 

The statement of the Minister does not go further enough to explain the actual genesis of the problem. The explanation you have given to me as a Minister in charge of Internal Affairs does not satisfy the parent who has lost a son; it does not satisfy a serious MP listening to you. It indeed does not satisfy any Ugandan who has seen this type of death caused by people holding guns all around. I wish that you could explain the circumstances beyond what you have put on paper. 

Secondly, it has been a practice of recent, which is very commendable, for Government to regret acts that it does not condone. However, the Constitution does not simply mandate Government to apologise when there is a danger like this. Civilised societies and governments go further either to duly compensate the parents and make the findings later or promptly find a way of having ministers resigning for the failure of their ministries to keep guard of the lives of these individuals. 

It is really very unfortunate that some of these students are coming from Kenya and before they come to this country, their parents read our Constitution which says there is a Government in Uganda and there is a State that has a responsibility to keep lives and property of the people. So you cannot continue to keep life when it is going away and you are staying there. The noble thing to do is to start these investigations but promptly compensate – it has happened many times - like when people died in fires in Budo and many other schools but it has been apologies and sorrows. Governments do not work like that my colleague. 

I am appealing to you, hon. Minister, to go and place this record straight to members of your Cabinet that you are responsible for compensating people whose relatives have died under circumstances as the ones explained in your document. They must be compensated and you must go back in short history and pay money to people who lost their dear ones. They must duly be compensated because putting up an inquiry does not mean that you are responsible enough – it is not enough! There are people who died in a bar in town and to date, I have never heard of the report coming out. There are also those who were killed in riots and there is no report. What is going on, because death should not be a common thing? 

Like the Mbale incident which was just an apology - one comes here and flamboyantly stands up to say, “We are very sorry and we are doing everything possible ….” What does that statement mean, saying, “Everything possible”? What does that statement mean? The person you killed in a family could be the one that the entire family has been looking at. If a member came and shot at hon. Kasaija, God forbid, the family of hon. Kasaija would have lost –(Interjection)

MR KASAIJA: Is the honourable shadow minister in order to insist on this question of compensation when it is not an agency of the State that has committed this heinous action - these are private security organisations. The best I would be expected is to be asked is, “What action are you going to take against that organisation?” So is it in order to mislead this House on this question of compensation when it is not an agency of Government that has committed this act? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, compensation takes a process. First of all, you must establish the liability. Therefore, since this happened the other day, there definitely must be investigations to find out who did this, who was wrong or who is the employer, assuming Richard Hafasha intentionally did this. So you cannot now say, “Sorry about it.” This is compensation; it has to be assessed and, therefore, there must be some kind of a process. You cannot expect compensation to be made within – even the Public Accounts Committee in future may ask, “How did you come to pay compensation without a due process?” (Laughter) So because it is not personal money, even if it were personal money, you must be liable. 

These are public funds that have to be used and definitely there will be compensation, but you will be paid by somebody who is liable like the employer of this security man or the security person concerned. So you do not expect compensation to be paid in a week or a month, no, it will take a due process. 

MR KYANJO: I thank you for your guidance, and I am quite pleased that it is not the same as the assertion of the minister. If I understood the Speaker well, he says there is a due process that has to be followed. The minister says this was a private firm – compensation and the commitment with which we –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker and also thank hon. Kyanjo for giving way. Last year, I put a question here on security organisations and my question was answered. After that, some people went to Kitgum District and recruited 100 youth whom they brought here, took away their certificates and they were not being paid. I was called and I used the Police and this matter was sorted out. However, I learnt from the Police that all the security organisations here are now supervised by the Police; they are licensed by Government. So, if there is to be any compensation, definitely by extension, the government is responsible. We cannot run away from this fact.

MR KYANJO: Thank you for that useful information. Again, I want to inform the minister that it is the responsibility of Government to discover the particular area where this compensation is going to be picked from. Even if this area is not found, Government has a duty to compensate. 

What do you swear about when holding the Constitution? What are you keeping? The other day someone was telling us here that the organs, which import weapons into Uganda or which authorise weapon-importation into Uganda are Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs. The purpose of these weapons is to protect the lives of Ugandans and their property. Now the weapons are killing people. So, it is not the same statement.

My appeal to the minister is that come up with a clear guideline about how people are going to feel safe in Uganda or to feel safe sending their children to study in this country, or to feel safe sending their children to stay in hostels or universities where everyone who is holding a gun can go and shoot someone and the best the government can do is to come here and promise investigations and say sorry. It is not enough!

I am insisting that there must be a due process of compensating people who lose their family members without a proper reason. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have said it. When I came this afternoon, I was going to comment about things we are seeing in the newspapers everyday. People losing their lives; husband killing wife; wife killing husband; a baby being slaughtered; everyday! I was concerned and perturbed. This morning I saw a story about a lady who used a hot flat iron to kill somebody’s child; another one killing someone in Kyengera; another – it is too much! 

I think compensation must be paid by somebody. First of all, in their investigations, they should find out who Hafasha is. Was he in the course of his employment? Who is his employer? They have to assess the compensation to be paid. Who is the beneficiary of the compensation? All these have a process.

I agree with you. It may not be Government; it may be the owner of the hostel where this happened; it may be the university itself. We do not know. That is why proper investigations should be carried out so that whoever wants to follow can follow.

4.45
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for coming up with this statement about the state of affairs at the university. It is quite disturbing. 

On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Lwemiyaga, I regret the deaths of such young people. I extend my compassionate condolences to my coursemates, lecturers, the Dean at the Faculty of Law and the entire university fraternity.

When such deaths occur, I would like Government to always come with strong or appropriate statements. When you say, “There was fighting with benches and then during the scuffle, a security guard by the name of Richard Hafasha, who had been deployed by Snow White security company to keep guard at the hostel, went to intervene”, why are you coining it into that and then you add, “It was during this intervention that Richard Hafasha released bullets.”

Is releasing of bullets part of the intervention? Certainly it cannot be. There are other methods that can govern, that can easily and ably lead to the control of the crowd.  It is not the policy of Government to say that you intervene by releasing bullets. I think this statement will mislead the public to think that armed men in Kampala - in Uganda, intervene by releasing bullets. This is not the policy of Government. I think there could be other ways like saying, “A mistake happened. Maybe in the course of doing this, this happened.” Certainly, the release of bullets, by any standard, cannot be any form of intervention, particularly in students’ affairs.

This raises a question about the safety at these mushrooming university hostels. Is there a policy for monitoring the safety of our students in these mushrooming hostels or when one puts up a flat, an arcade or something like that; the students are free and let at ease to manage themselves? This has resulted into many fatalities. Some are mugged; others are stabbed; others are raped; others are strangled. I think this is very serious and I would really suggest that the Minister of Internal Affairs takes interest in these incidents.

The trigger-happy environment that has been part of our security and armed people must end. Whether we want it or not, when we have people who are trigger-happy, at any slight provocation – why should such private security bodies be allowed to guard in such sensitive places? They may not understand the psychology of university students. They need a higher and sophisticated level of interaction. That is why we needed properly trained policemen to be in charge of these places of abode or any university extension. They can understand the language. They cannot be offended by a student saying stupid or any other vulgar word.  But someone who is half-baked can easily get offended that, “Because this one is speaking English, this is why he is under-looking or minimising my role here.” Normally, the resultant effect is always misdirected anger.

I feel we need to streamline this and even give reassurances to our counterparts from Kenya that Uganda is a country that keeps law and order; that – you may take note that it is only Kenyans who died – the death of Kenyans is not related to any matter.

Last week, there were also deaths at a hostel. The Kenyans are safe. This is their country. We belong to East Africa. It is not meant to target Kenyans only, and Government will do all it takes to get to the bottom of this matter. And I, as the incoming Secretary General –(Laughter)- I hope to do my best and to give all the support to the bereaved families to ensure that this does not happen again. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to express my condolences to the bereaved families and the Government of Kenya which has now lost three people in hardly a week, but also wish to express my anguish at the way we have privatised our security as a country. It is unfortunate that 60 percent of the security of the private persons and properties are now under the cover of private security organisations, most of which do not meet the criteria - if at all it exists - according to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which licences these private security companies. 

It is my hope that the guidelines set by the Ministry of Internal Affairs will sooner than later meet the requirements that our people deserve. My problem with this statement is the apparent coincidence that can be seen from the wording, “A Nyongesa Ignatius was holding a bench and a one Brian Amwoga tried to stop him, and the two were shot dead.” What kind of coincidence is this? It would appear that this was a pre-meditated murder and to allude to an intervention would be to understate what has happened. So, I would feel more comfortable if the minister came tomorrow after the investigations are made – 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think this statement is depicting violence in elections; that the elections at Makerere have become violent, typical of other elections?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, I would agree with you, Mr Speaker. But I assume there were not only two people. Why did the bullets all of a sudden get only these ones? Be it as it may, I believe we need to learn more on what exactly happened - how many people were there and why these two were targeted - in order for us to come up with a conclusive position. Other than that, I do sympathise with the bereaved and may their souls rest in eternal peace! 

4.55
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of colleagues who spoke before me, and express my heartfelt condolences to the families, the university, the government and indeed the people of Kenya for the loss of these two young citizens. 

In any student’s elections, you are bound to have scuffles; in any excitement within a student’s community you will have these sorts of contradictions and conflicts, where somebody gets a bench and attempts to hit a car and then another student restraining him. But all of a sudden, somebody armed comes in to intervene and just shoots both!

The statement of the minister, that states that Richard Hafasha came to intervene, is very unfortunate. You cannot intervene in a small scuffle involving a bench by shooting people.  The problem today in this country is that there are so many guns in the hands of untrained and sometimes unauthorised persons. You just need to walk on the streets, and you will find that every two or three people have their hips bulging with a gun. 

This particular incident shows one thing; that Government has relegated its responsibility of keeping the lives and property of Ugandans, and has surrendered it to the citizens. 

A week can hardly pass without reading an incident of an Army man going to shoot a girlfriend, or an Army man shooting people in a bar. It is happening everyday, and Government is not taking this up seriously! 

We have said time and again that there are too many armed people in this country. This is no longer security, but indeed insecurity. That is why, during the bi-elections in Mbale the other day, we had ministers with three Members of this House involved in shooting people. We have not even received a statement of that on the floor. The Minister of Internal Affairs has not yet come here to tell us that his colleagues were involved in shooting people; you have kept quite. Instead, you move around, you even have the guts to sit with us here when you have been shooting innocent citizens. 

Mr Speaker, we must get serious on this. The policy of arming private people with guns should be regulated. It is worse when leaders like us are also armed. Why doesn’t Police, for example, provide security to the MPs and other leaders who think they are at risk, other than giving them guns? 

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that many of your MPs here are armed. In fact, hon. Mallinga is armed; I know for sure because I have moved with him in a car and he had a gun –(Interjection)- yes, he just left it outside because I have seen him armed. So, Mr Speaker, if a slight scuffle came, you may find one of your MPs pulling out a gun and shooting a person. And the following day, that sort of incident will have ramifications on the integrity of this House. 

My appeal to this Government is - I know they love having guns because they know what they do with guns - let them control the use of guns. In fact, one other Member I was about to mention who is armed may be standing up, but that is not –(Laughter)- the point now.

Secondly, just after this incident, there were some riots at the university arising out of this incident, and I expected the minister to talk about that crisis; what happened and whether the situation is under control. We may be sitting here and we hear another death; this time the Police may have shot students because it is shooting right now. The minister’s statement falls short of this; it is not exhaustive and this takes me to one point, that when you try to hide some of these facts, we read beyond them and we think that you are hiding something. Why do you come with a statement knowing very well that as we talk now, shootings are going on at the university, and you do not inform us that actually this is what is happening, and we are taking these sort of steps to calm the situation?

Because this incident involves two students who are non-nationals, I would request the government to come up with a clear statement and apology to the Kenyan community about it, because as a country, we failed to protect these two innocent citizens of our neighbours. We need to apologise to them and assure the Kenyans that actually, this is an isolated incident; it is not a deliberate target on Kenyan nationals, and they can come and if they so wish, do their own investigations to calm themselves down.

Lastly, this incident, according to the statement, originates from a campaign of one candidate called Teira. We want to know which political party is promoting this Teira, because there is a notorious political party in this country. Wherever it participates in an election, there are shootings; so we may not divorce this particular party from this incident. There is a very notorious political party in this country; whenever its interests are at stake, they bring out guns. We know those who shot in Mbale.

Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, tomorrow I am going to bring you photographs and I will lay them on Table to show you what happened in Bugweri; these people putting on uniforms of that political party and carrying guns and shooting people. I even have them captured in that notorious political party uniform. I would like to know, since the minister is here and he has done some preliminary investigations, which political party is promoting this Teira. I thank you.

5.05
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the families who have lost their dear ones and also to the Government of Kenya, and the East African Community, because those who have died are from the East African Community.

The hostel is called God is Able. It means in that hostel God is there. What a coincidence; a bench is a long thing. To carry a bench, you need two people. One has to hold this side and the other one the other side. I do not know what type of bench that was. Was it a chair; because it is easy to carry a chair but not a bench? If you are talking of a bench, it is unfortunate; that bench must have been tiny.

These are two students; one was coming to restrain the other. We do not know what Magezi was doing because the one who came to restrain Ignatius was Brian, a Kenyan. I do not know what Magezi was doing? Was Magezi the one they were fighting with? Was it a war between Ugandan and Kenyan students? 

It is unfortunate that guns are being used anyhow. I recall when I was growing up, we used to see Securicor guards; they used to have one gun with one bullet purposely waiting for thieves. Now you are giving them guns with full magazines. I know hon. Mallinga, before you crossed, you were the Chairman of UPC and we used to go to your house and you had long guns in your house at night when we were meeting -(Laughter)- and I want to warn those who are there that that man is a very dangerous man!(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it really proper if you privately visited someone’s home and then some years after you come and say, “There was no bench, there was just a simple mat?” I think that is a private matter.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I want to apologise but I brought that because he is the one who took us to UPC and he run away and left us. That is the problem we have with him and we do not know why he left us; but I want to apologise.

Guns should be used for specific purposes. In a hostel, where students are, I thought the guard is supposed to guard the gate and not guard inside. You can only go inside if people have attacked the students and at 2300 hours that means it was 11.00 p.m. What type of campaign is that for somebody to come from another place to enter at such a late hour? We know campaigns stop latest, I think, 6.00 p.m. as a law, and I am sure Makerere has also put in place the same law. Somebody to come and campaign from somewhere far in the late hours; what was that? The person who was an insecurity to this organisation was this agent of Teira and that is the person whom they should have shot, not these students –(Interjections)- you are right, they should not shoot anybody, and with the worst that would have been the person.

I am sorry for the Kenyan Government. Recently, we lost another student from Kenya. This is becoming dangerous! I hope the Kenyan Government will not assume that we are killing their people. We would like the minister, whom we like most, to assure us what security exists for students. Many have died in Makerere and there has been no report!  And even for this one, we have talked about it here and we are going to stop here. But I can assure you that the Government of Uganda cannot run away from responsibility. You know law and you know what we call vicarious liability. You will not run away from it. You are the ones who gave guns and you are the ones to monitor them. You are the ones responsible. I can assure you, Mr Minister, I have been supporting your reports, but this one here leaves a lot to be desired.

The President recently went to visit us in Bududa when the landslide occurred and he also walked with a gun. I do not know if he had come to shoot the landslide. So, the guns have become the order of the day. I think you are copying. Hon. Werikhe and Lyomoki - let us not lie - shot people with a gun during the day and there was no action. If you are aware, yesterday but one there was a shooting in Mbale at Umeme. Umeme had gone to disconnect illegal connections in Bungokho South -(Interjections)- if you are not aware, they have arrested people. You say you are from Mbale, but you do not know things about Mbale very well because you do not understand the language. I am the one who understands that language.

Mr Speaker, everywhere there are guns. We need a law about guns. In Police there was a time they were saying we must eliminate small guns. We have not even seen this law on both small and big guns and how to utilise them. 

Finally, it is unfortunate that we can go to institutions of higher learning and take guns there. We have all been there except for some few who might not have been there, but we can give you the experience of when we were there. When we were in Makerere, during elections, everybody would want his candidate, and sometimes we would even fool one another. But I never saw a gun during our time. Why do we have the guns this time? And at that time you could have said that there were rebellions, but now we have peace. “You know, we went to fight and we have brought peace with guns.” What are the guns for? You have brought insecurity instead. 

In fact, if I had authority - and one day I know I may have it - I would scrap this Ministry of Internal Affairs, because it is not doing its core function of monitoring security. If you were doing this, there would have been nothing like guns of this nature in Makerere. There would have been sticks and during elections. That is why we passed a law that nobody is allowed to walk with a gun during elections. Why should it be in Makerere? You should have walked with sticks if you wanted to. And I feel sorry that something of this nature takes place in our higher institutions of learning. My condolences to the family and to the Kenya Government; I hope that the Uganda Government will come up with a strong statement on this matter. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Now, let us listen to her because she actually came before we started and she was going to make a statement on it, and I advised her that the minister was making a statement; and I thought it was fair that she is given the opportunity.

5.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The death of a student in such circumstances is a very painful thing. In the 1990s - I think it was 1990 - I was a student of Makerere University and we held demonstrations about stationery, when the Movement Government had just come in and abolished our stationery. The Police who were deployed in Makerere shot dead two students: One Okema and another Onyango. They shot one Amodoi, one Wakabi and one Oulanyah who was a Member of Parliament recently. 

Mr Speaker, up to today, we the students who went through that have not heard of any report saying that these families were compensated. You can imagine the pain and the trauma these families faced. You send your child alive and well to the university and the next thing that happens is that a dead body is sent back to your house. It is very sad and very painful! And we send our deepest condolences to those families. We also pray that that student, who is under intensive care, may perhaps live by the Grace of God. 

I am glad that the minister has come with this statement, but I am disturbed by the language the minister uses. How can the Minister of Internal Affairs, who understands the guns more than Alaso who is a lay woman, use a statement like “releasing bullets”? Do you really just release bullets from a gun? That is expected to come from Alaso who has no understanding of the fact that guns are fired and that there is a trigger in a gun. I think this statement is just annoying me. I thought the word “fired” would come from the Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of all the guns held both illegally and legally. But I am so disturbed anyway! 

I want us to revert to the issue of guild elections in our universities. I think that my colleague from Education should get universities to try to clean up the process of guild elections. What is happening in our universities, and even our secondary schools, is a mirror of what is happening in our community and in our elections as a country. 

I would like to remind the House that violence during elections has not started with Makerere University. You have heard my colleague hon. Abdu Katuntu talk about violence in elections. But there are universities in this country - I know that in Uganda Christian University Mukono, they have stipulated guidelines that try to make the process of guild elections as sober as possible. They try their best. I would like that in our public universities the minister responsible makes it a point to get the universities to hold sober elections. If you watch these guild elections in public universities, you see violence, bribery, intimidation and chaos typical of the one we have in our villages anyway. One time somebody told me that the products, for instance, that we have in our universities, the politicians, the Army, the Police are all drawn from a common pool. So, it indicates that our society is terribly rotten.

Last week I watched a certain witchdoctor inject UShs 8 million - it was a news item on one of the TV stations - to ensure that her son was elected head prefect in one of our primary schools. And we think we are in charge? A witchdoctor put UShs 8 million then she went and campaigned for the son and he was elected. And you know how our children distribute sweets during campaigns and how they distribute money under the watchful eye of Ministry of Education -

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean a native doctor or a witchdoctor? (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I do not know. But it could be any of those. (Laughter) I think I would appreciate your guidance if you told me which way to refer.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think native is okay; but a witchdoctor -

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. So, the native doctor put in UShs 8 million and I thought that was very unfortunate. By the time those children begin to campaign for elective offices like we do, how much bribery will we have put in their minds?  

The same applies to the violence - you know they learn from us. Only recently in Kololo Airstrip, the NRM political party was passing out their 500 poll watchers who were armed, trained, drilled and were passed out by the President. These are people who are going to guard ballot papers and ballot boxes - trained, armed, drilled and passed out by the Executive of this country! So, what level of violence do you expect to find in a polling station? So, I am not surprised that our universities are degenerating to a level that is unacceptable in terms of guild elections and it will get worse!  

We have always cautioned this country that where we are headed to, if we do not round off those guns, hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, those guns will be on everybody’s door before we know it. Currently, they seem to serve the purpose of intimidating those of us in the Opposition, but I am telling you one day, they will be on everybody’s door, including you people in the Movement. 

Hon. Katuntu asked a question here, “Who is Teira?”  And I think I should answer this because I know Mr Teira is a second year law student at Makerere University and a former student of Busoga College Mwiri, and he is currently contesting the guild elections under the Movement party ticket. I thought that the minister should have brought out this matter because he knows him as their candidate, and it is very unfortunate. 

But, as the Shadow Minister of Education, I would like the Minister of Education to relate this incidence and then today’s shootings in Makerere to the future of guild elections. I would like the Minister of Education to tell us, have you reigned in? Are we going to have guild elections in this present mood with students rioting in the university or are they on halt? It is important that we know these facts, because it is not healthy for students to go into voting when the atmosphere is tense, since the voting is a few days away.  

Finally, I think that students, especially foreign students, should have an elaborate security advisory that is provided for them. I am not sure whether they should be let to go into all the chaos of Kampala; Kampala can be very chaotic. Perhaps our children know how to get over it with Hafasha, the man who just releases bullets. But I think that there should be an elaborate security advisory so that we do not get ourselves embroiled in diplomatic embarrassments as though you cannot protect your foreign guests, hon. Minister. It is important that you look at details of how to secure foreign students, but also secure our children. When we send them to public universities, we send them to you and we think that as a government, you would do a better job. Unfortunately, this Government has let us down when it comes to public universities. I thank you.

5.24
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you. Mr Speaker, to get a son or a daughter to a university takes a lot of efforts and a lot of resources. For a parent to wake up and just hear that his or her son or daughter at the university has been killed, is devastating and very traumatising! I would like, therefore, to add my condolences to the families which have lost their dear sons.

In the late 60s, I was at the University of Nairobi and in all my three years there, there were strikes. Every year the university had to be closed and we had to come back home here. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, not a single student was killed because the governments we had in East Africa those days were governments of the people; they were civil governments and not military-oriented or military governments.   

The people of Uganda are rapidly losing faith in the rule of law. That is why you find killings taking place day in, day out. And people are losing confidence in the law because of very many reasons of which I will only mention two: The civil police are being militarised; now the ordinary people find it very difficult to tell the difference between a policeman and a military man. Look at the new uniform of the Police; the boots are now military boots. How do you say that that is a civil police? That is militarism! 

Civilians are supposed to be handled by civil police and not a militarised police. And I think the Minister of Internal Affairs must resist this move to convert our Police Force into a military force; it is very dangerous.

Maybe it is not surprising that what is happening is happening under this Government, because this Government is the beneficiary of violence. It came to power through violent means. So, I will not expect this government to stop what we are talking about because it is the government arming people.  The boda bodas, for example, were one day addressed by the President right here in Kampala. And when they complained that some of their clients turn on them and kill them at night, they were given guns. These boda boda guys ride their piki piki with guns -(Laughter)- given to them by the state. 

Honestly, are we okay? Are we not sitting on a time bomb? Definitely this country will one day explode. And even the people who are giving the guns will not be safe. All of us are sitting on a time bomb. Something must be done and must be done now, Mr Minister of Internal Affairs. 

I would like to differ with the minister’s statement that this is a private firm. Over the weekend, Uganda Peoples’ Congress successfully held its Annual Delegates Conference at Namboole. We hired a security firm to keep peace at Namboole. They started work on Friday but that night at about 10 O’clock, they were ordered by Government to leave Namboole immediately. This was a private security firm. 

We worked through the night to find replacements. It was a private security organisation being ordered by Government and here is the minister saying that is a private thing? You mean the other one was not private? We are joking with matters of security in this country! I think the Government should be very serious and take the future of this country as a very serious matter. We cannot produce children for your guns to consume, it should not happen!

I said I was going to mention two reasons and the second one is corruption. The public has lost faith in the Police because of corruption. As a part of rehabilitating the North, police posts are being opened in some remote areas. In 2008, I went with the German Ambassador to open two of them in my constituency. I went back this January and the people were telling me, “We don’t want this police post here, they are corrupt. If you have a case and take it to the police and your opponent or the person you are complaining against takes just a goat there, you have lost the case.” So the people are demanding that we close the police detaches. Look at this kind of situation - a goat for a government employee! Is this okay?

Honestly, you can do better than that. We have all the money here. If you people stopped being corrupt, this country would not be like this. Now all our money goes to corruption, to a few people and the rest are treated like non human beings.

Lastly, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs not to come next time there is a crisis like this with this type of cosmetic statement. We want serious statements because as I was coming in here, people were still running in Makerere. Why couldn’t the minister wait, get the latest position and then come before Parliament and say, “This is the situation as of now and this is what we are doing to do”, rather than come and tell us what happened yesterday. We don’t know what has happened today so I think this idea of trying to hoodwink Parliament with a statement like this will not help us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think we should end this debate?

5.33
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are very much aware that recently you signed offering Parliament of Uganda to host the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 2012. In one of our preparatory meetings, we observed that about 5,000 visitors will be coming to the region around that time and already the Kenyan and Rwandan governments are sitting and scheming on how best to attract them to their countries as tourists during that time.

This forced us, as a preparatory committee meeting, to invite the Ministry of Tourism and the officers of the Tourism Board. We asked them how Parliament could assist them to ensure that when those people come to Uganda for the meeting, they can also stay a little bit longer in our parks and other facilities. 

The only answer they gave is image. They said we need to improve our image as a country because when somebody is coming, he needs to sleep believing he will wake up and go back alive. The biggest challenge we have, like you have asked, is that today in the media almost everyday there is a report of a murder and that progressively scares the potential people who would have wanted to come, visit and stay in the country.

You know that Uganda had cut itself a niche in education tourism, that within the five East African countries, Uganda is the one destination where most of the East African residents from other countries are coming basically because we offer value education. People also bring their children because they believe that the government will protect them. 

These three incidents, which have recently occurred, are likely to dent the image of the country and the ability of the people of Uganda to protect the foreigners who are here. It will also hurt the investors who have invested in education institutions with a view of attracting people within the region.

This is painful and I wish to call on the Minister of Internal Affairs and whoever it takes to know that the earlier we correct this impression, the better for the investors and the people of Uganda.

Also, I had the opportunity to be a student in Makerere University and to campaign for elections as a Guild President. This was not long ago but in the 1990s because I replaced hon. Mao as Guild President of Makerere University. I want to tell you that when we contested and competed, there were challenges of the day but the campaigns were run in a very mature manner. 

At that time, there was a candidate supported by Government. I wasn’t supported by Government but even then we competed within the set hours and there was no hostility. The results were contested through the established procedures. There was an inquiry after elections, which was chaired by Okumu Ringa and finally adjudication was made to say that I had been validly elected and I served my term as a Guild President.

This is civility, which we feel should be progressively encouraged and supported but what is the problem right now? One of the challenges that we have, and I did raise it sometime in the smaller sectarian forum, is that they have progressively introduced political parties at Makerere University. When a Kenyan student comes to Uganda, must he join a Ugandan party in order to participate in the civil affairs of the university? These are challenges that the Ministry of Education should come up to guide the institutions of higher learning about because once you are a student you are just a student with challenges that affect students. If I am a Tanzanian student and I must participate in the elections, the guidelines must be very clear on what my rights are as a non national student who must participate in running for the elective offices.

What has happened in East Africa of recent especially in Kenya and Uganda during the times of elections calls for a lot of caution. Right now we need education for our children in schools but we also need education to the people who are preparing for elections. People must be taught that when you participate in elections, you can either win or lose. When I was at Makerere University, I was a member of one of the state halls which had a very interesting motto which said, “We either win or they lose” and that sounded a little bit queer because to them there was no option of losing and this, if not well interpreted, can progressively diminish the ability to hold democratic elections in higher institutions of learning. Yet these are the people to whom we shall pass the baton of democracy tomorrow. What type of leaders are they going to be if they cannot hold effective elections now?

Finally, this can start as a simple thing but it can progressively also affect the relationship in the East African fraternity because right now, we are hurriedly saying that we want to form a federation but a federation where people are not willing to participate progressively in elections and either win or lose and accept the outcome may be a little bit far. With these few remarks, I wish to send my condolences to the members of the bereaved families. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think we shall have Prof. Kamuntu and the Member for Isingiro and we shall end there. 

5.40 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I want to express my appreciation to the Minister for Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija, for his prompt statement informing the House about this unfortunate incident that has resulted into the death of two students and left one in critical condition. We should avoid a situation where when the minister informs the House promptly, you blame him that he should have delayed and waited. When he waits, you blame him for delaying information to you. What situation should he be in? Let us thank him for at least informing us promptly so that we are saved from reading of these matters in the press and we can express ourselves as it affects us. 

I really want to express deep condolences to the friends and families and indeed to our sister state Kenya for the loss of these two students. 

My greatest concern is an attempt by some of our Members to politicise death. It is very unfortunate that the students have died and from the report we have received as well as from the knowledge we have from the students at Makerere, this was a very unfortunate incident. This was an isolated incident and for any Member to begin to connect it to the Mbale elections violence and to connect it to future imagined violence is really very unfortunate. And to even invoke some hatred and disaffection between this country and our sister republic because of this isolated death of two students is absolutely of great concern to us and as distinguished Members of Parliament, frankly, this death cannot be –(Interjections)- listen to this; that you even begin to identify the party labels of the candidates standing in this guild contest in order to connect it to the death of these two students? 

We must be more serious than this. Surely, I can say it without any fear of contradiction that nobody sat down to plan the death of these two students. Let anybody in this House prove that people purposely sat down and plotted the death of these students so that we take them seriously. But to begin to politicise death is very unfortunate. 

The Government of the Republic of Uganda is totally committed to protecting the lives of the students in this country. They died here and it is unfortunate; they could have died in Kenya as well -(Member timed out_) 

5.44 
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to extend my condolences to the families which lost their dear ones and to express my appreciation to the minister for the timely statement. But my concern goes to a different ministry. Possibly, we should have had a holistic approach in responding to this calamity or we should have another report from the Ministry of Education. 

If you see what members are bringing forward, it seems that the procedures that should be followed in election time are not being followed at these centres of learning. So I would like the Ministry of Education to assure this nation that it is in charge and that the parents should trust institutions in as far as the safety of their children is concerned.

I would like to pose two questions: what is the fate of the campaigns at Makerere University? Is the minister telling us whether the campaigns will continue or not? 

Two, I would like the Minister of Education to assure us that it is going to put in place procedures to be followed and strictly so because I foresee a situation where parents are going to withdraw their students in times of elections and bring them back if they are to stay alive. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that marks the end of the debate, unless the minister who owns the statement has something to say? 

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, thank you very much. Let me start off by making one observation. We are one country and we – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, don’t you think that after a day or so, you will give us another detailed statement after the investigations? This is something on which you acted because you wanted to inform the House of what had happened. You had not gathered all the information. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, being the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and also being a border MP, I am seeking your guidance whether it is not necessary for you to relay a message of condolences to the Kenyan Parliament so that we can have harmony within the region to avoid reprisal? 

THE SPEAKER: To avoid what?

MR EKANYA: To avoid reprisal because it has happened in the past. When Kenyans are harmed here, Ugandans are also harmed in Kenya in return.  

THE SPEAKER: But we have not even come to the conclusion. I am only asking whether the minister does not intend to make another detailed statement and then after that we shall decide on whether to make a resolution or not.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I will begin from where you have just stopped. I wish to refer my colleagues to page 2 of the statement, the second last paragraph. I repeat, “All will be done that is within its power that justice is done.” Well, they are dead and there is nothing much that we can now do about it but find a way forward. This was an answer that we were still looking for and I thought that I should come in and fill you in so that you do not hear this from –(Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: I thank you. I have just learnt that the third student has died and since the minister is carrying out investigations, I do not know whether he has already been told that the Ugandan student has also passed away.

Secondly, I want to know that since the agents of this Teira are the ones who went to this hostel and caused commotion, has this man, Teira been arrested? We need to know why he planned to have campaigns which ended up with this kind of scuffle and has caused three deaths. Since justice is being pursued, I want to know whether this student has already been arrested to explain to us the kind of agents he sent to that hostel. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But I heard this from one contributor asking that, “How do you go at night?” You see hostels are lived in by students of different camps and so you cannot say this was restricted to one camp or the other. It could be that these were students staying in the same hostel. So you cannot say, “How did it go?” No, these are hostels.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I have deliberately kept quiet. I am rather disappointed about this emotionalism about this unfortunate incident. The students who died and for whom we really sympathise did not die because they were Kenyans as some innuendos have emerged. It was just a coincidence that the two students who died happened to be Kenyans. Hon. Dombo was trying to say we need to know why Kenyans should be targeted or if they should participate in politics. There is nothing like targeting Kenyans. Indeed our system allows students without discrimination to participate in all student affairs at campus regardless of wherever they come from. 

Coming to the information given by my sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I am in touch full time with the Deputy Vice-Chancellor who is also in touch with the doctors at Mulago. I put my phone in silent mode and the message I just received and according to the clock, it is 10 minutes to six – I got a message at 15 minutes to six and it is saying that, “I am informed by the head of surgery in Mulago that the patient’s condition is stable after surgery.” This is the message and I do not know where my sister has got the information that the third student has died. 

Having said that, I want to assure everybody that the education ministry and indeed the nation and all organs of the State, are in charge. We cannot stop incidents of -(Interjection)- do not even talk about shooting. Leaving aside guns, how often do we get instances of people in the rural areas where there are no guns, stabbing each other with knives and slicing each other with pangas? It has nothing to do with guns but just a coincidence or bad situation that has also happened the world over before and not only in Uganda. 

Hon. Members, it is true we should be sad and regret the incident but we should not be emotional. To say we should apologise -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: I studied in Makerere in the late 70s and I was part of the university guild government. In 1976/77, we had an incident where President Moi’s niece was murdered when she had just landed at Entebbe Airport from Kenya. The matter was not taken lightly by the Kenyan Government. Even Idi Amin whom you despise – that was Amin’s time - he took trouble to go and address the university students. Brig. Kili who was a minister, took the trouble and spent time to personally investigate the matter. That was a responsible Minister for Education. What exactly are you, senior minister, doing other than just getting these messages –(Laughter)- SMS. What steps are you taking? Who is now representing Government –(Laughter)– in this incident which is very unfortunate? What is the role of Government now? Are you giving assurance to the students - that confidence which the students are now losing because they are not sure of their lives? 

These are foreign students – if we are used to dying cheaply in Uganda, we should not take the matter of foreign students dying in our country lightly for sure. So that information and these statements that we have made here should not be taken lightly. Mr Minister, I did witness the death and the temper that occurred at the time. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think we should stop giving information. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank you for that information. As you listened for yourselves, the statement of my colleague in charge of security is that we are investigating the matter further. What we have received is a preliminary report and we are not taking the matter lightly. On the face of it all, it was just an ordinary unfortunate incident of student elections - ordinary, unfortunate incident of an election nature, which can happen anywhere.

I want to say –(Interjections)- that the situation, since the incident, has been under control. The Police is in charge. Investigations are taking place and Members who were concerned about the fate of the elections –

MRS OGWAL: Can you stop the tear gas?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not abuse our Rules of Procedure. A few moments ago you wanted to stand to give information and I said no. I do not see what has developed between then and now to prompt you to raise a point of order now. I decline to receive it. Let us not abuse our procedures.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I am much obliged, Mr Speaker. As for the honourable members who are concerned about the fate of the elections, definitely, the campaigns and the elections cannot continue with this state of affairs. We have advised that the process is put on hold until the dust settles down.

Everything that is within our means as a ministry working together with the ministry in charge of security has been done to ensure that there is calm, peace and security at the campus. The matter is being thoroughly investigated and we, together with my colleague from security, will come up with a more comprehensive statement about what exactly transpired.

I beg you, Members –(Interjections)- to the best of my knowledge - although I do not respect the heckling by my colleague – there has not been any tear gas at the campus –(Interjections)

I end by saying that let us all sympathise with the bereaved family. We should pray for the wounded to heal and wait for a comprehensive statement about what happened. I thank you very much.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I pray that we take this matter with the seriousness it deserves. I said that from the beginning that it is a sad, unfortunate incident. We feel very sorry for losing those two citizens of East Africa. We should – death is a common denominator. When there is death, we should all speak the same language irrespective of the party you belong to. So, colleagues, some of us take these matters very seriously and we take you to be very serious people.

I came here to fill in –

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we understand what you did. Do you intend to make another statement? That was my question. Say yes or no.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Most obliged -(Interjections)- I said I came in today to give you - 

THE SPEAKER: This was an interim statement. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: It was preliminary information so that you do not get this information from the press. For sure, we will give you more information as the situation develops. We shall give you information about the action the State is going to take when the investigations have been completed.

I think a number of questions have been raised. I beg this House to reserve my comments about most of these until we bring a full story to show you the direction we are taking. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The matter has ended there. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the proposal moved by the Minister of Internal Affairs but I remember on the 3rd of this month, you had also directed after I had raised the matter, which needed a minister to bring a statement, that he brings a statement on the 11th, which was last Thursday. We have not received it. When he is bringing that statement, he should bring along that other statement. 

This was supposed to be a statement about the shootings in Mbale, which left two gentlemen languishing in Mbale Hospital. They were injured during the by-elections in which the ministers are alleged to have been involved in the shooting. We had asked – I do not know whether he got that information – you were supposed to have brought a statement. This was followed by the issue of Ssembabule. If you can come with a joint statement about that, we shall appreciate it because we never received it after the directive the Speaker gave.

THE SPEAKER: Bring another one where hon. Ahabwe was attacked in Kigezi. That has also been reported. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, Mr Speaker, as far as I am aware, there is a statement supposed to be brought to this Parliament. I am ready with the one concerning the Mbale incident. I am only waiting to be fixed on the Order Paper and I will be here.

Two, there is a question about the death of Mayombo. I can see it. It is already here as one of the issues. The statement is being prepared and when we are required to come, we shall come and make that statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have only dealt with two issues. The Order Paper has not been really tackled. The Bill, which was supposed to be tabled, was not. The Bill about the presidential emoluments and what not has been put on the Order Paper time and again but we never reach it. 

Therefore, tomorrow after we have received hon. Ssekikubo’s statement, we shall handle your Bill, Minister, and then other business will follow. I am sorry - is the Agriculture Minister here? This must be Agriculture. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. Regarding the issue of the Bill for tomorrow, the Ministry of Public Service was supposed to come up with some information. Ideally, if he has the details, he should give them to us so that we go with them and when we come tomorrow, we just go through the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Which details?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason why this Bill was stopped at that time – I think it was the issue of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the former presidents and the timing. So, they must have come. Does it mean from 1962 or from -  

THE SPEAKER: I think this will be explained tomorrow. Let us start with it tomorrow. What I know is that we had started the general debate during the Bill’s second reading but because of some two or three issues, we adjourned and that is what we need. There may not be much general debate because we debated it last time. But let us clear it.

What caused the adjournment I think was the involvement of the third Arm of the State, that is, Parliament and the issue of other leaders who ruled before this Government. These were the issues, but otherwise, we went on with the general debate. So, it will be an extension of the general debate if necessary. 

I thank you all for your time and I hope the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is processing the legal reforms of elections so that we can clear them soon. 

So, with this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow, at 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 March 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 





