Thursday, 4 March 2010

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Again, I regret that we are starting late. I was here on time, but when I realised Members had not come to the Chamber, I had to delay in the hope that other Members would come in. However, I would like to thank those who are already here, for coming early. I would like to appeal to those who have not been able to come over to come to the building so that we can transact business.

Honourable members, for sometime, I have noted something that it is getting persistent in the newspapers. That is the matter concerning the hon. Minister of Information, Princess Kabakumba Matsiko. The matter is in respect of business of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Public Accounts Committee and all the other accounts committees for the good job so far done. 

However, on that issue concerning hon. Matsiko Kabakumba, I would like to say I have only been reading about it in the newspapers – I have never been officially informed about it. 

Anyway, from the newspapers, I gather that hon. Kabakumba Matsiko, while at the funeral service of the late Mr Behakanira, the owner of the CHOGM Hotel, made a statement concerning the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, which apparently offended its Members. I can say that is what I have been able to gather from the newspapers because nothing official has been communicated to me complaining about the conduct of the honourable minister.

However, today I was surprised to read a story from The Observer trying to connect me to what is happening between that committee and hon. Kabakumba. From what I have gathered, I have learnt that hon. Kabakumba was summoned to appear before the Public Accounts Committee, but apparently for reasons I do not know, she never appeared. 

I also have learnt that the committee waited for her on Monday, but she did not appear. It was then that the name of the Speaker of Parliament got involved. I was not there to listen to the proceedings of the committee, but while at another function receiving a petition from the religious leaders with views on hon. Bahati’s Bill, the media asked why I was encouraging hon. Kabakumba not to appear before the Public Accounts Committee. 


I was surprised that that was the case. However, I later got to realise that facts were not being told. I am saying this because when that committee was waiting for hon. Kabakumba, she did not appear for the first time because she had written to the chairman of that committee, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, but that while they were waiting for her, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was informed of facts that had prevented hon. Kabakumba to appear before that committee. I am saying this is true because on 25 February, hon. Kabakumba wrote a letter that I am going to read to you. The letter, which originated from the Office of the Minister of Information and National Guidance, and dated 25 February 2010 reads: 

“To Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, Parliament of Uganda. 

RE: Issuing and service of summons: Refer to Rules of Procedure. 

I acknowledge receipt of your summons dated 22 February 2010. I do appreciate your powers of summoning witnesses in respect of executing your functions as a committee. However, I honestly believe that the issues for which I am being invited to appear before the committee are not the ones envisaged by Rule 181. Rule 181(d)1 states that, ‘In exercise of its functions, a committee shall have powers of the High Court for enforcing the attendance of the witnesses and examining them on Oath, affirmation or otherwise.’ The gist of the summons does not show that I am a witness in any audit query under investigation, but that the committee is allegedly aggrieved by newspaper reports attributed to me. I believe issues that do not clearly fall within your committee functions envisaged under Rule 148(2) - in this democracy we cannot be seen to be promoting judges in their own cause, which is against the cardinal principles in the rule of law. You cannot be seen to be a complainant, prosecutor and a judge at the same time. In normal circumstances, you ought to disqualify yourself for conflict of interest. Otherwise, natural justice will judge you harshly. 

Signed Princess Kabakumba Matsiko Labwoni, 
MP and Minister of Information

c.c. Rt Hon. Speaker, 
Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker, 
Rt hon. Prime Minister, and 
The Government Chief Whip.”

This is the first communication I have ever received in respect to this matter. But I am told that on Monday while the committee was holding its proceedings, the chairman had this letter, but from what I gather from the media, the committee was never informed of the reaction from hon. Kabakumba. What they only said was that the Speaker must have told some of our Members - the Observer said that I had copied the letter to some of the Members and not the chairman of the committee. How could I copy a letter that had been copied to me when it had been addressed to the chairman himself? 

Anyway, the point is that the function of the Public Accounts Committee is to deal with the Auditor-General’s reports; not otherwise. The Public Accounts Committee, for instance, cannot order the Accounting Officer of Parliament or any other ministry to tell them what he did with the money this week. That is not possible because it has to wait for the Auditor-General to do his work. Also the witnesses that go to the Public Accounts Committee are usually in respect of audit queries; not otherwise. But what must have happened was that hon. Kabakumba is alleged to have defamed the committee by calling it – as I understand – ‘a torture chamber’. I do not know whether this is true or not. 

Anyway, if hon. Kabakumba said so or defamed the committee, the right procedure is found in Rule 77, in that the aggrieved party should have come to the Speaker or the House and made a complaint to that effect. 

It would have been on the basis of that that the Speaker would refer the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to investigate. It is not the very committee defamed to carry out the investigations. I think this should put the matter to rest. Rule 77 reads: “Defamatory statements to be investigated by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Whenever, in the opinion of the Speaker…” If the committee is defamed, it reports to the House. The House will refer the matter to the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I appreciate the feelings. I also understand how, as the Speaker of this House, you must be feeling over the matter, particularly when being alluded to in the press. However, I would like to point out that the matter that arose in PAC was premature at that stage and we could not think of referring it to the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee. 

I am saying this because at that stage, we only wanted to know the veracity of that statement to establish whether indeed she had said so or not.  This was important because sometimes one can be – and on most occasions – quoted out of context. So, the preliminary question was: Did she say so or not? It would be after that, that we look at the necessary procedures to be taken.

But having said that, Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, the key term in the rules is the word “investigate.” If you have concluded that it was a defamatory statement, then what will the committee investigate?

MR SSEKIKUBO: The crux of the matter - and why I am rising, Mr Speaker, is that I have cross-checked with the Deputy Director, Clerks, who is a senior officer of Parliament, together with his secretary, Dinah who normally receives correspondences – the only information that is available is a letter that shows hon. Kabakumba received the summons, copies of which were filed as returns.

Mr Speaker, sometimes it is difficult –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the relevant document is the letter I have read to you. This letter was not addressed to Clerk or any other person, but to Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. So, the clerk could not file this letter because it had been addressed to the chairperson himself. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, but hon. Nandala is the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and I think it was addressed to him in that capacity. There is no record whatsoever - and sometimes that game is played where one shows –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Procedure, Mr Speaker. The Hon. Ssekikubo is a Member of the Public Accounts Committee. I have seen him in meetings of that committee many times. I think opportunity to speak on the matter should be given to non-Members of that committee rather than the people who are involved.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, are you a member of that committee?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Speaker; I was co-opted on that committee. And so I am in the know that we never – the chairman is not here and I think I am entitled to say that we never received that communication as a committee. Someone can rightly indicate that he has such a letter addressed to you, but may be withheld or retained at some stage. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the letter is here; it was addressed to hon. Nandala-Mafabi and just copied to me. In any case, the author is here. Maybe let me give it to the Leader of the Opposition to read it out to you to confirm it was addressed to hon. Nandala. Isn’t that the case?

3.31
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF Information and National Guidance (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to say it is true this letter is addressed to Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It was received on 1 March 2010. It is copied to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Ssekikubo, when you say you never received it, I do not understand that because this is the receiving stamp for the office where a copy was delivered. We could not stamp it for hon. Nandala; we do not know whether he has a stamp or not. The stamp here is for the Office of the Speaker showing when it was received. Clear?

MR SSEKIKUBO: But Mr Speaker, the point I was labouring to make was that yes, it was duly received, but as PAC, we never received that letter. There is no record to that effect; letters are not just dumped.

THE SPEAKER: In any case, what I am saying – because the newspaper said I should have copied the letter – I only received a copy of a letter addressed to hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

3.33
MR JOHN LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with your first comment on late starting of the sitting yesterday and today. Yesterday, the House started sitting at about 3.30 p.m. because Cabinet was meeting. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you not making any comment on this?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am coming to that one but I want to comment on both.

Today we started at 3.15 p.m. I would like to suggest that in future, maybe the rest of us could be informed that the House will start late because something is taking place. Because to keep us in suspense, we loiter in the lobby, go back to our offices, we come back, this is not interesting. I think we should be informed. The time should be set and whether people are not here, the House should start at that time. 

The second point; to me, this matter could have been solved administratively. I think we allowed the matter to go out of hand. I believe if your office had called the chairman of the committee and the minister and the three of you shared this, I think the matter would have been solved amicably and ended there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, I think you missed one point. There is no communication of whatever nature to me about this matter other than what I have been reading in the papers. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I sympathise with your position, Mr Speaker, but as the chief administrator, if you read in the press that your children are fighting in the press, definitely you should take interest and find out what is happening -(Laughter)- and call them to sort out the matter. 

Unfortunately, one of the parties is not in the House now. The other one has just entered the House and it seems we are –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, what I can say is that if hon. Kabakumba made a defamatory statement, the complaint should have been directed to me. And according to the rules, this matter would go to the rules committee. It is, therefore, a waste of time for the committee to continue dealing with this matter. Period. 

3.36
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I appreciate that there was certainly a mishap in the way the matter was handled. I also recognise that all the parliamentary committees conduct their business for and on behalf of Parliament. For that matter, if any single committee has a challenge and is defamed in any way, it is not only the committee that is defamed, but the entire institution of Parliament. 


Under the circumstances, I would like to propose that we now forward this matter formally on the floor, through you, for further investigation by the rules committee so that the rules committee makes an independent investigation and reports to the House appropriately. That is how I propose and I beg to move at this time that –

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the Public Accounts Committee?

MR EPETAIT: I am not a member of the Public Accounts Committee. I am a Member of Parliament and all committees do business on behalf of Parliament. I, therefore, beg to move that the alleged defamation be forwarded to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges of Parliament for further management. 

3.38 
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I support the motion that the matter be referred to the rules and disciplinary committee where I was. I think it would help because some of us were now planning to censure hon. Kabakumba Masiko. (Laughter) So, now that the issue is going to the appropriate committee, we shall lay down our guns and wait for the verdict of that committee. I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Rules is directed to investigate this matter and report according to the rules. (Applause)

(Mr Wamanga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. “Mugole”, you want to talk now? You could wait at an appropriate time. I will give you opportunity to make your maiden speech.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 102/1/08

3.39
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): “Would the minister explain to the House the practical strategies that Government has put in place to reduce maternal mortality to attain the MDG No.5 by the year 2015?”

3.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health is within the precincts of Parliament, but as we all know, we have an emergency in Bududa and quite a good number of ministers are on call. I suspect he could be attending to one of the urgent calls from the area, which has been hit by disaster. Otherwise, he should have been around.

THE SPEAKER: Since it was on the Order Paper, although we normally answer questions on Thursday, let him answer on Tuesday. Alert him to come and answer the question on Tuesday. 

MR MIGEREKO: I will communicate accordingly. The offer by hon. Beatrice Anywar could be taken on, but you have already given a directive. So, we shall comply with your directive. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabwegyere, I remember you should have said something about Bududa. 
   
3.41
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I promised to give this House a comprehensive picture of the whole country regarding the impact of El-Nino as soon as I could. I had hoped that by today I would have had the full picture, but the deployment of personnel in my office in Bududa and Butaleja has not enabled me to keep in touch with other districts. For example, I have some preliminary information that there is a problem in Kabale. I have been trying to get information from other parts where the likelihood of landslides is expected. 

So, I plead with the House that I give this report by Wednesday next week. (Interjections) Tuesday is a possibility but since Monday is a public holiday, I may not have access to information for me to be ready on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you remember we had a debate on a statement which was given by the minister on the Bududa tragedy, but we did not complete debating that statement because we had been promised a comprehensive statement the following day. Therefore, we never concluded our debate on this tragedy. It is a serious tragedy as you have gathered from the papers, and I know that a number of proposals are being thought about by Members. 

This is what we shall do, since the Minister says Wednesday, on Wednesday we shall resume debate on the Bududa matter. Time will be given to you, maybe an hour or two to conclude and make proposals as to how to handle this matter. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. I am seeking further clarification, as the minister prepares to give us a comprehensive report on the tragedy that happened in Bududa. 

Today, as I bought the newspaper, I saw a photo of the President and he was in full combat attire holding a gun while trying to lay a wreath. Mr Speaker, one of the colleagues I was with was wondering whether the gun was going to be used to shoot down the problem. 

But that said, what I am seeking clarification on is that in the newspapers today, as the minister prepares to respond and as we see that our response is somehow being delayed, I am wondering what he has to say with the statement of the President as quoted in today’s newspapers. He is quoted to have said that the people of Bududa are now our martyrs and they would serve as a lesson to all other Ugandans who disturb nature. This statement is very strong and as I said much earlier, I have relatives and friends in Mbale and they had to ring me. We want to have this clarified; whether the President was quoted out of context or what we read in the papers was what the President said. I want to say that the impact of the President’s statement is closely pegged to the decision of rescue and response to the problems of the people of Bududa in as far as they are concerned. 

We would want this to be made clear; whether the President was quoted out of context or he meant what he said that they are serving as martyrs; as a lesson to those who disturb nature. I want this to be clarified for the sake of the people of Bududa and those Ugandans elsewhere who are awaiting a similar fate. We are waiting for that clarification and it should come out clearly. Otherwise, the implication of it is that the President, literally, is not feeling the pain or that this is serving as a lesson. That was not the time for the President to have said that. (Interjections) And I need that to be clarified, Mr Speaker.

3.47
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion under rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure.

Rule 46(k): “Any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency”, therefore, I beg for your indulgence to allow me move this motion without notice. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, hon. Ekanya was trying to move a motion, which required your guidance and before you could give your guidance, he was moving in such a manner that suggested you clearly needed to give the guidance. So, I seek your guidance on the matter.

THE SPEAKER: I think in fairness, hon. Ekanya, after we adjourn, you come to me and we discuss what you want to raise so that we address the matter fairly.
 

MS RWAKIMARI: Mr Speaker, now that the honourable Minister of Health is around, is it not in order for him to answer the oral question?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have already said that the minister will answer this question on Tuesday, although normally oral questions are answered on Thursday. The answer will be given on Tuesday.

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL

MOTION SEEKING FOR LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL TO WIT: THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

3.50
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking for leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to Wit: The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, under rule 43, 105 and 106 of our rules. 

“WHEREAS clause 2(i) of the national objectives and directive principles of state policy, which is enshrined in the Constitution, provides that the State shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance;

AND WHEREAS article 1(iv) of the Constitution stipulates that, “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda;

NOTING THAT the aforesaid key principles of democratic governance have not been fully realised in all previous general elections inter alia on account of deficiencies, or loopholes in the existing legal framework;

NOTING FURTHER THAT the Supreme Court and other Courts of Judicature have repeatedly pronounced themselves on such inadequacies in the existing laws and recommended necessary amendments; 

AND CONCERNED THAT we are left with very little time to make preparations for the forthcoming 2011 general elections;

NOW, THEREFORE, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve that leave is granted to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, ‘The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act of 2010’”. 

I beg to move.

It is further prayed that Parliament doth cause the said bill to be published in preparation for the first reading. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The only problem is that you should have attached the proposed Bill so that people when giving you - okay, the motion is seconded.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my colleague, the shadow Attorney-General, and luckily enough, when I and my colleagues in the Ministry of Justice and affiliated institutions appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the bills that were presented by Government on electoral reforms, hon. Lukwago was in the committee. 

The committee itself urged and encouraged him that the idea of having Private Members’ Bills on subjects on which Government had already proposed Bills would be irregular. Irregular in the sense that the normal practice and convention of this House is that when a Bill amending an Act of Parliament has been read for the first reading and referred to an appropriate committee, any one interested in moving an amendment, be a member of the committee or not, would be free to do so. 

In fact as far as members of the committee are concerned, they are even freer than others in the sense that they are allowed to make minority reports and come with them on the Floor of the House. This is a very peculiar situation which could not have been anticipated when we were making our Rules of Procedure, but I was looking at a rule that could actually offer some guidance.

Rule 67, the problem of anticipation. You look at paragraph four of that rule, “No member may refer in a debate to any matter, which is in a committee report until such a report has been tabled in the House”. This is anticipation of what is likely to be in the report. How would he know that what is actually coming on the Floor of the House is not going to be covered in that report? 

In paragraph 3, in determining whether a discussion is out of order on the ground of anticipation, the Speaker shall have regard to the probability of the subject matter in anticipation being brought before the House within a reasonable time. 

As I speak - good enough the chairperson of the committee is in the House - they are in the final stages. Actually they are in a retreat working on the report. I understand the retreat has ended. Why then do we have to be engaged in this kind of irregularity in the way we handle our matters? I beg clarification and guidance from you, Mr Speaker. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity you have given me to give information on this very important matter. It is good the Attorney-General has admitted that there is no express rule in our Rules of Procedure that bars any of us from bringing a Private Members’ Bill in a situation where there is a Government Bill. There is no express rule. 

The anticipation the Attorney-General is talking about is extremely speculative. Why? Because there is no indication whatsoever that in my presentation mention is going to be made in regard to any matter, which is in the report of the committee because that is what rule 61, clause 4, talks about. It says, “No Member may refer, in a debate, to any matter in a committee report until such a report has been tabled in the House.” 

I can guarantee to the Attorney-General that in my presentation, I will not make any mention of the committee report, if at all it exists. But you have clearly stated that there is no report as of now, that the committee is still piecing together information received in the retreat. Therefore, the Attorney-General is moving under a rule, which is not applicable here, and these are very serious matters concerning amendments. 

I beg that the House listens to the presentation we are going to make and the views that are going to be raised. I think the objection the Attorney-General is raising can be couched in such a way that he is opposing the motion but not as a preliminary objection to the presentation. Those could be his reasons for opposing the motion but not a preliminary objection to the presentation. I thank you.

4.00
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must say that I am utterly shocked by my colleague and friend, hon. Lukwago, in the way in which he has come up to seek leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill. We have been with hon. Lukwago for the last three days in a retreat considering the electoral Bills and the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill is one of them. Some of the matters he is talking about like the court rulings, we have considered them. 

Hon. Lukwago has religiously attended the meetings and contributed to the report that is forthcoming, and as a Member of Parliament and a member of the Democratic Party, he has had an opportunity to give his input. It is true that we have been in a retreat for three days, and hon. Lukwago knows that today morning, we were discussing the finer details of our report. 

As a committee, we realise the importance and urgency of having these Bills here, because all the stakeholders are waiting for these Bills. I do not know in what spirit my colleague is bringing this amendment because he had the opportunity and even still has an opportunity. If he does not agree with the contents of the report, he still has an opportunity to write a minority report which can be tabled before this House and debated. So, I suppose this is being insensitive to the expectations of our –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Member, for yielding the Floor. Mr Speaker, my colleague knows that when we were looking at those Bills that he is talking about, there were people who were invited to give their submissions. The Private Member’s Bill I am seeking to present is not my personal property. It is a product of the work of so many people, particularly the IPC. 

And you are aware that when the Inter-Party Cooperation was invited, they put it to you in writing - I have a copy of the letter here - they pieced together the Bills and copies of the Bills were even given to the Speaker. There was even a function which was organised here in the parliamentary gardens and the Speaker attended and he got a copy; and you are aware that they clearly stated that those Bills are not incorporated in the current Bills that were tabled by the Attorney-General. 

Therefore, to say that it is Lukwago who is seeking to bring a Private Member’s Bill, I think is to miss the point because these are not my personal Bills. They are Bills which were pieced together by various stakeholders. That is the information that I wanted to give you. 

THE SPEAKER: Any Member is free to come and apply for leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill that he wishes to bring. That is a fact and hon. Lukwago or any other person is free to do so. 

But I think what we have to take into account, especially since these Bills are intended to help run the next election smoothly, is that we have similar Bills which have been tendered by Government and actually, I had encouraged anybody who wanted to improve on the Bill that had been tabled by Government to do so, and it would have been the right of anybody to do so. 

I told the chairperson of the committee that he should allow people to bring amendments they wish, even if it is necessary to amend the memorandum because it is expanding what has been stated. 

I don’t know whether this was done or not, but I don’t see any problem granting him leave. But what I can tell you, hon. Members, is the time factor because Parliament will be sitting for this session within this month and next month, and then Parliament will be prorogued for the new session, which will start in June. 

I don’t know if you have considered the time to be taken to gazette the Bill and you will bring it here for the first reading; and it will have to be sent to the committee and I do not know how long it will take in the committee. Maybe by the time they finish with it, Parliament will have even prorogued and that is my problem. 

So, without prejudice to your Bill being granted leave, I advise that you submit these amendments which you want, if they are not in the proposed Bill, to the committee. If the committee refuses to adopt your amendments, we have rules here in that you are free to bring the amendments to the House. 

If the committee refuses my amendment, I am free to come here and say, “I went to the committee, proposed this amendment and they rejected it. I am now putting it to the entire House for consideration.” This may be faster for you to achieve what you want rather than this separate Bill which will take time and then as you see, members are agitated, they are not here; they are in their constituencies and I have a problem. But I am not prejudicing your motion. We can grant you leave, but I am just advising you that we may be caught up by time. 

4.07
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Personally I would submit that we have had precedents where Private Members’ Bills have been taken over by the Executive in good faith, and in the unlikely event that the wise counsel you have given does not auger well with the mover of the motion, two scenarios may happen: One, the Bill may be taken over by Government. I have seen Bills being taken over. Two, they may deny you the Certificate of Financial Implications besides all other remedies. 

So, the point that hon. Lukwago is trying to prove is of time. The amendments he is bringing are substantial and can be accommodated at any stage but the problem is with the time that the committee is taking because we are not very comfortable with passing a law one week to the next elections. We need to know the rules; we need to know the size of the goal posts and we need to know that the posts will not be shifted. 

What I would really appeal to my colleague, through you, Mr Speaker, is that the committee should be given a timeframe in which they can expeditiously handle any Bill that will regulate both presidential and parliamentary elections so that we can dispose of it as this House. I think that is the main mischief. Hon. Erias Lukwago is trying to doubt the speed at which the committee is doing its work. 

THE SPEAKER: And again what I forgot, hon. Lukwago, is that in the list that I saw, you also want a constitutional amendment. I think that is justified because among the Bills which Government submitted, there was no one for a constitutional amendment. Maybe you should have started with that one so that you process it, but you are free to proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion. The justification for this motion –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Let him justify his motion.

MR LUKWAGO: The justification for this motion is that, one, we need to strengthen the functioning of multi-party democracy in this country and we have to realign the legal framework regarding electoral process in this country -(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: I am sorry for coming up once again. What hon. Lukwago is bringing up now has already been brought by the IPC in their proposals today. They brought them today morning and we have them. We agreed to consider them on Tuesday as a committee. Is it really correct that Parliament should again go through the same process when we already have the same proposals that he is going to table here?

THE SPEAKER: What I can suggest, hon. Lukwago, is that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs gives some two days to hon. Lukwago to present his proposed amendments on the Bill, which is before you so that you consider them. 

MR LUKWAGO: I have been really hesitant to talk about what is going on in the committee fully aware of our Rules of Procedure. If push comes to shove, I will tell you how I am being oppressed in the committee and the chairman knows it. Even today the chairman will tell you what transpired in the retreat.

THE SPEAKER: The problem is, even if leave is given to you and you present the Bill for the first reading, that Bill will be committed to the same committee.

MR LUKWAGO: The justification I was making for this motion is that we urgently need to bring the law into conformity with international standards; to bring the law into conformity with decisions of the courts which have pointed out areas that need thorough amendments, and those areas that are so central to the holding of a free and fair election in this country.

Unless we amend these laws, we cannot have free and fair elections going by the decisions of the Supreme Court come 2011. Unless we do that the Electoral Commission cannot live up to its mandate. 

I will show why, I have here the principals which were enunciated by the heads of state and government in the 38th ordinary session of the African Union (AU) which was then OAU on 8th July 2002. These are principals which were laid down by that organisation which convened in Durban. The AU in laying down these principals considered a number of international instruments and these instruments are so central in the holding of free and fair elections.

The AU considered the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which was adopted in 1948 as well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which was adopted in December 1966. The African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights adopted in Nairobi in June 1981 which recognised the right of every citizen to participate freely in Government and in the democratisation process of his country.

They also considered the African Charter for popular participation in development which was adopted in Ethiopia in Addis Ababa in 1980. They considered the Cairo Agenda for Action adopted in Cairo in 1995, which stresses the imperative of ensuring good governance through popular participation based on the respect for human rights and the principals of a democratic exercise.

They also considered NEPAD, which was adopted by the Assembly in Zambia in July 2001 and other protocols, conventions, declarations and others. These are the principals. 

THE SPEAKER: You gave a copy of the intended Bill, what you need now is to allow you to present it.

MR LUKWAGO: I was justifying the motion so that I can convince Members to grant leave. We intend to bring clauses that will entrench multi-party democracy to ensure that there is participation by all stakeholders, particularly the political parties. We need to bring provisions that curtail the power of incumbency.

We need to entrench the principals of accountability in the management of ballot papers, management of election materials, and the role of parties in management of elections such as appointment of polling assistants. 

We also intend to bring a law that puts a ceiling on the funds that are being used by presidential candidates; we need to come up with that regulation.

We want to bring a provision in the law to the effect that parties or candidates that are guilty of grave malpractices and bribery should be banned from participating in subsequent electoral processes for a period of ten years.

We also intend to make provisions for a secure environment for all candidates and their agents and campaigners. We want to bring laws to prohibit the participation of the military in electoral processes, the provisions that will guarantee security of all the participating candidates and their agents.

I invite Members, in the interest of peace and tranquillity in this country to grant us leave to bring up this Bill. You know for sure, Uganda has had a turbulent history, it is characterised by turmoil, upheavals, guerrilla wars, and they are all related to rigging of elections and manipulation of electoral processes. So if we are to stabilise this country, we need to come up with laws that will guarantee free and fair elections so that everybody is satisfied with the outcome of any given electoral process, and that is the only way we can guarantee peace and tranquillity in this country. 

4.20
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I stand to support the motion. It is very paramount that we as the current Members of Parliament see beyond the challenge that we have today and think about the future of our children and the legacy that we want to leave behind. I want to call upon the honourable members -

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to assume that he is one of those whose name appears on the motion paper as seconder, and yet some of the members whose names appear were here and have absented themselves. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is making his contribution to the motion as a member.

MR EKANYA: I wish to call upon my colleagues, today we are Members of Parliament, and we swore to defend, protect the constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I wish to remind you that this Bill intends to operationalise the gaps in the current electoral laws that derive their mandate from the Constitution of Uganda. 

Free and fair elections are fundamental not only for us the Ugandans but even for the international community - our neighbours who invest in this country. 

Our Rules of Procedure give opportunity to Members of Parliament to move Private Member’s Bills. It is paramount that we grant leave so that tomorrow when you have hon. Kabakumba Masiko, for example, seeking to move a Private Member’s Bill on the rights of her people, she will be supported because we shall have set a precedent. 

It is fundamental that we do not deny and ignore the right that we ourselves provided for in the rules. The rules also gives opportunity that when a Member seeks to move a Private Members Bill, Government should do all that it takes to support him, and therefore we should not seem to pre-empt the goodwill of Government that is committed to supporting the private Members. 

Hon. Members, if there is violence in this country, all of us can be victims. Let me remind you about the September riots – they did not spare anybody regardless of who you were. Anybody who was driving a Government car, whether you were the chairperson of a committee, in the Opposition – but anybody driving a Government car was a target. It was not only for Cabinet ministers but even Members of the Opposition who were driving Government cars because they head committees were a target. Everybody decided to park Government cars and use private vehicles. 

The purpose of this Bill is to ensure that the coming elections will be free and fair. We should do our best such that we leave a legacy - this is our moment, colleagues, to rise up and to do what is right for this country. You are chosen among thousands to be in this Parliament. Many people desire to be MPs and therefore it is paramount that you do not betray those who are in the streets; those who yearn for democracy, peace and tranquillity. This Parliament has a mandate to make laws for order, good governance and peace.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for exercising and granting opportunity. I know you have been under extreme pressure, both locally and internationally, from those who are against this Bill and for those who support this Bill. However, you have exercised a level of independence that is required of a Commonwealth Speaker and may God bless you. 

I want to call upon the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business – when we were amending the Constitution, we realised that the Office of the Prime Minster is fundamental in the government of the day. I want to beseech you to call upon the MPs on the Government side to support this Bill because the Leader of Government Business is a professor who is admired locally and internationally and therefore today is a testing time for you, Mr Speaker.

MS KABAKUMBA: I was really reluctant to rise up on this point of order. Is it in order for hon. Ekanya to intimidate -(Interjections)- the Prime Minister? To attack the character of the Prime Minister-(Interjections)- to make the issue personal as if when we make a decision, it will be held against the reputation of the Prime Minister? Is he in order? (Laughter)      

THE SPEAKER: What is happening is that he has devised a strategy of persuading the – yes, by talking personal matters so that he can persuade him to support - I mean this is what he is doing –(Applause and Laughter) 

MR EKANYA: I thank you. Hon. Kabakumba does not know how deeply I respect the Prime Minister. He is associated to the family where I marry my beautiful wife –(Laughter)- so hon. Kabakumba may not know all these details -(Laughter)- and therefore when I call upon him, I call upon him as a father and a senior person whom we admire. 

Back to the motion – this motion is very necessary that it has come at a time when our rating – when the Congress of the United States of America that supports Uganda very seriously in Somalia in terms of fighting Al Qaeda and terrorism is watching our trend as regards our actions towards ensuring that there is free and fair democracy. 

We need to remind ourselves that the world has become so small that the action we shall today take here will immediately be known, not only here, but also by all our friends, local and international. 

I, therefore, would like to call upon you to know that today you are on the Government side but this Bill is intended to strengthen what Government is doing; to ensure that in case any person loses an election, he or she cannot claim foul play; that Government did not provide a free, fair and smooth ground.

I want to conclude my statement as a seconder of this motion by appealing to my colleagues that the worst crime any human being should commit while still living is to know the right thing to do but refuse to do it. The world is watching us, we know what is right, and I call upon you to support and grant leave. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t we – yes?

4.32
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof.  Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Ekanya for those kind words.  

I oppose the motion primarily because it is going to delay the process of making the laws; yet the Electoral Commission should have these laws in time.

I suggest that hon. Lukwago makes the amendments on the Floor of Parliament. This is going to ensure that we expedite the process of amending the electoral laws. So, I oppose the motion.

4.33
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, we have heard what hon. Lukwago has put forward; seconded by hon. Ekanya and responded to by the government. We feel this motion has reached a stage where the question should be put. I, therefore, propose that the question should be put. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Let us hear this side. What harm does it cause to give him leave? Let us hear this side.

I put the question on the motion to grant leave to Hon. Erias Lukwago, the shadow attorney-general, to table a Private Member’s Bill in respect to the presidential elections.

(Question put and negatived.)

(Motion rejected.)
I suggest that we consider the proposal by hon. Lukwago and appeal to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to study it. We either accept them or not; then we shall know what to do. I give you two days; we are asking the committee to give hon. Lukwago two days – 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, I want to assure this House that we, as a committee, are very anxious to get this report out of the committee as soon as possible. Hon. Lukwago can come to the committee on Tuesday –

THE SPEAKER: Inspite of the decision we made, the committee will give hon. Lukwago and interested Members two days to present these amendments contained in the proposed Presidential Elections Bill. Should they refuse them, you will be free to come back to the House. Okay? Please, liaise with hon. Tashobya at the appropriate time. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, since Monday, I have been looking for the committee to present some critical issues. I went to the committee room, which has been designated by Parliament to make a presentation; but I have failed to find the committee. I hear the committee is meeting in a certain hotel – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, to avoid doubt, let the committee’s chairperson tell us the room where he will meet –(Applause)- honourable -

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee room is Room 139.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, when should they come? Tuesday? Yes Tuesday because Monday is a public holiday. Tuesday and Wednesday are assigned to you to go and present your case.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to go on record that I oblige and undertake to appear before the committee on Tuesday and Wednesday. My humble request is that there are several people who have contributed to this Bill and I request members of IPC to also be given an opportunity on that day because they have not  - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, very good. Alert them. If they are to come and talk about the amendment, they will be accorded time. The reason we have committee proceedings on Bills is to facilitate outsiders who cannot come here to go and provide their input.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, I first of all, thank you for your kind ruling.

We still have four more Bills to pass through this House. The clarification I am seeking is, does this ruling also refer to the four other Bills which are remaining, of which you have the motions in your Office? 

THE SPEAKER: I will be speculating because I do not know whether there is an intention to apply for leave. What is applicable to this one is – because what we want is amendments so that we do not waste time and people are given an opportunity to present their amendments. I will talk to the chairman to ensure that if you have any other you want to present, you should copy it to me requesting for time to meet the committee. I will work on that so that you present it.

4.40
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful to honourable members who have made their contributions on this matter. 

During the bitter military struggle of Northern Ireland, one commentator said, “The problem of Northern Ireland is that there are too many Catholics and too many Protestants, but not enough Christians.” That is the problem afflicting Uganda. We have too many members of the Opposition and too many members of Government but not enough members of Uganda. (Interjections)

There is consensus in this country that we need electoral reforms. Government can never concede even a reasonable demand from the Opposition; the Opposition can also never be objective about a reasonable position in Government. This position undermines the maturity of politics in this country. I think we need to be more mature in this country and leave the politics of do or die; that one is for Opposition or for Government and must die for it; and in between, nobody is dying for Uganda. This is a big problem!

THE SPEAKER: That is patriotism. (Laughter) 

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, what has brought us to this stage has got a history. We are not here by accident; we have not moved this motion simply because we want to be cosmetic. One year ago, the Opposition submitted its electoral reforms to this Parliament and to whoever is a stakeholder in this country. While the Attorney-General was considering the Bills before the committee, these reforms were ignored. 

On 10th December, hon. Lukwago attempted to move a Bill. He was advised to split the Bill and not move it as an omnibus. The Attorney-General, who is on Government side, ignored these views. Is the honourable member on my side, whom I suspect to be the President of Uganda Federal Alliance, in order to insinuate that we are just moving these Bills to prove that we are on Opposition?

THE SPEAKER: I thought hon. Kamya’s submission was counselling all of us; she was counselling us to be nationalistic and patriotic. I think her intention was to instil this spirit of nationalism in all of us. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance and I am sorry that the honourable Leader of the Opposition is upset by anticipating wrongly what I was going to conclude with. But, Mr Speaker, you got me right; I am speaking from experience. In the Opposition, when you try to be objective, they say that you have been bought off. In the Government side, when you try to be objective, they want to discipline you and consider you a rebel. It is becoming a national crisis. Members of Parliament debate for the press and the public; people are trying to “steal” shows. This has undermined the quality of patriotism and the work we are trying to do.

To end my submission, I call upon my colleagues to be – (Interjection)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you are a senior Member of this Parliament. I did not want to bring hon. Beti to order, but I need to remind her, because in the Sixth Parliament up to the middle of the Seventh Parliament, we used not to have live broadcasts; and the Members of this august House used to debate very objectively with love for this country. Members did not stop debating because at that time, there was no live broadcast. 

Is hon. Beti Kamya, who is a new Member in the political history of this country, who came after there was live broadcast of the House, in order to say that Government and even the Opposition present issues for the purposes of media coverage? Is she saying that what she has said now will not be covered by the media?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether she decides on what is broadcast in the media. But I appeal to you, honourable members - I recently attended a function where I signed a memorandum; it was in Imperial Royal. I think you can utilise that new forum to discuss such issues instead of suspecting each other and thinking that someone is plotting against me. I think, if we use that one, we shall have harmony. 

As I told you, you are the pioneers after 20 years, of a multiparty system of Parliament in Uganda. So, I appeal to you to sustain it so that we pass it over to the Ninth Parliament; forget about the past practices of 20 or 25 years ago. Work together; where you can agree, agree; and where you disagree, point out the cause of the disagreement. Become mature; that is how we are going to sustain the multiparty system. 

I am happy we are moving towards that direction. Therefore, I do not want you to quarrel over this and the other; and, therefore, let us rest the subject. He has said what he wanted to say; you can sleep over it and see if it makes sense or not. 

4.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been trying to stand up to give my views, but my humility has become my disability. But I am grateful that this time, I have caught your eye. 

The point I want to make is that on electoral matters like this, there should not be a winner or loser. I would have wished that before a motion is put on the Floor, we should have had a tactful way of withdrawing this motion and charting a better way forward. When we have a good electoral law, it benefits all of us, and a bad law is bad for both sides of the House. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is my humble plea to Members of both sides of the House that we abide by the guidelines you gave, instead of continuing to debate on the matter, because it is stirring in us unnecessary emotions. By Tuesday or Wednesday, let the members of the IPC; or members of the Opposition; or members of any other committee, present their views to the committee. 

I also insist that the committee should come back to the House with a report within the next one week; and that should be our position. So that we now hold our fire until the committee comes to the House. When we see that the committee has not incorporated the views of the Opposition, then we can see how we can come out with a different position.

I am really saddened by the way people think that this motion is against the other side, and I want to share with you an experience which you know. We used to have a very senior politician in this country; he was a member of the Democratic Party called Ojok Mulosi. Dr. Ojok Mulosi actually stood for Parliament in Kampala East at that time. He defeated hon. Aggrey Awori -(Interjections)- Yes, for those of you who want to review history. Actually, it is very recent history; I am surprised if you people do not know. (Laughter) 

When the RDCs were harassing me, Hon. Ben Wacha and Hon. Patrick Mwondha in Lira, including him and another member of the Democratic Party, Hon. Ojok Mulosi raised an issue which has remained a burden to me up to now. He said, “One thing we should learn is how to accommodate the views of the minority when you are in the majority. When you are in power, is when you should prepare how to be on the opposition because what is happening to us now is what UPC used to do to us”. I told hon. Mulosi that the UPC that treated him like that was not us. We were both being battered together. 

This is what I am trying to say; that if we have a good law, that good law will prepare the Government side, so that next time you are on this side, you will know how to be on this side and when we are on that side, we will know how to treat you when we are on that side. Thank you. (Applause)

4.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to the submission by hon. Lukwago, hon. Betty Kamya and my senior sister, hon. Ogwal. The fears that are emanating here, in my view, are being dealt with. You have informed the House that you attended the signing ceremony of a memorandum of understanding involving opposition parties and the NRM under the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue.

I would like to report that ever since the signing, opposition parties and the NRM have been meeting on a very regular basis. Secretary Generals and their delegated members have been meeting. As a matter of fact, in the last one and a half weeks, we have been looking at these Bills tabled by Government on electoral reforms and the proposals by the Opposition on electoral reforms. Last night, we met up to past midnight and we were coming up with proposals that try to harmonise the views of the Opposition and those of Government so that at the end of the day, we can have a comprehensive law that takes into account the interests of every Ugandan.

THE SPEAKER: I think this subject should be closed so that we proceed. It was a question of understanding.

MR KIBANZANGA: I thank my brother for having given me the opportunity to give this information. We would not have come to this level if it was not for the betrayal of the National Resistance Movement, especially the Secretary General. The Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue sat; you burnt candles; you sat throughout the night and you agreed to submit your views to hon. Tashobya’s committee. When they were moving to submit, the Secretary General of National Resistance Movement disagreed and the IPOD is guided by consensus. The moment one party disagrees with the other, you stifle the process and it is because of stifling the process that we have come to this. 

We are all interested in a clean democratisation process for our country. My prayer is that let us be guided, in these groupings of ours which are outside Parliament, by the principle of honesty. Let us show the country leadership; it is the only way we are going to get out of this quagmire. I thank you for having allowed me to inform my friend.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES ON SELECTED ASSURANCES

THE SPEAKER: No, we considered that yesterday. Maybe there is another one which we shall consider next week. Let us go to another item.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Works requested that he be allowed to comment so that the report is adopted.

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS & TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, as I promised, last night we looked at the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and we found that actually most of the issues which were raised in that report were already fulfilled and a few which were remaining - actually, I made a matrix which is here; I can circulate it. They may not be enough - and the few are, for instance, Nchera Bridge; by the time they were there, we had paid UShs 200 million and actually that is the certificate they had presented. There is no way Ministry of Works would have paid for a certificate which was not presented. 

As we talk today, they presented more certificates and the ministry paid UShs 620 million for the works done and approved for substantial completion. Substantial completion does not necessarily mean all the works are done. We are remaining with gabion protection works on higher embankment and these will be completed by May. The reason why there was a delay, Mr Speaker, was that at one time there were torrential rains which washed away the work that had been done; but thank God there were no variations and the bridge will be open for the usual traffic by May.

Let us now go to Aswa Bridge. I agree with the committee that there were some delays on this one. These were more on the side of procurement because we are using two systems of procurement; that is, the European Union system and our system, and the stages are so many. But I want to inform the House that finally the works have been contracted out and we expect to commence by 1 April 2010. Actually, the contracts documents are with the Solicitor-General.

Selected ferries

The committee commented on Kiyindi Ferry Services and we agreed with the committee that the offices and the quarters were not there by that time, but fortunately we had budgeted for them this financial year, and they will be in place by June 2010.

Concerning the stores, we store equipment on the ferry itself and sometimes on landings, if it is heavy. But we usually store it on the ferry itself. 

Communication systems

It is true they were not there by that time, but I promise that we shall procure communication equipment, especially radios, because this is a short distance and we can use radios across. 

Waiting rooms

I agree they were promised, but they are also within the budget of UNRA. UNRA has bought a lot of pick-ups. It is true by that time we were using motorcycles. We were improvising because the means of transport were not enough; but as I talk, they have bought pick-ups and now fuel is being delivered on pick-ups. 

You commented on Masindi Port and Kungo Ferry Landing Sites. 

I agree with the committee that this ferry is really old - 15 years, and landing sites are temporary and they required about UShs 2 billion to be put in place. But since UNRA took over from Ministry of Works, these landing sites have undergone repairs and plans are underway to replace the old ferry. The good thing is that our national roads leading to the sites have been maintained. 

Wanseko Ferry

Yeah! It is true the residents asked for the ferry to alternate and spend nights at Wansenko and Panyimur in order to benefit the two districts. We had not yet considered this, but we can consider it in the next financial year, by adding extra funds and resources. Actually, we were considering having a second ferry and developing another landing site at Nganda and Karoro in the medium term. You know we have Lwampanga Ferry Landing Site in Nakasongola District and the committee was proposing to drop the assurance because Lwampanga Site is not suitable. We appeal to Parliament that we should not drop the assurance since the procurement for the ferry to serve this area is on course. The landings can be relocated at other suitable points but we appeal that we provide the ferry for Lwampanga to Namasele on the other side.

Then Zengedde Ferry Landing Site in Nakasongola District

The committee was informed that Zengedde is being considered for the alternative ferry landing for Lwampanga. However, they noted that construction of landings had not started and recommended that this should start. We are going to commence in-house design and the award thereafter will be made on this landing.

Then they talked about Umi-Laropi Ferry Landing Site. The sites have two ferries that are operational with a full-time backhoe station at the landing site. That place silts a lot and we found it necessary to have a backhoe to de-silt the landing sites now and then.

Let me go to road works; Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima Road up to Hoima - it was not up to Kiboga. This one was completed. 

Kampala Northern By-Pass was opened on 1 October 2009. In other words, it was substantially completed and when I say substantially, I do not mean all works are complete. What is remaining is the street lighting on roundabouts and we are waiting for Umeme to give us metres and we connect them. Otherwise, the construction is done and the lights and bulbs are there. It is only permission from Umeme that we are waiting for. 

Recommendations

Improving landing sites

Yes, we are now improving them and I would even invite the committee, if possible, to do another round to verify what I have included in this matrix. 

Supervision work should be enhanced by the ministry and UNRA in order to complete implementation of Government assurances in time. 

Apart from what is stated in here - because we have contract managers - we get monthly reports on these contracts. We do reviews and timely responses, and now that UNRA has acquired vehicles, they will do more frequent visits and even the Ministry of Works is now carrying out more visits to these roads.   Mr Speaker, I beg to report those differences that I found.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. 

5.10
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the minister for the developments so far reported. 

I want to thank the Minister of Works because by the time the committee visited Kiyindi-Kilongo Ferry, the ferry was in a bad state, but as we talk, it has two engines. I, however, want to remind Government that the two engines are old; they just overhauled them and brought them back. So, they keep breaking down.

We sympathise with the engineer because the ferry keeps on breaking down; it must be repaired every morning. I advise the minister that it would be good – first and foremost, since we have a ferry, which is supposed to have four engines we would rather have two brand new engines on it so that it does not break down every day. 

The second issue on which the minister has not reported is the pier, on which the ferry cannot dock properly. We have been promised that these piers will be worked on, year in year out. I just urge the minister to work on the piers. Otherwise, I am taking his word that he is going to construct the shed and the toilet. I would also like to thank him for putting sheds on the ferry in January; you can now cross properly even if it is raining. 

With those few remarks, I would like to conclude by saying that even the road linking Kiyindi-Kilongo ferry to the main land, that is, Lugazi-Kiyindi road, is impassable when it rains and you cannot access Buvuma. So, it is important that this being a government road connecting two districts, Buikwe District and Buvuma District, it would be prudent that Government works on it. I thank you.

5.12
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and the minister for updating us to see to it that Government has fulfilled most of these. 

I, however, have a few comments. The one, which is on page 5, where he is not comfortable with outsourcing experts in those different fields of engineering. While I understand the desire of the committee to build capacity in the ministry, it is extremely difficult because there is a lot of specialisation in engineering. I cannot see the ministry employing a hydrologist, and then somebody in hydraulics, geo-textile and foundation engineering et cetera. We have to be flexible with outsourcing since it will continue.

Secondly, to put the record in good reporting, on page 6, the first paragraph of the report says, “In preparation of the variation report,” - these are variation orders not reports. And then in the second paragraph, “Certificate of Completion”   These are interim certificates; there is only one final certificate but the rest are interim certificates. So, if you could correct that one.

Lastly, I like the conclusion that the chairperson made on page 16: “The committee, therefore, recommends to Parliament that this assurance be closed.” This is on the Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima but in the text, they were just writing Busunju-Kiboga and left out everything between Kiboga and Hoima. I wish that is also taken on board so that the whole assurance is taken as one. I thank you. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on the way we are proceeding given the fact that the report of the committee was caught up by time and has substantially been altered by the facts presented by the minister. My worry is, what are we going to adopt? The committee report that has had substantial variations or we are going to have the minister and the committee harmonising the report and we adopt it? 

THE SPEAKER: It is subject to the various observations made and then we shall adopt the report. 

MR KYANJO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

5.16
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, the minister for his response and Government generally for the commitments it has undertaken and been able to implement. 

I would like also to make a correction as far as yesterday’s Hansard is concerned because there was an appreciation that the committee covered the entire nation. But I would like to submit that the landing sites in Masaka District were not part of the report. I should say that the report was not that inclusive as far as my landing sites are concerned. 

Secondly, I would like to note that the chairperson of the committee appreciated that some of the landing sites were being modernised and she referred to the absence of access roads as one of the major problems concerning those landing sites. But she left out what I think are major problems in Masaka District as far as my landing sites are concerned. 

I am, however, happy that the Minister of Water and Environment, hon. Namuyangu, is here and I think she will take note. I recently visited my landing sites, which I usually do anyway, and I found that the situation was pathetic. There is no general sanitation and the landing sites are ignored 100 percent. You don’t find a functional toilet there which is a basic need and you don’t find any drinking water. 

There was an attempt by the Ministry of Water and Environment to provide some boreholes but all of them are not working so you find that the lake is used as a toilet as well as a source of water for drinking! 

Therefore, I appeal to Government to stop ignoring people who are at the landing sites. As an emergency, I am inviting the Ministry of Water to go with me so that I show them these boreholes that are not working so that we can provide some drinking water to the people at the landing sites.

Another issue that I would like to talk about as far as the landing sites are concerned is that I am appealing to this Government, and I have done this several times, to give these people equal treatment like what is given to people at the national parks or those around the national parks where there is revenue sharing. People at the lakes are not given any consideration as far as what is coming out of the lake is concerned. I am calling for revenue sharing for them so that they too can benefit or enjoy the benefits of the lake. I thank you.

5.20
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, hon. Winnie Kiiza and hon. Odonga Otto have provided very good leadership to this committee for which they should be commended. It is now nearly four years down the road since this committee was established and this is the first report we are getting. We must thank them for doing a very good job and I encourage them to lead this committee so that we put Government on its toes to keep the promises that they give to the people.

The Whites say that good liars must have good memories. I don’t know whether Government keeps record of whatever they tell the people of Uganda. I want to start with Agwar Bridge in Lira. This bridge was bombed and it is the linkage of the Greater North road. When you pass from Aboke via Angai, Icheme to Bovi, it is a distance of only about 30 kilometres but it takes you two hours to pass through that road and yet this is the road that should carry the bulk of our business and the transport vehicles taking goods to Juba. 

Government has been promising all along and we passed money here to repair the bridges in Northern Uganda. I recall it was a lot of money. We would like the minister to make a comment on this. I wonder why this bridge is still made of timber when we passed money here over a year ago to repair these bridges.

The second comment I would like to make is about the Busunju-Hoima road. I want to thank Government for at last taking efforts to create a linkage between Bunyoro and the rest of the country. This is the only tarmac road that leads to the heart of Bunyoro but if we were to divide the road, you would find that only 12 miles of it is inside Bunyoro. If you computed all the mileage of tarmac roads in the Bunyoro region, you would find 12 kilometres on Hoima road and 22 kilometres on Kafu-Masindi road yet Bunyoro is a very productive area of our region.

I happen to travel from Kugumba via Masindi Bulima, Hoima, Kabwoya, Mabale, Kagadi, Muhoro to Kyenjojo. It is a distance of about 240 kilometres and that is what you would call the Greater Bunyoro road. For a long time, Government has been promising to tarmac this road. When I passed that road last week, you would wonder what is happening. I asked myself many questions. Do some people really care and tell Government about what obtains in this part of the country? 

I was even wondering what the response of Government would be if those people chose not to vote them into power because the road is terrible and Government has been promising and assuring the people of Bunyoro. My good friends, I would like to tell you that if you find a different voting pattern in that part of the country, that is one of the reasons. You should conclude this matter. So I would like to remind the minister to keep his promises. 

Finally, I want to emphasise the fact that we passed money here and you pleaded very much to repair the bridges. I have seen some pains on Komolo Bridge in Moroto road. This money should be utilised to improve the welfare of our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.25
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this very important report because as a Parliament, we are receiving a report from this committee for the first time. I am most concerned with what impact it is going to have on the assurances that we usually have from Government. I am certain that Government is not simply going to be making commitments just for the sake of it but it will make commitments knowing that there is a very serious committee in Parliament that will ensure that the commitments are actually fulfilled.

The committee in its report is actually interested in the extent of work done and the time taken to implement these works and the advocacy of work. But I have observed from the report that they went on to give recommendations. For instance, on the roads and bridges, they do cite the assurances that were made but in the recommendations, they say they want Government to put aside a budget. I thought they should have gone further because the actual costs of these roads are known, given that they should be putting it to government to commit a specific amount or a proposed amount or costs to ensure that –

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the committee should work out the exact figure other than making a general recommendation that we work out an appropriate budget?

MR EKEMU: I am not really saying that, Mr Speaker. In the committee’s report, they have already made a recommendation but in the same report, they have actually outlined what the costs of the different roads are. So, when they make a general recommendation of saying that this budget should be provided, I do not see why they do not cite the actual money that goes that is already mentioned in the report. That is how I see it. 

And then on page 8 of the report, there is a company that I want to call notorious called Omega Construction Company Limited, which I know has operated or operates in about 23 districts across the country and particularly on road works. Of these 23 districts where it has operated, there is almost no district that has not found problems with them and is raising complaints with them. We should get more concerned because the committee has properly cited here their poor performance or their shoddy work but all the same, they continue to be awarded contracts. What then is our policy towards such facts if we can now not suspect that probably there are godfathers behind such companies? 

I would like to cite a specific example of a contract that was awarded to this same company in Soroti to do a simple one-kilometre tarmac road. This company defied all the arrangements and went on to a labour-based contract. It used prisoners to provide the labour and went against the council’s resolution – the council said that they should not have been paid for the work that they had done because it was shoddy - but all the same, it went ahead to bulldoze its way and got paid against the council’s recommendation. So I am really interested in knowing who the owner of this Omega construction firm is –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you for giving way. I would like more clarification on the use of prisoners instead of workers. Can I really be properly briefed since Uganda has been accused of using prisoners as labourers? I would like to get that properly. Can you clarify on that? Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): The company that I know is called Omega Construction Company Limited but you said that they went against the council resolutions not to pay and they manipulated their way and he was paid. I want to know how he was paid and by who. 

MR EKEMU: Thank you; I will give this clarification. The council went and inspected the road works of this company and found that their work was shoddy. The council resolved that this company should not be paid but from the powers that be and I do not know from where – and this is why I am interested in knowing who this Omega Construction Company Limited is and where they are getting this influence peddling from that they can defy council resolutions to be paid. 

THE SPEAKER: Was the council the employer? 

MR EKEMU: It was the ministry that paid but the money is remitted from the ministry and having found out that this work was shoddy, the councillors resolved that they should not be paid but somehow, Omega Construction Company Limited got its way through – 

THE SPEAKER: You mean they recommended it? There is a difference between recommending and ordering not to pay because if the council were not the employer, then they could not order. You can only advise the employer; he may take your advice or he may not. 

MR EKEMU: Mr Speaker, I just brought this as one of those cases – 

THE SPEAKER: No, I am just telling you why such a recommendation can be ignored because they were not the employer. They just said that the work was shoddy and perhaps the employer looked into this and thought they were not justified. 

MR EKEMU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that concern but I am also saying that this Omega Construction Company Limited is just a tip of the iceberg on what is happening with these contractors. These contractors are actually procured by the ministry from the centre and sent down there but of course it is the community’s responsibility because they are the actual users of the roads. So, in their opinion after inspecting the road, they said this road is not worth paying for the amount that we have –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague, hon. Ekemu, for giving way. Actually, this particular contractor - Omega Construction Company Limited - was contracted by the central government to do urban roads in many Eastern Uganda towns – Mbale, Kumi and Soroti inclusive - and these were really meant to be short roads of between half a kilometre to one kilometre. They were put in different lots. Yes, they were clustered and given as one contract and the responsibility of supervision was left to the local authorities through their own municipal engineers. Unfortunately, the contractor has done really terrible and shoddy work in all the towns that he has been contracted to pave roads and he is not listening to the supervising engineers but also - and this is really the gist of the information I would like to give - urban roads fall under a commissioner who handles district urban and community access roads and so in case of a failure on the part of the contractor, it is the responsibility of that officer in the Ministry of Works to come and arbitrate. So far this kind of arbitration has not been done.

MR BUSIMA: I would like to give further information and a particular one on Mbale. The road Omega did is Naboa road, it took him more than half a year and when we drove on it on the first day of opening, the road failed. I have been wondering what it did, I have now got an answer, it is good the minister is here. What my colleague was saying, the ministry passes over the responsibility of supervision to the local authority but the ministry pays and in the engineering language or practice you issue interim certificates for payment when you are satisfied with the work. Someone else cannot certify the work and the pay master is in Kampala or Entebbe. This is something which is spreading all over the country. 

There is a tourist road in Budadiri East going up to the mountain. It was contracted by the Ministry of Works, which asked someone in Sironko District administration to supervise. The road has been poorly done, the marrum is not there. I find that as a weakness of having poor work being done because if someone who is certifying is different from someone who is paying; it is a big problem in the engineering field. If the ministry wants to design and supervise the roads, let them do so. Let them not pass on the responsibility to the local authorities. I tend to think that it is a way of supporting corruption.

MR EKEMU: Thank you very much for that information but I think hon. Amuriat answered most of those other issues that were raised apart from what the honourable member asked about prisoners’ labour being used by a contractor. In fact the information that I have is that the contractor hired prisoners’ labour cheaply. 

I was part of a meeting that the Deputy Speaker and hon. Elijah Okupa called up here in Parliament and I think we even met the Prime Minister over the “Kadaga-Okupa” ferries linking Kamuli and Soroti districts by the Bukungu Kagwara and Kaberamaido ferries. Why I am calling them like that is because of the initiative and effort they have put in to put you, Government, on your toes to make sure that this assurance is actually realised.

I am wondering why there is no information on this one and yet we are really keen to know about these ferries that link Kamuli and Soroti districts.

There is also the Kamalinga Ferry linking Katakwi, Tororo and Kumi districts not captured in this report. Probably, the hon. minister will clarify. Otherwise, I expected to have seen or known if there is any progress on any of these ferries to date. I thank you. 

5.42
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): I thank you, and you know that I am always brief. My concern is about timely implementation of government assurances. Whenever the President moves around the country, he keeps promising, “I am going to do this” and yet it sometimes takes a lot of time for the assurances to be implemented. For example, the road from Gulu to Atiak was promised way back in 1996 during the elections and at that time I was already part of the working class. It is only last year, since 1996, that some surveys have started taking place. I do not know how many years, but you can calculate. (Laughter) 

As I am talking now, after the surveys were done, again everything went down and I do not know how long it will take for the work to begin again because that road is very busy with the booming business between Uganda and Sudan. Actually, the traffic on that road is only comparable to the one along the Jinja-Malaba Road; it is very heavy - (Laughter) – So, the hon. minister could try to rush and have that road made.

Secondly, yesterday - 

MS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much. I would like to provide information because I know the Speaker may not pick me out. (Laughter). The information I am providing is that the same thing is happening to Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road. It has been promised but last year they told us that they would start the work. The survey has been done. They said the work will start in March and now this year they said June, but I have again heard that it is now September - (Laughter) – so I am not sure when exactly the road will start. I thank you very much. 

MR OCULA: I thank you, hon. Baba Diri, for supplementing. You know, we have experience in this; you know how long it took Government to finish the road from Kafu to Masindi? It was a matter on the Floor most times when we were talking about roads until finally it was done, although it took a long time. I am emphasising on timely implementation of government assurances because as they delay, the contractors also keep varying the costs and it becomes very expensive to the tax payers. 

Finally, I got up yesterday and really requested the minister to tell us something about a presidential directive on a ferry supposed to link Amuru District and Arua District around Rhino Camp. I have the letter the President wrote way back in 2007. To date, I do not know what is taking place. I really want the minister to really come up and – the minister has the letters. I thank you so much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We should end lastly with you.

5.47
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you very much. I also wish to thank the committee for its first report in this Parliament. 

I would like to first comment on the body of the report before saying something about the minister’s response. The committee chose to only cover projects that had been promised, budgeted, money passed and released. It considered bridges, ferry services and roads. In my view, a government assurance is a promise given by Government to the citizens of a country to implement particular programmes. What I thought the committee should have done would have been to examine bridges, ferry services and roads. It would have also looked at all those promises made by Government, whether they had been budgeted for or not, because I believe whatever promise is made by Government remains a commitment by Government to the people of the country. 

Apart from the policy statements, the other area that I thought the committee should have examined is the manifesto projects. We know that the NRM Government that is in power today runs its programmes based on the promises made to the people and I bet there are many promises given to the people of Uganda through the manifesto of the 2006 elections – (Interruption)  

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, hon. Amuriat, for giving way. I would like to give you information that my own constituency is the only lucky constituency that featured in the NRM manifesto. When you read page 23 of that manifesto, there was a specific promise to Makindye East where the President promised that he would tarmac the ring road around the Namuwongo Estate. That is a very specific promise but to this day, nothing has been done on this road, which also takes the hon. Minister of Defence to his place. (Laughter) I would like to really support you by saying that this report should also have reflected the ring road of Namuwongo. You can go and read your manifesto because I am reading your manifesto, not mine. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the committee is concerned with government assurances. Manifesto issues are party issues. The best committee to deal with party manifestos are the parties themselves. This is a government and this is a parliament dealing with government assurances rather than party assurances. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know we would do it in a better way when we come to power because our policy statements would be reflective of our promises in our manifesto to the people of this country. 

By ignoring that comment, the committee missed out many programmes that were promised to the people of Uganda. Kumi-Magoro Ferry that is meant to ply Lake Bisina has been raised here several times from the Seventh Parliament through the Eighth Parliament. It was considered and funding was provided through – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Individual Members of Parliament should report the government assurance in respect of their areas so that the committee can follow; otherwise, they may not know about something that was promised. We, as Members of Parliament, should complain or remind the committee to look into the issues. That will enable them to be more comprehensive.

MR AMURIAT: I know that this is a late opportunity for me to raise this so that the minister can put it on record. We know that money was availed for this particular ferry the other financial year but I am shocked that until now, the ferry is nowhere to be seen. I have also been informed that this ferry could have been transferred to another lake. I would like to say that is a big risk because it will anger not only the people of Kumi and Katakwi but also the people of Teso as a whole.

The 10,000 kilometres that are meant to be upgraded from district roads to national roads is a matter that we articulated in this House some time last year and there was a written promise from Government that was made by the Ministry of Works and Transport to all districts, including Masindi District. So, I am shocked that nothing is being done. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Byanyima, for raising this matter strongly some time last week. We would like to hear from Government what is happening in regard to this assurance.

I would like to turn to comments made by the minister in charge of roads. The problems with the ministry and their projects include unnecessary delays, poor designs, poor supervision and in the confession of the ministry, corruption. It does not surprise me that the Ministry of Works would continue to entertain incompetent contractors. As far as I know professionally, every road or bridge contract has got a penalty clause. I have not heard, throughout my life in this Parliament, the ministry invoking the penalty clause on incompetent contractors. This is why you will find Omega Construction playing around with public resources and nobody is raising a finger against him. 

The minister has proudly spoken here to us about the Busunju-Hoima Road. This road has been tarmacked and I would like to thank the ministry for that. However, little notice is given to adequate designs of these roads. A six-metre-wide carriageway is narrow for a road like the one in question. This also applies to the Soroti-Lira Road where the carriageway of a new road that is meant to carry heavy traffic - and so much traffic - is reduced to six metres. I would like the minister to explain to this House why they have continued minimising road widths yet they are aware that traffic is expected to increase.

I would like to talk about the Laropi Ferry. As Shadow Minister of Works and Transport, I have had several opportunities to visit the river crossing at Umi and Laropi. Whereas the committee observes in their report that it is a closed assurance, which means they are fully satisfied with what they saw, I would like to observe that no attention has been paid to the construction of a permanent landing site on either side of the river. So, I would like to call on the minister to do something about this. It is completely more uneconomical to maintain equipment on both sides of the river than to have a permanent landing site in this area. This applies to all the ferry landing sites, including the one at Wanseko, which I have personally travelled to. 

Finally, I feel very sad when the minister talks about Masindi Port and Kungu ferry landing sites. Apart from other difficulties that are experienced by travellers across this lake, he talks about a very old ferry - 15 years old - plying such an important and busy route.  I feel sad about this and I think the minister should apologise to us - (Interjections) – Yes, he should. We are Ugandans and we deserve something better. Travelling on water is very risky and it is even made more risky when you use unreliable vessels. In this case, we are talking about a 15-year-old ferry, an engine which is 15 years old. Without any plan, the minister instead has come here to lament the need for Shs 2 billion. I think this is not how we should continue as a country; we deserve something better as a country.

In conclusion, I advise the committee that in future, it would be good to consult, especially regarding the use of technical terms. The report is quite confusing when it states that 70 percent of expected works was completed and then it talks about the issuance of a certificate of completion. You need to listen to the professional people. There is a valuation certificate before the work is substantially complete or an interim certificate. A completion certificate is issued upon substantial completion of work.

THE SPEAKER: What I note is that a lot of the submission you are making should have been handled by the sessional committee in charge of infrastructure other than blaming a committee which went to see what has been done. What you are really saying should be done by your committee. I believe you sit on that committee. Some of these things should have been done by you.

MR AMURIAT: I am sure, Mr Speaker, that some of these reports get to the internet and get read by some people who are not part of this House. It reflects quite badly on the competence of the House. I am merely advising the committee. There is free technical advice if they desire it; it shall be given. I wish to thank the committee, thank the minister and to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the position is that the report was received and it has been commented on by the minister. So, what we can do is to adopt the report subject to the observations made; that is how it should be. 

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am rising to respond to a concern by hon. Hajat Sauda Mugerwa about safe water for the landing sites and sanitation facilities. 

Mr Speaker, my ministry has done six pilots at landing sites like Namasale, Rakai, Mayuge, among others, through a Norwegian company called Scan Water. The challenge we have, as she rightly noted, is that around these sites you can hardly get ground water. If you find it, it is normally salty and cannot be drunk by people. So the only thing that is feasible for these areas is a piped water system and yet it is a bit expensive. 

We have also encouraged the districts to use up to 12 percent of the district conditional water grant that we give them specifically to provide sanitation facilities. We are also encouraging them to use ecological sanitation facilities, where the waste is recycled; so, they do not dig pits which eventually contaminate the water. 

Equally, the Ministry of Agriculture has a project where they have developed some landing sites and this includes provision of the sanitation facilities. However, as I said earlier, the challenge is that the landing sites are many. If you take Kalangala District for example, they have over 150 landing sites. So we are trying to move in and replicate what we developed under scare water because it has proved that it works. So, we are not just doing nothing; we are moving in the right direction and we are only limited by resources.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, some members raised some issues which were outside the report and which have gone on the Hansard. 

One honourable member brought up an issue that the whole of Bunyoro Kitara region has tarmac of only 22 kilometres; that went on the Hansard. I want to refute that and state that we have got Kafu-Masindi - I think that one also is in Hoima and I think it is 44 kilometres. There is Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo; this road was put in the manifesto of 2006 and as we talk now, the surveys are going on. Considering the gestation period of tarmacing roads in any country, to reach surveys within four years means we have moved very fast. So, this should not be used for political purposes; we are working very hard.

I want to comment on the issue of the clustered roads. Mr Speaker, this has been a problem. Wherever I go – I have visited Soroti, Hoima and many other towns - I have found this problem of Omega. What the Ministry of Works actually did was to amalgamate these short distances into big work so that that this work can attract a contractor, and they were procured. However, the money is not with Ministry of Works. We procured on behalf of those municipalities. We tasked the municipalities to supervise their jobs satisfactorily and pay for the work done. 

As I talk now, some of those balances are still on the accounts of the municipalities. The problem has been communication. I want to thank Soroti; it is the only district that has put it in writing and I have it on my desk. Others have done it verbally, but I have told all of them to write so that we can take action on Omega. This is the same case with the bridge in Kiziranfumbi in Hoima. We had to push very hard for this man to do some job. 

I agree with hon. Amuriat; the problem is that if I have good food on my plate and there is bad food on another plate, I would leave the bad food and take the good one. However, if all you have is the bad food, what do you do? Sometimes you find yourself saying, “Let me simply eat this bad food to survive”. The type of contractors we have in this country, especially local contractors, leave a lot to be desired. 

We have been pushing. You remember even when we were in the committee we tried our best to build these local contractors but the moment you give them an advance, the first thing he does is buy a good vehicle, add on another woman or wife – I do not know if that is called a wife – and also put up another house. By the time he realises that the money is finished, things have gone wrong. However, we are struggling and we are pushing. I want also to call upon the Members of Parliament, because usually we inform you of what we are doing, to help us also on supervision. I think those were the major issues which deviated from the report. I thank you very much.

6.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I must say from the onset that I am very happy with the way the minister drafted his answer to the report of the committee. (Applause) The way he made his response makes it easy for the committee to actually follow up the next assurances. He even invited the committee to go back to the areas and committed Government on the next action. It is really appreciated, honourable minister, and we feel the committee will follow up these assurances.

The only unfortunate bit is that when the minister talks of other assurances that will be handled in the medium term and yet for some of them, like the honourable Shadow Minister for Works did mention, funds had been procured most especially the ferries, then we kind of fail to coordinate. Like we mentioned in our report, no funding gap was left. Maybe an appropriate committee will handle that because ours, as empowered by Rule 153, is not supposed to go into those financial matters. We are only supposed to look at the promise made by the Government agent on the Floor of the House and the level of fulfilment - whether it was done within the period mentioned. 

I am saying I am happy because for most of the assurances, the minister is saying they are beginning by April this year, which is next month. I hope by the end of next month when we go back to site, we shall be able to see that some of these issues are being handled.

I am also happy that members were commenting and really seeing the need for this committee to continue working, indicating that they wanted all departments to be handled. This is what the committee intends to do and that is what we are really doing. In the beginning we have handled only those sections that we talked about in our report. We are looking forward to a moment when we shall also be handling other departments, and we have started; there is another report that is coming before this House. 

We only appeal that our reports should not be delayed such that by the time we present them, they are almost irrelevant. This is a committee that is supposed to help Government perform to the expectations of Ugandans but when we bring these reports when they are already out of time, then it does not help the Government to perform.

We could not talk about the actual amounts like the hon. Ekemu requested because I have already mentioned that our committee does not deal with the specifications, and possibly that is why we could not go into the technical language as would be required by the other committee. However, we believe we shall always do our best to ensure that Government delivers on the promises they give to the Ugandans.

There is a Bill that this committee brought before this House. The Bill, among other things, is supposed to help ministers perform better. Like members were saying yesterday, we have not given strong recommendations like saying that the minister should be reprimanded for non-performance. I would request that the chairperson of the Committee on Legal Affairs really speeds up the process of handling this Bill so that we can have a legal framework within which we can operate to make our committee function a little bit better and be relevant.

Finally, I wish to thank the honourable members for the comments they have made to the report. Like you advised, maybe in future we should ensure that the President’s manifesto, which is an undertaking by the President and the relevant party (Mr Mabikke rose_)

THE SPEAKER: There is no information

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, we should ensure that the President’s manifesto, which is an undertaking by the Government or the fountain of honour to-be during campaigns, becomes an issue for all Ugandans to consider and possibly to appear within the confines of Parliament. We shall be requesting possibly at an appropriate time to be guided on whether the one in charge of the manifesto implementation cannot be summoned by the committee to find out the extent to which the manifesto has been implemented. We can then see whether the promises that the President made to the population of Uganda have been taken on board. 

Otherwise, I want to thank you and thank the honourable members and do pray that the report be adopted with the guidance of the ministers.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is to adopt the report subject to observations and corrections that have been raised during the debate.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B.Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have a bad flu so I want to request that we present next Tuesday. However, the information I have is on areas Parliament stood over and deferred. One of them was to provide for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Presidential Emoluments Bill. We took the principles for the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to Cabinet which approved those principles. The recommendation that it should be incorporated in the Presidential Emoluments Bill by amendment was presented to the Attorney-General. We have been advised that we separate the Bills and come out with an amendment of the Parliamentary Pensions Act and drafting is ongoing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister is indisposed and she prays that we handle this matter on Tuesday. With this, we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m. to continue with business.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 March 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 

