

Thursday, 2 March 2017

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank the Members who turned up for the special sitting for the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana and those who have gone to Kitgum to support our colleague, hon. Betty Aol Ocan. 

Yesterday, we had some work which we did not complete. We would like to go straight to it so that we can do as much of it as possible. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Commissioner Bahati, could you lay for us the Health Service Commission report on the Table.  

MR BAHATI: It is not ready, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall skip it and go to the other reports. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow UA 5.84 million from the African Development Bank Group for a supplementary loan for the Interconnection of Electric Grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries Project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the Semi-annual Budget Performance Report for Financial Year 2016/17 together with Semi-annual Budget Monitoring Report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is sent to the budget committee for perusal and report back.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INVESTIGATE ALLEGATIONS OF TAX EVASION IN THE STEEL SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer that motion because I do not see the movers.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to. 

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We to propose that clause 3 be amended as follows: 

a) 	In subclause (1) by inserting the words “or HMO” immediately after the word “insurer” wherever it appears in the clause; and 

b) 	By adding a new subclause (4) to read as follows: 

“(4) For purposes of bancassurance, ‘financial institution’ means a company classified as a bank under the Second Schedule of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 and licensed as a bank by the Central Bank and includes a commercial bank, merchant bank, mortgage bank and post office saving banks; or a company licensed by the Central Bank as a micro finance deposit-taking institution under the Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003.”

The justification is to make bancassurance apply to HMOs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to propose that clause 4 be deleted and replaced with the following: 

“4. Meaning of unauthorized business 
Subject to any exemption granted in accordance with this Act, a person carries on unauthorised business where the person carries on any business or activity for which a licence is required without a valid licence issued by the Authority.” 

The justification is: to prohibit the carrying on of unauthorised business as stipulated under ICP 4.1.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to propose that clause 5 be deleted and replaced with the following: 

“5. Meaning of insolvent
(1) 	An insurer or HMO is insolvent where the insurer or HMO does not meet the minimum solvency capital requirements prescribed in the regulations.

(2) 	An insurance intermediary is insolvent if the value of its liabilities exceeds the value of its assets or is unable to pay its debts as they fall due for payment.”

The justification is: the solvency requirements for the insurance companies are to be provided in the regulations; and to categorically provide that a company is insolvent when it fails to pay its debts when they fall due. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 7 is amended as follows:  
i) 	By renumbering clause 7 as 7 (1); and 
ii) 	By inserting immediately after clause 7 the following:
“(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a- 
(a) 	foreign reinsurer that enters into a reinsurance contract with a licensed insurer or a retrocession agreement with a licensed reinsurer; or
(b) 	foreign insurer that carries on insurance business in accordance with an exemption granted by the Authority under section 33 (4).”
That is it, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MUSASIZI: We propose that clause 8 be amended by deleting subclause (1) and substituting it with the following: 

“(1) A mutual insurer may be formed in accordance with the regulations.” 
The justification is: to provide for the enactment of regulations that will provide the details for the formation of the mutual insurers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you not interested in the limitations on numbers? It had provided for a minimum of 25 but not more than 300. Aren’t you interested in that? 

MR MUSASIZI: I beg your pardon.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You said that we delete subclause (1) but I want to know whether you are not interested in the minimum which was in the subclause that you want to delete. The subclause mentions a minimum of 25 persons but not more than 300 to form a mutual insurer. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I need to consult on this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us defer clause 8. 

Clause 9

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 9 as follows:  

    a) By deleting subclause (1) and substituting it with the following:

“(1) Subject to subsection (2) and to any exemptions specified in the regulations, a person shall not, except with the prior written approval of the authority, use the words “insurance”, “assurance” or “reinsurance” or any derivations in English or any other language as part of his or her business name other than a licensee, provided that the name does not suggest that the licensee carries on any licensable business other than the business that it is authorised by its licence to carry on.” 

    b) By inserting the following new subclauses immediately after subclause (2): 

“(3) All local risks and persons, including imports shall be insured by insurance companies licensed to carry out business in Uganda. 

(4) The regulations may prescribe other words or phrases to which subsection (1) applies.

(5) A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not exceeding 1000 currency points.”

The justification is: to provide for retention of local risks and to provide clarity to the clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 11 subclause (2) by deleting the words, “require the insurer to” in the second last line of the clause. The justification is: to provide for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 12 as follows: 
i) 	In paragraph (1) (e) by inserting immediately after the word, “group” the words “wide and cross-border”.

ii) 	In paragraph (1) (i) by inserting immediately after the words, “where appropriate” the words “initiate and”. 

iii) 	By deleting in paragraph (1)(g) – the second (g) - and substituting it with the following: “(g) to receive and resolve insurance related complaints”. 

The justification is: to comply with ICPs 23 and 26 that provide for group wide supervision and cross-border cooperation and coordination on crisis management respectively. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When talking about “cross-border”, do you mean this law can operate beyond the borders? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, insurance core principles are global practises; they operate in the 240 countries where they have been adopted, Uganda inclusive. That is why we are saying, “cross-border”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Correct the spelling of border and remove the “a” so that it is “border” and not “boarder”. Who is asking for clarification? Please stand up when you are asking for clarification.

MR OSEKU: In section 12, we seem to have repetitions; after (f), (g), (h), (i), we have (g), (h) again. We need clarification on this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I think you need to present all of them and then we shall consider them one by one. You stopped at the first one, “initiate and” and then there is (iii), (iv) and then (v). Did you drop them? Are you only concentrating amendment No. 8 (i)? You should read the other two because you had not read them. Present them.

MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 12 as follows: 
i) 	In paragraph (1)(e) by inserting immediately after the word “group” the words “wide” and “cross-border”. 

ii) 	In paragraph (1) (i) by inserting immediately after the words “where appropriate”, the words “initiate and”. 

iii) 	By deleting paragraph (1)(g) - the second (g) - and substituting it with the following: “(g) to receive and resolve insurance related complaints”.

The justification is: to comply with ICPs 23 and 26 that provide for group-wide supervision and cross-border cooperation and coordination on crisis management respectively.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I think it is also important to change the sequence; you have three G’s in this provision. It is now (j), it is no longer (g).

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I was advised by our legal counsel that they will do the arrangement when they are writing the final report. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Shall we have the three G’s passed and we leave it to the draftsman to correct? You should request that we re-number them sequentially. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I notice that there is repetition of (g). I therefore propose that these be re-numbered sequentially.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you also had to deal with (iv) and (v). Did you say that these are deleted? Are you stopping at (iii)?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to. 
 
Clause 13

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 13 as follows:
i) 	In subclause (1) by deleting the word “person” and substituting it with the words, “domestic or foreign supervisory authority or domestic law enforcement authority”.

ii) 	In subclause (2) (a) by inserting the words, “a domestic and” immediately before the words, “in the case of a”. 

iii) 	By inserting new subclauses (3), (4), (5) and (6) immediately after subclause (2) to read as follows:
“(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a), the Authority may require the domestic or foreign supervisory authority making the request to give a written undertaking, in such form as the Authority may require, to provide reciprocal assistance to the Authority.
(4) A decision by the Authority shall be made only where the Authority- 
(a) 	has received satisfactory assurances from the local or foreign supervisory authority that any information and documentation provided to it will not be used in any criminal proceedings against the person providing it, other than proceedings for an offence of perjury or any equivalent offence.

(b) 	the local or foreign supervisory authority undertakes to make such contribution towards the cost of exercising its powers as the Authority considers appropriate; and 

(c) 	is satisfied that the local or foreign supervisory authority is subject to adequate legal restrictions on further disclosure of the information and documents and that it will not, without the written permission of the Authority- 

(i) 	disclose information or documents provided to it to any person other than an officer or employee of the authority engaged in the exercise of any of its supervisory functions; or 
(ii) 	take any action on information or documents provided to it. 

(5) 	The Authority reserves the right not to provide the information requested. 
(6) 	The Authority may share information with other supervisors and also inform them before taking any action that might reasonably be considered to affect group entities under their supervision and where prior notification is not possible, the Authority shall inform the relevant supervisors as soon as possible after taking action.”

The justification is: to comply with ICP 3 that mandates the supervisor to have the legal authority and power at its sole discretion and subject to appropriate safeguards, to exchange information with other relevant supervisors. The existence of an agreement or an understanding on information exchange is not a prerequisite for information exchange.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I would like to be satisfied about this issue of “person” because “person” may be human or corporate. You say that it is only a domestic or foreign supervisory authority or law enforcement authority that can request for information. If I am an individual, can’t I apply to this authority to get information? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this amendment is aimed at ensuring that disclosure requirements are provided for and the regulator has got all avenues to ensure that he gets the required information. 

My view, therefore, is that if this is an individual, he or she should be required to give information to the authority and not the other way round. That is why we are using “person” to mean the authority or any other corporate body.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t I, as an individual, request for information from that authority? Must it be a domestic or foreign supervisory authority?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, even an individual can ask for information. An authority can avail information to all stakeholders including individuals because most of the policy holders are individuals. Therefore, they should not be limited in accessing information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In that case, you do not need to delete the word “person”. I think you just need to add, “domestic or foreign supervisory authority or domestic law enforcement authority” so that the individual can ask but the authority can also ask. Just add “domestic or foreign supervisory authority” after “person”.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, can someone help me in drafting?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let it read thus: “The Authority may, on the written request of any person, domestic or foreign supervisory authority or domestic law enforcement authority- (a) undertake onsite inspection…”

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the headnote of the clause is “power to cooperate with other authorities” not persons. In this regard, I feel the amendment being proposed by the House does not hold.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what was your rationale for this provision in the first place?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to refer to the headnote under 13; it refers to the power to cooperate with other authorities and not necessarily information as you suggest. If we look at the headnote, then the body and amendment proposed by the chairperson become relevant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it only the authorities that can ask for information? I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 14 be amended as follows:
i) 	In subclause (2) (d) by deleting the words, “Institute of Uganda” and substituting them with the words, “Training College”.

ii) 	By inserting new paragraphs (h) and (i) immediately after (g) to read as follows: “(h) The Chief Executive Officer of the Capital Markets Authority. (i) The Chief Executive Officer of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority.”

iii) 	By deleting subclause (iii) and substituting it with the following: “The chairperson and the persons referred to in subsection 2(f) shall be appointed by the minister from among persons who have knowledge, experience and skills in insurance, banking, finance and actuarial science.”

Justification

1. 	The Insurance Institute of Uganda is to be transformed into the insurance training college with a mandate to train on insurance.

2. 	To provide for a representative of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority and the Capital Markets Authority to be on the board.

3. 	To give the minister powers to choose a chairperson and two persons representing the public from persons who are qualified in insurance matters, banking, finance and actuarial studies.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thank hon. Musasizi. I just have two points of clarification. First, usually, when we are providing for boards in this House, we provide for a figure of nine. That seems to be the standard policy of Government. I just want to know how big the board is with the inclusion of new members.

Secondly, the chairperson of the committee gave a justification that the Insurance Institute of Uganda is to be transformed into the insurance training college. It is as if the training college has not yet been established. Would it be proper for us to put it here when it has not yet been created? You are saying that it is to be transformed, meaning it is in the future; aren’t we anticipating something, which has not yet happened? Would that be proper? Shouldn’t we wait for the creation of the training college and then if the law requires amending, that is when we can insert it instead of putting it upfront?

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, on the representation of the two participants from the public, I think we would be interested to have a representative of the users other than having only skilled people in insurance. In the public, we have people who are going to use insurance services; they could be picked to be part of the board other than just having only experts. 

When you also look at the other representatives, they all have something to do with insurance - the Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda, Insurance Institute of Uganda, and then the ministry responsible for health, maybe to cover issues of health. How do we support the consumers of insurance? Thank you.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was wondering whether there is an assumption being made here. Looking at (f), it says, “two persons representing the public, one of whom shall be the deputy chairperson”. Why did they leave out the women, or is it assumed that -(Interjection)- Mine is about the two people representing the public. They have said one of whom shall be the deputy chairperson but I was also thinking that they could add that one should be a woman.

I have been told that gender is somewhere there. Why don’t they say, “one of whom should be a woman” apart from the deputy chairperson? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 14 (4) says, “The Minister shall, in appointing members of the board, ensure that there is a balance of skills and gender.” It is provided for. Can you answer the question on numbers.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing nine board members with voting rights and this is consistent with the Government policy, as Dr Baryomunsi said. The tenth person is the chief executive officer with no voting powers. 

On the training institute, currently we have a training institute in Uganda and this Bill is proposing to transform it into a college as a result of the benchmarking studies we have undertaken. It is created by law. The Insurance Act of 2006, as amended in 2011, established the insurance institute.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we just change it casually from an institute to a college? It must be done by an Act of Parliament.

MR MUSASIZI: In this Bill, we are proposing that the institute be turned into a college.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the proposal?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 137, there is the establishment of the insurance training college. However, my worry is that if we pass these earlier clauses referring to a training college, which is not yet created, shall we not be legislating in anticipation? Is there a way of bringing the creation of the insurance college earlier?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 137(2) says, “For the purposes of subsection (1), the Uganda Insurance Institute existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be transformed into the Insurance Training College.” I think it is being planned so that when it is transformed, it will cease to be an institute. Anything else, honourable members?

MR BAHATI: I would like to make a slight amendment on 14(c). I would like it to read as, “the Governor of the Bank of Uganda” and not “a representative of the Governor”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing the Governor is not there, can’t he delegate?

MR BAHATI: We either say, “the Governor of the Bank of Uganda” or “a representative of the Bank of Uganda”.

MS ASAMO: I wanted the other one to remain the way it is: “Two persons representing the public, one of whom shall be the deputy chairperson”. Also, in the conclusion, instead of having skills and expertise, let us leave this to the one who will be appointing the people. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not want the skills and expertise?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this law aims at improving the way of doing business in the insurance industry and the insurance industry is specific. That is why the issue of skills and experience must come out because we are dealing with a specific sector with specific requirements.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think hon. Asamo has a point. The experts are there and include the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a commissioner, the Governor of Bank of Uganda, someone from the training institute and someone from health. However, for the representatives from the public, they can get the Chairman of Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA), for example, because he is from the public. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, Uganda has evolved. Even in KACITA and in the private sector, we have these skills. Therefore, it is not that we will be restricting the public from accessing the board. As long as we can get the skills from KACITA, why not?

Experience does not necessarily mean that one must have gone to school to do a course in insurance. He may have practiced insurance as a broker or an agent for quite some time. I believe that this experience can be got from the public.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you need some civilian brains?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, my understanding of hon. Asamo’s submission is that the other institutions, including ministries, are sending their technocrats. Although there is a provision for balance in gender, I think she wants specifically that for the two people who will represent the public, at least one of them should be a female. That is if I got her properly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, her worry was about the qualifications of the members. She was saying that the qualifications will lock out members of the public. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Then I agree with the chairperson that this is a specialised area where we require people who have skills in insurance.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, insurance in Uganda is very poor because people do not understand it. If you do not have somebody there to learn what is happening - I can also be “the public” and I do not have any knowledge about insurance but I can come back and talk to members and tell them to go and get insured. It could be a person coming from the public, well established as regards integrity, but his or her work will be to tell you the views of the public regarding insurance while the rest of the members may have the knowledge. 

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a problem with the word “public”. How do you define “public” in this context because all the entities defined here are public? Bank of Uganda, the Ministry of Health, the insurance institute are all public. I would propose that we have two from the private sector to take care of that bit. Otherwise, we shall take a long time debating something that we may not understand. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The public sector is the public service. That would still be civil servants. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in (f) we have two persons representing the public, one of whom shall be the deputy chairperson. I think having experts from the public would make a contribution because we need to have people who understand these issues as this is a professional area. If we send people there who are not experts, there might be no meaningful contribution; we may just have people who will be spectators on behalf of the public. We would rather have experts. I concur with the chairperson.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I concur with hon. Asamo. Insurance is not doing well in Uganda because our people are not informed. Whereas we need the experts, the bigger challenge is with our business community who would be the first beneficiaries. 

I know there is expertise developing even in the private sector and they may be considered as “the public”. We have people in the logistics industry as well as the Kampala City Traders Association. They should be able to get us the best of their best and they will be the ones who will interact with those who fear to get into the insurance business today.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition, honourable members, when you have the so-called experts, they may not understand the public environment. In the courts we have assessors; they are not lawyers but they sit there and also give their opinion, which you may take or not. I think this is for the people and we should find where people’s interests are. These doctors will just prescribe medicine but a civilian may give you some views.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We can have a middle ground because if you read subclauses (3) and (4), they say that the chairperson and the person referred to in subsection (2) (a) shall be appointed by the minister. That is what hon. Asamo is proposing.

In case there is need to have particular skills in appointing those two, subclause (4) suggests that the minister shall, in appointing members of the board, ensure that there is a balance of skills and gender. I think her proposal does not necessarily harm the objective of the Bill. Therefore, I concede to her proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed variously.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we have no amendment to clause 15.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you abandoned the traffic offence? I think you wanted to put an exception.

MR MUSASIZI: Okay. We propose that clause 15 be amended by inserting the words, “except a traffic offence” immediately after the word “offence”. The justification is that traffic offences are minor and should not be used to stop one from being a member of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we need to refine it by saying “has been convicted of an offence other than a traffic offence”.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 16 by deleting subclause (1) and substituting it with the following: “(1) A member of the board shall hold office for three years from the date of appointment and is eligible for reappointment for only one term.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No other term? 

MR MUSASIZI: He or she is eligible for reappointment for one further term.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you adding, “three years from the date of appointment”?

MR MUSASIZI: “A member of the board shall hold office for three years from the date of appointment and is eligible for reappointment for only one term”. This means that you can be on the board for only two terms.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you still need the word, “further” because this can confuse. I do not know why you do not want the word, “further”.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I think this is a matter of drafting. I have no problem with using the word “further” - “…for one further term”.

We propose to amend subclause (2) by deleting the words, “chairperson and”. We propose to delete subclause (3) and substitute it with the following: “(3) A member of the board may, at any time, resign from his or her office in writing addressed to the Minister, giving notice of not less than one month.”

We propose to amend subclause (4) (a) as follows:
a) 	By deleting the word “or” appearing in the last line in paragraph (f).
b) 	By inserting the word “or” immediately after the word “minister” appearing in the last line of paragraph (g).

c) 	By inserting a new paragraph (h) immediately after paragraph (g) to read as follows: “(h). Where any of the grounds for disqualification under section 15 become applicable to a member subsequent to his or her appointment.”

We propose to further amend the clause by inserting subclause (5) after the new paragraph (h) to read as follows: “(5) If a member of the board is or becomes aware that any of the grounds for suspension or removal specified in subsection (4)(e),(f),(g) or (h) apply to him or her, the member shall, within 15 days, give written notice to the minister and the chairperson or, if the member is the chairperson, the deputy chairperson.”  

The justification is: to require that notice is given in writing.

MS ASAMO: Looking at the members who represent institutions, what happens in case their tenure in the institution ends or their term of office expires? Maybe we needed to put this somewhere. If the Governor of the Bank of Uganda is no longer at the bank, for example, he cannot continue being a member of the board. I do not know how we can put it somewhere.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is on subsection (2); are you deleting it or not? 

Secondly, I think the term of office also needs to be made clear in terms of when it will start and end as this is not clear to me. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think he made amendments to that one; it is from the date of appointment. We have made an adjustment in 16(1).

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, in response to the clarification sought by hon. Asamo, I do not think it is necessary to state that if a representative of the Governor has his term expired, he is no longer a member of the board because these offices do not expire. The member representing the institution can cease to be an employee but the office will not expire; it will remain. Therefore, whoever comes in will automatically be on the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 16 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 18 as follows:

1. 	By deleting subclause (2) (a) and substituting it with the following: “(a) advise Government on policy matters concerning insurance.”

2. 	By inserting in subclause (2) (b), the words, “establish the principal policies of the Authority and” immediately before the word “oversee”.

The justification is: to make the provision clearer and to make the establishment of the principal polices one of the functions of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, who will assist the Government to do the implementation if you remove coordination and implementation of policies relating to insurance? You want to stop at advising Government on policy matters concerning insurance; who is the implementer of the policies?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we are establishing a board and an authority, which has management. There is a chief executive officer and staff, whom I can call the secretariat. This secretariat is an implementer of the board’s decisions and policies.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to convince the chairperson of the committee to maintain this clause the way it was. This is because the point you are making is that in (a), we see that the board is being given another assignment to coordinate the implementation of Government policy relating to insurance. The secretariat is actually the employees of the board, so it is the apex of the institution. I think the way it was, including coordination, is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not agree, honourable chairperson?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose that clause 18(1) should say, “the board shall be responsible” instead of “is responsible”. This is because when we say it is responsible, it is like we are telling a story. We need to give it effect. It is general but here it is like we are giving a narrative of something. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you any objection there?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, I have no objection on the proposal by hon. Robina Rwakoojo. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 18(1) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 21 by inserting a new subclause (6) immediately after subclause (5) to read as follows: “(6) The Minister shall publicly disclose the reasons for the disqualification or removal of the Chief Executive Officer.”

The justification is: to comply with ICP 2.2 which provides that there should be explicit procedures regarding the appointment and dismissal of the head of the supervisor and members of its governing body where such a governing body exists. When the head of the supervisor or members of its governing body are removed from office, the reasons shall be publicly disclosed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause–

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I find it a little bit strange that the minister has to sack someone either through television or radio. When I see the justification, it seems not to tally with what you are recommending. The justification is just saying that ICP 2.2 says there should be an established procedure. 

I oppose this because my understanding is that you are saying the minister should announce to the public that he or she has sacked so and so. Is it really a requirement of the Insurance Core Principles (ICPs) that –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing they sack me and I continue holding out, what happens? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: If it is about sacking, I am sure he does it in writing. Once you receive a letter that you have been discontinued, there are mechanisms internally to make sure that you no longer hold the office. What I am objecting to is going public on radio and television.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this amendment generated a lot of debate in the committee. However, we were advised that this is a standard requirement - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Standard requirement in that industry?

MR MUSASIZI: When you look at the justification, it is to comply with ICP 2.2. This is just a compliance requirement. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what ICP 2.2 requires is that the procedures be clear for recruitment, appointment and dismissal. They should be laid out, not that they should be announced to the Bakiga –

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Chairperson, the committee’s choice to announce was to prevent people who would want to default or defraud others in the future. When you announce that someone has been sacked for a particular reason, it becomes better for the public to know that the person was disqualified because of certain behaviours, which means he or she cannot be appointed to another office. Thank you.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am worried if we have to announce that someone has been appointed in the first instance and in the second instance, we must also announce when we sack such a person. This causes a bit of a problem. Even within the institution, you are going to have chaos because of the element of professional codes of conduct. My view is that we delete this subclause and maintain the old arrangement. Thank you very much.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to make reference to the fact that when the chief executive officer is being appointed, it is on the recommendation of the board. The board plays a supervisory role over the chief executive officer. In fact, the minister will not be supervising this chief executive officer. Therefore, I suggest that the sacking should be on the recommendation of the board. 

Having seen that he has not fulfilled his terms and conditions of work, the board can write and the minister can use that to fire him. However, announcing that somebody has been fired will kill the entire family, clan and everybody. There could be a company, which can take him on and maybe there are different terms the other side. The board could play a key role in recommending the sacking of the chief executive officer instead of the minister making a dismissal announcement without the board. The board’s role is not indicated in subclause (5).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what other industry publically states dismissal? I would like to know if there are other industries where this happens. Are those binding?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, why we are repealing the old law and replacing it with this new one substantially, is so that we comply and conform to the requirements of the insurance core principles. 

While there are deadlines that we must have this law, this law is going to be evaluated by the world association to see whether it conforms to the standards. It is unfortunate that we are just importing some of these proposals from the standards and placing them here – I (Interruption) 
 
MS KARUNGI: Madam Chairperson, of course we must conform to the minimum standards. However, if the law we have somewhere does not befit us well, do we have to conform to it because we are going to be looked at by other people, companies or countries? Do we need to make our laws in that regard?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, Uganda does not exist in isolation. We have to, as much as possible, try to fit within the global perspective on how some of these sectors are looked at, including the insurance sector. I know it is difficult to justify before the House but this is a requirement I find constrained to defend but which I must defend because we must -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, have we domesticated these principles? Have they been brought into this country and adopted by this House? Are they part of our law?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I am not a lawyer but I have learnt some law. There are two areas in international law. There is what we call legal monism where instruments, which are agreed upon either regionally or internationally, can directly have an effect of law at country level. However, for us in Uganda, we have legal dualism where instruments that are ratified can only have effect through domestication. This is part of the process to domesticate that. 

However, domestication through legislation, in my view, does not necessarily mean you must transplant whatever is in the instrument into a municipal law. It depends on what Parliament feels but I do not think we are obliged to photocopy whatever is in this. Therefore, we can uphold the principle as captured in that provision of having explicit procedures, but I do not think we must have that provision of public declaration. 

Let me give an example. In clause 21 (4)(d), it says that the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) can be removed from office by the minister on recommendation of the board for incompetence and inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind. Supposing the CEO gets an accident and is infirm and then the minister goes to the television to say, “Today, I have publically sacked so and so”, you ruin his family when the reason for sacking him is not to do with moral turpitude or corruption and so forth. 

Therefore, in my view, we do not have to insert everything. Even if we omitted that provision, we shall still have complied with the general principles of this instrument. We have always domesticated very many instruments here but we do not have to necessarily put everything in the law. We just try, as much as possible, to see that we comply with the general principles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the only one where we took almost everything was the COMESA treaty. We only made some small amendments, which were outside the COMESA treaty. However, do you see a situation where someone can hold out after being sacked? I can continue driving to the office and sitting there after being sacked.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this amendment is seeking to protect the independence of the people charged with this responsibility. You have two important offices here; one is the board and the other is the office of the CEO. What this proposal is seeking to do is to ensure that if for any reason they are terminated, the public should know the reasons why they have been terminated. This is what the amendment is seeking to do. 

Madam Chairperson, these two offices are responsible to the public. We need to understand the insurance sector. The insurance business collects money from the public and this money is given to companies. Companies keep it on the promise that they will compensate in the event that loss occurs. Therefore, the policy holder’s protection largely lies in the regulator and in the regulator, we have a board and the CEO. 

What this means is that if a regulator is mismanaged, public interest can easily be lost. Our view is that in order to give maximum protection to the people charged with governance responsibility, we should make whatever they do public and whatever happens to them should also be known to the public whom they protect — (Interruption)

MR ANGURA: I would like to be guided. Does the CEO of the authority run the day-to-day business of the insurance company?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, hon. Angura. The CEO of the authority does not run the day-to-day business of the insurance companies but is charged with the responsibility of licensing and regulating all insurance sector related businesses.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Chairperson, we are aware that there are normal procedures in appointment and dismissal of civil servants or public officers. These appointments and clarifications are made so that when I have a problem and I have been dismissed, reasons are given. When reasons are given, if I have a complaint I can follow the normal procedure. 

We should not speculate that when I am going to be dismissed, I will maybe refuse to leave office. What I know is that as long as the procedures are there and I have been dismissed, then that is the end of it. The public can read about why I was removed from office and there are procedures if I wish to complain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, what do you envisage in a public notice? Is it that announcement in the newspaper that says, “do not deal with so and so because he has been sacked”? Do you cause a press conference to be held? What is envisaged in public disclosure of this sacking? Which public are you talking about? Is it our friends in park yard? (Laughter) I am trying to understand whom this message is intended for.
   
MR MUSASIZI: This message is largely intended for the public whose interest is being protected by the regulator. Members of the public are policy holders and so they should be informed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They should know that I should not deal with you again.

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. This is what we are trying to deal with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When I am appointed, is it announced on the radio?  I do not know but anyway –

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. My understanding is that there are procedures for appointment, promotion, dismissal and other things. When it comes to dismissal, it is not done in a haphazard way but in a prepared manner. First of all, they even provided that an opportunity will be given to that person. There is going to be interaction. By the time one is written a dismissal letter, for example a one Ababiku, there are administrative conditions that will be provided for even for the handover of the assets of such a board. 

Therefore, I feel that we should not continue with this issue of having the dismissal announcement in the public. It should be handled administratively so that the security of the assets and the operations of the person shall be regulated through a clear process. What we are intending to cure is the fear that one may take that opportunity to continue with business of the institution as usual and yet the person has been dismissed. This can be regulated internally. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe it is because he is also the accounting officer. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, it is true that these regulations provide that there are explicit procedures regarding the appointment and dismissal of the head or the supervisor and members of its body. If such a governing body exists, when the head or the supervisor or members of the governing body are removed from office the reasons are publically disclosed.

However, I still think that we can move the way we had suggested in the Bill but take care of some of these things in the regulations or human resource manuals, which will all be part of the governance of the body that this world governing body will use to asses us. It will not only look at the principal law but also at the other manuals that govern us. 

To place this in the principal law when we are not sure which audience or public we are talking about, what methods we are going to use – How are we going to handle this because we can injure this person, among other things? I would like to suggest to the committee chairperson to concede and we leave the law the way it was. We will take care of these things in the human resource manual and regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a win-win proposal? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. Since the minister has committed to take care of our wishes in the regulations and the manuals and also looking at the mood in the House, I concede. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the question is that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill. There is no amendment because we are staying with the old text.

MS RWAKOOJO: I would like to agree because in our law, the conventions and all that are not self-executing; we have to domesticate. However, we do not have to take on everything that is therein. Let us leave it as it. Normally, they will rhyme; if the appointment is public, then dismissal is also public. 

I know that what we have not provided for in the main law cannot be provided for in the regulations, if it is something that important. So, we should not think that because the minister has promised, it will be taken care of in that regard. I think we should just realise that we will not have it altogether.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a nascent industry. If I get to see the clause that says I will be dismissed publically, then I will not apply for that job. I will say, “Aaah, sagala”. (Laughter)

HONOURABLE MEMBER: Madam Chairperson, you are on the Hansard.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Oh, sorry. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: I am privileged to sit in as the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon - (Laughter) – by designation. 

First of all, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for this report. I would also like to use this opportunity to reinforce what the minister has just mentioned. We are talking about a chief executive officer, – an office that has dignity. International standards dictate that whoever gets the job will be someone that will come along with dignity. Therefore to me, it will be redundant to have public sacking incorporated into the Bill. 

You are not talking about the marketing officers whose notices are placed in the print media saying, “so and so no longer works with the company and whoever continues to work or relate with them does so at their own risk”. We are talking of a chief executive officer here. It is standard international practice that a public announcement be made because even when they apply for other jobs elsewhere, for as long as they have mentioned that they have ever served at that top level, then the prospective employer takes it upon him or her to dig out the history that relates with his time at the service of the previous employment. Madam Chairperson, if we can, I think we should stay with the other one. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have enough reasons for which someone can lose a job; they are here. We do not need to add injury to put in the notice that we do not like this man, be careful with him. (Laughter)

Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In your amendment you are saying that notwithstanding anything contained in the Public Finance Management Act, all monies under subsection (1) etcetera received by the authority shall be retained by the authority and used to offset costs of administration and other expenditure.  How?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I propose that I first read the amendment then I can justify it. We propose to amend clause 25 as follows: 

1. 	By deleting subclause (3) and substituting it with the following: “(3). Notwithstanding anything contained in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, all monies under subsection (1) (c), (d), (e) and (f) received by the Authority shall be retained by the Authority and used to offset the costs of administration and other expenditure.” 

2. 	By deleting subclause (4). 

The justification is that subclause (4) is incomplete and redundant. The justification for the previous amendment is to give the authority powers to retain the levy it charges from premiums. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I hope you can really satisfy us on this one because we have been consistent that all monies should go to the Consolidated Fund first and be appropriated by this House. I do not know who you are – 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, insurance regulatory authorities world over work in such a way that they levy an amount of fees on the premium charged and these monies are used to run their day-to-day activities. These are the same monies they use to run their operations. 

The Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda, under the old law, has got this mandate. It never gets any money from the Consolidated Fund; it is run by the monies they get on levies on premiums and we are seeking to maintain the status quo. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why didn’t you attack 25 (1) (a); it says, “money appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Authority”? Now you are saying they do not get any money from the Consolidated Fund. Why don’t you say “levies”? You are you talking of all monies. You are now dealing with all the monies – all monies received should go to them.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, maybe this was an oversight by the people who prepared this Bill. In essence, the Insurance Regulatory Authority is run by levies charged on premiums. I do not think there is any other form of money that comes to the authority apart from money from premiums and licences. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we should not allocate it money, not even to start it off?

MR MUSASIZI: No.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Chairperson, we should change that. I am also wondering about this subclause (5), which says that the authority is exempt from paying corporation tax. I wonder why. Every authority in Uganda pays tax, even Members of Parliament pay taxes, so the authority also needs to pay tax. Like I had said, we should not carry everything from other countries and bring here; we do not have to do that because others do it. 

MR ABALA: I would like to refer to subclause (4). It refers to fees, charges and contributions. According to the new amendment, all this should be discarded. Madam Chairperson, we are getting money from embassies and from everywhere including primary schools; they all pay money to the Government of Uganda. Why now do we exempt this authority? It is unfair. 

Last year, we lost US$ 52 million to the Kenya insurance companies just because we are too generous. Look at subclause (5), are we a charity? My view is that we leave subclause (4) the way it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even the way it is is not the way we have been doing it. Can’t we stand it over? We have been very consistent on this one and I do not think we can make exceptions without proper advice. Let us stand over the clause. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: As we stand over the clause, I will maybe seek some clarification, which you can check because Bills are accompanied by certificates of financial implication. You are saying that subclause (1) (a), which says that we may appropriate money, is a new introduction. So, were you satisfied that fees and levies will raise enough money to run this authority? It is like you are saying the appropriation by Parliament was made in error. If we remove it, are you sure that the fees and levies will be enough to run this authority? You could check on what the minister said in the certificate of financial implication.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, let us stand over it; let us examine the pros and cons. We stand over it and go to clause 26.

Clause 26

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to amend clause 26 by deleting the word “authority” and substituting it with the word “board”. 

The justification is that the principles of corporate governance demand that it is the board that should have regards to sound financial principles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to amend clause 27 by deleting the word “board” and substituting it with the word “authority”.
The justification is that the authority is the organ that opens and operates the accounts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chair, we have stood over clause 25 because we wanted to get clarity on clause 25(a) – providing money appropriated by Parliament. And in clause 28, we are subjecting their borrowing to Article 159 of the Constitution. Article 159(2) applies to Government borrowing. This means that by passing this without resolving the other issue, we are indirectly passing the earlier clause, which we have stood over.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Bbumba is right. Actually, we have outlawed this provision in other laws – the capacity to borrow; we have removed it in all the previous laws. They cannot borrow unless they have authority of this House; they cannot just go out and contract – Parliament has to approve? Okay. Although the borrowing powers were removed – Okay, let us leave it there. 

I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to insert a new clause 32 immediately after clause 31 to read as follows: “Publication of accounts by the authority: The authority shall publish its audited financial statements at least annually in a Ugandan newspaper with a wide circulation.”
The justification is to comply with ICP 2.7.2, which requires the authority to be transparent in handling of financial matters.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal is for purposes of openness. Does anyone have an objection to that new clause?

Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to amend clause 33 as follows:

    (i) By inserting the word “or HMO” immediately after the word “insurer” wherever it appears.
(ii) 	By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following: “(1)Subject to sub-section (4), a person shall not carry on, or purport to carry on, insurance business, reinsurance business or the business of an HMO in Uganda without a valid licence issued by the authority.”
(iii) 	By deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “(2) A foreign insurer shall not occupy or operate an office in Uganda without the prior written approval of the authority.”
(iv) 	By deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting it with the following: “Notwithstanding sub-sections (1) and (2), the authority may authorise the effecting of insurance with a foreign insurer in exceptional circumstances.”
 (v) By deleting sub-clause (4) and substituting it with the following: “ (4)Sub-section (1) does not apply to - (a) a foreign reinsurer that enters into a reinsurance contract with a licensed insurer or a retrocession agreement with a licensed reinsurer or (b) a foreign insurer that carries on insurance business in accordance with an exemption granted by the authority.”
(vi) By substituting for sub-clause (6) the following: “(6) A person who carries on, or purports to carry on, insurance business, reinsurance business or business as a HMO in contravention of this Act is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.”
(vii) By inserting a new sub-clause as follows: “A foreign insurer that contravenes sub-section (2) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred currency points.” 

The justification is to comply with ICP 11 that requires the supervisor to impose collective and preventive measures and where necessary impose sanctions based on objective and clear criteria in regard to enforcement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have heard proposals for clause 33 – 


MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On Clause 33(2) “A foreign insurer shall not occupy or operate an office in Uganda without the prior written approval of the authority.” I find the word “occupy” redundant because you can occupy an office without necessarily operating. Therefore, I would like the chair to clarify why the words “occupy” and “operate” are both used in that clause.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, the business of insurance can sometimes take international dimensions. The way clause 33(2) is being amended is restrictive rather than permissive. I am surprised because I know the chairman’s background and experience he has got in insurance business. Insurance sometimes - now that we have mega investments in the country, the local insurance companies may not solely by themselves be able to cover such mega investments. They need partnerhip with international insurance companies.

However, when we put clause 33(2), the way it is, as hon. Rwakimari has intimated, “A foreign insurer shall not occupy” suppose they have a coordinating office from where they liaise with other local insurance companies? 

My proposal is that if we need to restrict it should be on their transaction that is why I would amend that by saying, “A foreign insurer shall not transact business in Uganda without a prior written approval or license of the authority.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is important that the authority knows where you work, what you do and with who. You cannot just roll in but the authority must know that hon. Ssekikubo has got a partner who is foreign.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, when we amend it that for one to occupy the operation part is okay but when you say that you cannot step in Uganda and occupy space - I think we are putting too much restrictions and as we make it operational, you will find that there will be – (Member timed out.) 

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I suggest that we should not spend much time on the issue of occupy and operation. The issue is to promote local content and give the authority its full mandate to regulate because issues of insuring are matters of profits and loss. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to state something concerning a copy of a letter which I received from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The minister was writing to the Prime Minister, and it was brought because our Property Holdings Limited in Kenya sent him a text of the laws the Kenyans made; no foreigner can own land in Kenya and yet, we have got properties there. The law was made in such a way that our properties will be taken over by the Kenyan Government because we are foreigners.

It is only in Uganda where people play. The foreigner must tell us where he is and what he does, why do you come in quietly? Let us know where and who you are.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, insurance is basically to cover the risks and the point I would like to bring forward is that our local industry might not have the capacity, and I do not understand how the chairman understood this.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you for your concerns hon. Ssekikubo. It is true there are risks, which are so big to be underwritten by only our local companies or companies registered in Uganda. However, Madam Chairperson, we are providing for reinsurance to provide for companies to underwrite risks and share the burden as well. I mean that the insurance principle works in a way that company x can underwrite a risk and when it feels that the risk is too big for it to handle, in an event of loss, it can decide to give a portion to other companies. The law is not restrictive on whether these companies are local, national, regional or international reinsurance companies.

It further provides for reinsurance under a syndicate; this is a collection of companies joined together to transact business. Nonetheless, Madam Chairperson, the issue at hand is that if these companies are to operate here, should they be known to us or not. The answer is as long as you come into this country to engage in activities that can be defined as insurance business; we must know where you are and what you do there. That is why we are providing that you should report yourself to the authority and the process of registering starts.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I do not see any harm with the proposal and we now seek for the House’s approval and I beg that you put a question and we move.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the proposal. If a foreign company has intentions to transact proper business, they should not hide; let them be known where they operate. In addition to that, we are all in good mood to support, promote and protect local content. Therefore, we should take all the precautions which protect the local content. Currently, Ministry of Trade is fighting Chinese who came into the country as investors and are now trading in popcorn. We should avoid these kinds of situation now that we are better informed.

Madam Chairperson, in the interest of further protecting local content, I find the penalty provided to be too low. It is only $10,000; insurance business is one that involves a lot of money. Two thousand currency points is Shs40 million and at the current rate that is about $10,000. This kind of penalty charged to a company which has come to deprive our people, I think it is too low. It should be revised to at least 5,000 currency points, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not be complacent. In which country do you just walk in and start doing business, how? You cannot even rent a building. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. You maintained clause 33 (2) of the original Bill. You had proposed an amendment but you brought it back again yet it is just the same. 

In clause 33 (6), the provision on offences, gives penalties in terms of currency points and a sentence for a number of years. However, the committee has removed that part of sentencing and only maintained the monetary fines. What was the rationale of removing punishment by imprisonment? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about upgrading the currency points? Hon. Syda Bbumba proposed that you enhance the currency points. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the currency points being raised as proposed by hon. Syda Bbumba. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why have you removed the imprisonment? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this law is not only aimed at prohibiting people from doing business, it is also aimed at creating an environment, where people can easily do business. Therefore, if someone has been fined and has paid that fine, we feel that such a person should be let free to continue with his business engagements. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you know what he will have done? You are now thinking that the offence will be so light that a fine is enough. Therefore, honourable members - 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I ask that we stay the imprisonment element because the purpose of having the currency fine is to deter the culprits. If we just begin putting 5,000 currency points; that could be lose change and it will not deter the culprit. 

I think what we are trying to do is to put a clear check system that states that every action will have a consequence. They will not just play around with that. In that way, they will be aware of their freedom and choose their actions but certainly in Uganda, they will not have the same freedom to choose the consequences of their actions. This is basically what we are trying to do. Therefore, I request that we have both co-currently - the currency and the imprisonment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Syda, did you want the 5,000 currency points to be in clauses 6 and 7?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted the raised currency points to be under clause 6. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that where there is 1,000? 

MS BBUMBA: No, it is where there is 2,000. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean 120? Is it where there is 120? 

MS BBUMBA: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, should we make it 5,000? 

MS BBUMBA: Yes, 5000 currency points. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, you know dubious people in this world will try to use that as a way to do what they want. When you look at 5,000 currency points is less than 50 million and 50 million to them is not money. 

My opinion in this case would be that we put 20,000 currency points so that somebody knows that when they make a mistake, they are in danger. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How much is that? Is it $ 40,000? You are contravening the Act. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, whereas we appreciate the proposals moved by members, I would pray that we keep them within the confidence range. The reason this Bill came to the committee was that we needed more time to study and understand it further. 

Therefore, if somebody comes with a proposal that is completely far away from what the committee thinks is reasonable, I would think that we be given time to first understand and study it better so as to assess the implications. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to defer it? 

MR MUSASIZI: No, Madam Chairperson, we can still move on. Hon. Syda Bbumba had brought a very good proposal. As a committee, we have no problem with it and I beg that the House passes it. 

MR OTIENO: Chairperson, the purpose of this law is to deter people from going overboard. In this country, most of the people that smuggle drugs use our country as a transit route because we have got a relaxed law. They know that once you are caught, you are only fined some little money and they have this money. That is why they keep using us as a transit route. 

Madam Chairperson, people are looking at the oil industry, which has a lot of money. Most of the insurance companies, especially the reinsurance business, would want to avoid paying our dues here. I am even surprised that we are proposing to remove the corporation tax because it is a very lucrative business. You saw what happened with these cases that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has been handling; it is going to be a similar case. You are going to have companies coming here aware that the oil industry is a very lucrative insurance business and our local companies here do not have the capacity and so they are going to engage in reinsurance business. 

Madam Chairperson, I would support the proposals that one; we retain the option of imprisonment. Then two, we raise that fine from the proposed 5,000 currency points to at least 10,000 because 10,000 currency points is very little money for this kind of business we are talking about.  In the oil industry, that money is very little. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this provision states that someone who purports to carry on insurance business, re-insurance or businesses as HMO are in contravention of this Act. So, you might swindle people for about a year and you will definitely get the money. You can swindle them for a whole year and people will not know that you are a thief. But after you will be fined only Shs 200 million after you have probably collected billions from Ugandans?

Hon. Okot Ogong has also reminded me and I think hon. Chris should remember that, when we were doing a charity walk for the acid victims, the police told us that the penalties are so small that people pay fines and nothing happens. The police also told us that the penalties are not serious. When they are arrested, the people go with their fines, pay and go back. You probably want to study the quantum. Let us stand over it and look at the quantum.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I beg that we stand over this clause for the committee to find time to study it further and report back.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but let us not play with our rights. Clause 33 has been stood over.

Clause 34

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34 – 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 34(1)(a) by deleting the words “insurers” appearing in the last line, and substituting with the words “licensed insurers.”

The justification is for it to comply with ICP4 that requires all insurers to be licensed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when the Clerk came here, she told me that hon. Beatrice Anywar got involved in a serious accident. I have asked her to contact the Inspector General of Police to see whether they can send a helicopter to bring her to Kampala.

MR KATUSABE: I may need your guidance, Madam Speaker. I have been following the proceedings. We are concentrating a lot of powers in the minister yet the minister in this case is just an individual.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? Is that Clause 35? The Chairperson has not even moved clause 35.

MR KATUSABE: Okay, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 35 as follows:
    i) In the headnote, by deleting the words, “health insurance organisations and”.
    ii) In sub-clause (1), by deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following: “(1) A person proposing to carry on business as a health membership organisation shall apply to the authority, in a prescribed form, for a license, which application shall be considered by the authority.”
    iii) In sub-clause (2), by (a) deleting the words “health insurance organisations and”; (b) inserting the words, “licensed and.”

The justification is to remove mandatory obligation being placed on the authority to grant a license to applicants. 
The re-drafted sub-clause (1) gives the authority the mandate to consider the applications before granting a license.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification on the difference, in the headnote, between “health insurance organization” and “health membership organisation”. I have looked at the interpretation, there is health membership organisation but health insurance organisation is not there.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, the honourable member is asking for the difference between “health insurance organisation” and a “health membership organisation”. The difference here is that, the health membership organisation will be the one charged with the responsibility of underwriting risks related to health. However, I beg for more time to consult on the health insurance organisation, Madam Chair

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, we stand over clause 35; let us go to clause 36.

Clause 36

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like you to guide me. We have these insurance companies – I think I should not even call them insurance companies - that insure these other common vehicles, third party insurances and they are everywhere even at petrol stations. Vehicles pay Shs 30,000 and others pay Shs 70,000 and others Shs 120,000. It is within that range. 

However, when someone gets involved in an accident, those companies can never help them in any way. I thought that the reason why we go for insurance is to get protected. Now, if such companies cannot assist our people, why do we give them capacity to keep operating yet at the end of the day, we do not see what they have done for us? Isn’t it good for us to scrap them? We need an insurance company with which we sign a contract and get assurance that in case of an accident, such a company will come in and help out.

Otherwise, I have seen our people suffering because the traffic is using these insurance companies very seriously to be bribed, to put people in prison, to make people stay on the road for the whole day and other scenarios of that kind. Sometimes the police are also very tricky in that area.

Madam Chair, may be you can help me understand it or if you can allow me, I request that we add some section may be to remove that kind of insurance business, which cannot help in case of problems.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that kind of insurance is under the Traffic and Road Safety Act? It is under a different law; the motor vehicle insurance is under a different law.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, motor vehicle insurance or – no, this is different. Let me be specific. Third party insurance is first of all a product, which insurance companies sell. 

However, the laws of Uganda require that every vehicle must have a third party insurance. This insurance does not seek to protect the owner of the vehicle but the third party or the passenger, in case that an eventuality occurs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what hon. Karungi is saying is that third party is not protected, notwithstanding the payments of that money, the third party has no protection. When people try to claim it, they don’t get anything.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister is in a better position to respond to that.

MR BAHATI: As the Chairperson has said, if you buy a third party from an insurance company, in case of any accident, you are supposed to go to the insurer and make a claim. I do not think there is an insurance company, which can refuse a claim which is genuine. I don’t know whether this is an issue of awareness or refusal by insurers to pay. I do not think so.

Madam Chairperson, I can maybe get more information from my sister from Kanungu District to understand what she really means because if you get – (Interruption)

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to get a clarification. A few years ago, while driving my personal car with a passenger, we got a small problem. The passenger went to the insurance company to ask for some compensation but he was ignored. 

My other challenge is that different insurance companies charge different prices at different stations. When you go to Shell, you pay a different price from that of Caltex but for same vehicle. My question is: does it really serve the purpose? Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: This issue of third party insurance - what happens is that once an accident occurs, you do not just go to the insurance company. You must first go to the police, get a police report and use it to get your claim.

Therefore, it could happen that once the accident happened, somebody went without following the right procedure. As an individual, I have benefited from that when I got an accident. I went to the police and asked how I could best be helped. They wrote a report and a letter, which I took to these insurance and that is the procedure to be followed. 

MS KARUNGI: Madam Chairperson, I think the colleague did not exactly understand what I meant. There are companies just selling to us third party insurance services and other insurance companies where we sign. For instance, one time when we were going to Kyankwanzi, hon. Ajaa got an accident - his insurance could be like the one of hon. Onzima, which does not require the Shs 30,000 or Shs 70,000.

I mean the one where you just meet on the way and which police considers by the way. The one you are talking about; maybe you had made a good agreement with them like hon. Ajaa had done so they compensated him.

Madam Chairperson, I have also ever got an accident and when I tried following up, the insurance company never helped me. But also I have many testimonies from many people including Members to the effect that those third party insurances bought from petrol stations, and which the police always consider very much, are not helping our people. 

I would like to move that we create a section to say that such kind of insurance services where somebody does not make an agreement with the insurers should be removed. You can imagine somebody having a business but because he has not insured his vehicle of only Shs 40,000, he stays on the road for the whole day and everything fails.

Sometimes people have problems that will make them fail to raise even Shs 90,000 to renew their insurance but that can cause them to sit at home for a whole week. 
So, I think it would be good if we included a section to remove all those kind of insurance services where the insured do not sign any kind of agreement with the insurance company upon which they can help them in case of an accident. Thank you.

MR SENGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I request that the minister presents us with a report detailing the performance of this third party insurance scheme because we have been paying money over the years but we do not know where this money goes. (Applause) We have not seen people that have benefited from such money. 

Therefore, I would like to move that the minister gives us a report on the performance of this scheme over the last five years or even ten because people have been paying and nothing has happened. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is true that in some cases third parties have low limits; in other words, when one gets involved into an accident, how much they can compensate them including the issues that have been raised by hon. Karungi.

The dilemma here is that what we are discussing here is under a different law. It falls under the Motor Insurance 3rd Party Risks, 1988. 

Since this law is being reviewed for amendment, it would be appropriate that all those amendments that Members would want to suggest are really handled during that amendment process. Otherwise, if we mix it with this one yet we have not studied it, it can confuse us. 
I pledge that that amendment can first be fast-tracked and brought to the House so that those concerns are addressed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sengo, you know we are at committee stage so I think when we resume the House, at a convenient session, you can move a motion formally to get an account of the performance of the third party. It is important; we have been paying for a long time; we need to know if it is working or not. 

So, hon. Karungi, your proposal will have to wait for the amendment but we can discuss it when his motion comes. We can discuss the performance of third party insurance while waiting for the amendment.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I just need some simple clarification because if you read this amendment -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clarification on what?

MR ABALA: That is 35 (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have stood over it. We are not discussing it. We are on 36. I put the question that clause 36 -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 36 as follows: (i), by deleting sub clause (1) and substituting it with the following: “A licensed insurer and a HMO shall have and maintain paid-up capital of not less than the amount prescribed in the regulations.” (ii), by deleting sub clause (2). (iii), in sub clause (3) by deleting the words, “directs otherwise” and substituting them with the words, “otherwise approves in writing.” And (iv), by deleting sub clause (4).

The justification is that the details of the requirements to be paid in relation to the capital requirements of the insurance companies should be provided for in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know from the minister, the rationale for the amount?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we are providing that we shift the ceiling in the amounts or the specification because overtime these amounts keep changing and we would not want to come back to Parliament every now and then seeking for amendments when such changes happen.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so you can change in the regulations.

MR OGUZU: I would like to propose that we amend it in such a way that they can bring the new tariff structure to Parliament probably before it is operationalised because there can be a chance that an overzealous person may just set up outrageous amounts and operationalizes them.

If there was a mechanism through which you could lay it in Parliament for us to have an input before it becomes operational, I would buy such a proposal.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and thank you, honourable member for the concern. However, to guard against that concern - I am made to understand that all regulations are approved by Cabinet and that provides a safeguard. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This Bill is going to serve as a tool when it becomes an Act. There is what we call investment confidence, especially for multi-national companies that may want to explore business prospects in Uganda. 

Some of these are the things that they will be paying particular attention to and at this point in time, I would propose that we do not just make an open space as far as the money is concerned. As a result, I propose that we stay the figures in a, b, c and d but also for instilling confidence in prospective investors, we triple it. No one is going to stake their monies in a country that has an environment that could be prone to manipulation; and because of what you have just said that the regulation might result from Government that does not deter us to put a standard figure upon which the regulation would stand. Thank you.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the proposal by the chairperson because absolute amounts are subject to variations according to the time value of money. And that will require them to come back to this House very so often to raise or lower the amount.

Madam Chair, that goes with sub clause (4) where they have provided for five per cent of the profit to be paid up capital of the insurer to facilitate capital-based growth. I have a problem with this because if inflation is higher than five per cent, this will not be able to promote capital-based growth.

So, in sub clause (4) I would like to propose that we put a mark-up on the prevailing inflation rates such that the amounts do not go below during inflation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think I also agree that we should not fix the sum. You know under the Penal Code Act the fine for adultery is still Shs 600; it has never changed. It must have been imposed like 30 years ago. (Laughter) 

So, honourable members, the question is that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we proceed, in the gallery we have a delegation from St Augustine Community Programme from Wisconsin in the USA. We have Dr Daniel Johnson, James Kirk, Jeremiah Rene, Patrick Stallman and Jonathan Kirk. 

They support women groups and scholarship in Zombo and Nebbi districts and they are here courtesy of hon. Carter Anywarach of Padyere. You are welcome. (Applause)

Clause 37

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend it by deleting the words “financial institutions” in sub clause (1) and substituting them with the words “a commercial bank approved by the authority.”

The justification is to be more specific and ensure accounts are opened in class A banks. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 37 be amended as proposed -

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we have had banks collapsing every other day. Crane Bank had won awards so many times and nobody expected it to collapse. 

I am a bit uncomfortable if we just use the phrase, “with a commercial bank” because what protection do we have against the collapsing banks? There is some discomfort which I would like to be cured before – personally I feel uncomfortable with this clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Syda Bbumba, what do you propose?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would be comfortable if these deposits were guaranteed by the central bank such that even if the bank collapses, they will be able to get 100 per cent to meet customers’ claims. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Here it says, “a commercial bank approved by the authority” but she wants the central bank to recommend the bank. Is that so?

Minister, what do you say about this? If they are going to open an account, they have to agree to it. Isn’t it? Can we stand over it?

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to encourage the House to adopt hon. Syda Bbumba’s proposal that we substitute the phrase, “a commercial bank” with the phrase, “Bank of Uganda or the central bank” because it is the chief regulator.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, I think you are trying to address 37 (3) on the deposits. Isn’t it? Because it is the authority which must decide whether to invest in government securities or any other.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, thank you for your analysis. However, I think she helped us to get the background where she was coming from, that certainly we cannot just place this in the hands of a commercial bank. Given the global economic trend, we are not in a position as a House to determine which bank will collapse tomorrow. I think her proposal is basically supposed to give a prescription to this Clause 37(1)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, if I may read verbally, Clause 37(1) reads: “Every insurer shall hold an account maintained by the insurer with a financial institution of a sum equal to 10 per cent of the paid up capital of the insurer.”

In our view, a “financial institution” can mean a “commercial bank”. Basically what this one is providing for is a commercial bank. However, we thought of being more specific by using the word “commercial bank” instead of “financial institution”.

In addition, the worries which hon, Syda Bbumba has can be protected under sub-clause (3) which reads that, “The deposits made under sub-section (1) shall be invested by the insurer in the government securities or any other investments as may be approved by the authority”.

Madam Chairperson, I do not see anything wrong with Parliament adopting our proposal. After all, it is just seeking to make the provision clearer. It is not substantially changing much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can an insurer hold an account in the central bank? It has to be a commercial bank.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the proposed amendment is chronically misleading. The position in Clause 37, as it is in the Bill, is more convincing and does away with the fear that people have in commercial banks. When you talk about financial institutions, we passed a law here where we talked about Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions with even big capacities to hold deposits. 

Let us take Wazalendo of the army, for example. If the army started insurance services and they become an insurer, we don’t have to limit that they hold 10 per cent of their paid-up capital yet they are a Tier 4 institution and very powerful. In other words, to lock us to commercial banks is more disastrous. The position as it is here is –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Honourable member, are you saying that it is safer for depositors to put their money in a SACCO than a commercial bank?

MR ANYWARACH: If you use Uganda’s situation where we are almost in economic recession, it is more dangerous to trust the commercial banks. If I am with a SACCO, I am part and parcel of the SACCO. I would probably be holding shares with them as well as being part of everyday management decisions. I can be in charge of internal or insider lending like they said management was doing at Crane Bank. We can stop it before it is too late since I am a member.

That said and done, what I would love to say is that if we leave it as “financial institutions”, the greater includes the lesser. This means that if by the decision of probably the board of the insurers, members would even want their accounts to be held at the Uganda Development Bank, so be it. Why are we locking it to commercial banks?

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is another problem. Honourable chairperson of the committee, your proposal is that it should be approved by the authority. As a result, if I am an insurer and I want to open an account in Equity Bank, the authority may say “No, don’t go to Equity Bank. Go to dfcu”. That is what you are proposing here. If they don’t approve, what happens? Do you still go to Equity?

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think we should avoid the two extremes. When we are legislating today, we shouldn’t put the current economic trend and say that what happened to Crane Bank yesterday is what will happen 10 years to come. The law we are creating is a law that will be for this country for even much longer. 

Therefore, I would not agree with somebody who says we should put a demand that they open an account in the central bank neither will I agree to leave it open to every financial institution. I will, therefore, support the chairperson of the committee that they should open accounts in commercial banks.

Madam Chairperson, when we leave it open to financial institutions, even my SACCO down there will be open to do that. Therefore, I would like to suggest that we support the committee chairperson and his proposal that we maintain this to commercial banks. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My question is, do I need approval of the authority to open that account? That is what we are proposing here.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Chairperson, the word “financial institution” is more generic and includes my SACCO in the village. To be particular and specific, I think “commercial bank” will be verified by the authority and will take the advice to the insurer so that they also take part. In addition when we consider the “financial institution”, we shall be leaving it to various institutions which are even weak. 

It is the central bank which will be responsible for controlling the quality of commercial banks. “Financial institution” is more generic and weaker than “commercial bank”. I would propose that we go by the proposal of “commercial bank” and that the authority is to control and be part and parcel of the decision made about that bank that will ensure the 10 per cent of the people’s premiums. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 38

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, just to update you, hon. Anywar will be flown to Kampala tomorrow. She is now in Gulu and the Secretary-General is in touch with her. They will bring her in the morning by air from Gulu. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 38, we propose to amend as follows:
    (i) By inserting the words “or HMO”, immediately after the word “insurer” wherever it appears.
    (ii) In sub-clause (1), by deleting the words “in the following priority” and substituting with the word “solely”.
    (iii) In sub-clause (1)(b), by deleting the words “with any remedial measures or enforcement powers exercised by the authority in relation to the insurer”. 
    (iv)  By deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “A security deposit -
    (a) shall be dealt with in accordance with the written directions of the authority; and 
    (b)  shall not be released except with the written permission of the authority.

Justification; HMOs are also required to make security deposit and provide clarity to the clause by drafting sub-clause (2) better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal for Clause 38. The question is that Clause 38 be amended as proposed. What is very wide?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I think the justification that he has given for (iv) that is on (2), which talks of an insurer that holds a security deposit – he is proposing that we should delete the whole of Clause 38(2) and substitute it with the following: “A security deposit….” Is it fully deleted because it is not very clear? In the Bill it says, “An insurer that holds the security deposit shall deal with the funds deposited”. 

Madam Chairperson, in legislative drafting, you say a deposit shall be dealt with like this. If it is not dealt with, then who is held accountable? You must first put someone who is going to be held accountable. In the original Bill, the wording is “An insurer that holds the security deposit shall deal with the fund”. When we put it generally as you have proposed: “Shall be dealt with in accordance with the written directions of the authority”. It is not dealt with in accordance with written directives of the authority which is accountable. It becomes vague in legislative drafting. Actually, the terminology as it is in the original Bill is clearer –(Interjection)– It should remain as it is. That is what I am struggling to say.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, this 38(1)(a), I think they were setting up – if you have $100,000, the first priority  is to pay the insurance bill and if there is any balance, then you can go to (2). But when you say “solely” - I do not know whether to just pay the insurance claims because this is presenting a hierarchy of what you should satisfy in (1)(a). It is giving a hierarchy that first of all, if there is a deposit, pay the insurance claims and if there is any balance, then you can do the cost associated with it and all other things.  When you say “solely”, it means insurance claims.

MR BAHATI: I agree with you that the original formulation of the clause was better than this one because “solely” is very confusing – (Interjection) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we revert to the old position?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, if I may recall where we picked this from; in the Companies Act, there is a provision of how claims are settled in the event that the company collapses while insurance claims do not fall under the priority creditors. Our proposal is seeking to make insurance claims one of the priority claims to be settled in the event of loss.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the order of precedence for this? Are you justifying the original formulation that the insurance claims takes precedence over the others?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, that is what we – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is what the old law is saying.

MR MUSASIZI: Okay, if that is what the old law is saying, then I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you are better off retaining the old one because it sets the hierarchy. What you pay first and what you pay next. 

MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am A member of the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Committee, but I feel that this Bill is very fundamental to the operations of businesses in Uganda and the insurance industry that is very crucial to the sparing of the economy.

Madam Chairperson, there are many activities this afternoon and that is why Members of Parliament are not in the House. Some of them travelled to bury the husband of one of our colleague. Would it not be procedurally correct to defer this Bill to a date when at least we have reasonable numbers of Members in the House? I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me invite the minister to move for resumption of the House. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered part of the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2016”, up to clause 37 and stood over clauses 2, 25, 28, 33 and 35. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, apparently, while we were busy there were teachers and pupils of Nyiize Primary School in Kangulumira, Kayunga District represented by hon. Baseke and hon. Nantaba. However, I was not told but let us have it for the record that the children came here to observe the proceedings.

Now, I would like to remind the Government that by the 15 March 2017, you are required to have presented all your policy statements. Therefore, please do the needful. Otherwise, House adjourned to Tuesday, 7 March 2017 at 2.00p.m. 

(House rose at 6.11p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 March 2017 at 2.00p.m.) 

