Wednesday, 5 March 2014

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want to begin by apologising for our failure to sit yesterday and to inform you members that contrary to the rumour-mongering which I heard on the radio, I was in my office, lawfully carrying out my work the whole day. I was disabled from convening the sitting because of the absence of the members of the Cabinet. On yesterday’s Order Paper, we were expecting a statement from the Minister for Works, the Minister for Public Service, the Minister for Gender and the Ministry of Education was due to answer questions. 

On the remaining business from the Committee on Local Government, the report was not properly signed and so, actually, there was no business. So, that is what I wanted to tell you as to why we did not sit.

Secondly, I want to request the Leader of Government Business to hasten the presentation of names of members of the Standing Committees in case you have made changes because again, our work is stagnating because some committees are in transition and others are not. So, it is making our work a bit difficult. So, I would want to appeal to you to do the needful as quickly as possible. I thank you very much.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Tourism? Absent?

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 14(10)(C)

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition to present your proposals to the House?

3.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a list of the Chairpersons and Vice-Chairpersons of the Standing Committees and I have a list of memberships nominated to the various Standing Committees. 

The normal practice would have been for the Government side to present the list but since things have changed, I will just be too happy to –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. I want you to present your side and wait. We shall take your – I just want you to inform the House about what you have done for now.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much. I have been ready since two weeks ago. The first Standing Committee is that of Government Assurance and the Chairperson is hon. Kassiano Wadri, deputised by hon. Isaiah Ssasaga –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, Members do not seem to be very comfortable with some of the names that I am reading. I am reading in Luo and not in English. (Laughter) 

The second committee is the Public Accounts Committee. The Chairperson is hon. Alaso and deputised by hon. Mwiru Paul. The third committee is that Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. The Chairperson is hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda deputised by hon. Florence Namayanja. The fourth committee is that of Local Government Accountability Committee and the Chairperson is hon. Winnie Kiiza deputised by hon. Maxwell Akora. (Applause)

The Parliamentary Pension Fund is going to be represented by hon. Roland Mugume and the Parliamentary Commission will be represented by hon. Reagan Okumu.

The ambassadors to international organisations are as follows:

The Pan-African Parliament is going to be represented by hon. Elijah Okupa. The International Parliamentary Union (IPU) will be represented by hon. Franca Akello. The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) will be represented by hon. Yokasi Bihande Bwambale and the African Caribbean Pacific and the European Parlaiment Joint Parliamentary Assembly will be represented by hon. Christine Abia.

Madam Speaker, that is the leadership of the various Standing Committees and the Ambassadors to the international organisations. I now turn to the members who have been sent to the various committees. I start – 

THE SPEAKER: No, those you can leave. We shall do them when they are being co-opted. We wanted to hear the leaders.

MRS OGWAL: Okay. Otherwise, if you want the names, I am ready. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So, Clerk note those changes and when the Government side and the Independents bring theirs, we shall then take a vote. The next item.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.15
MR WAIRA MAGYEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister – because with information technology now, guarding money by only physical security is not enough. That is why you find that in Bank of Uganda, there is a lot of physical security around but with money growing legs.

So, what I want to know from the Leader of Government Business is: is there a policy in information security as far as IT is concerned; as far as Governments funds are concerned – 

THE SPEAKER: What question are you asking?

MR MAJEGERE: It is a question – is the same question –

THE SPEAKER: No, please be clear. What is the question?

MR MAJEGERE: The question is –

THE SPEAKER: You are talking about guards; you are talking about IT.

MR MAJEGERE: The question is: do we have an information security policy as far as IT is concerned –(Interjections)– No, that is why I had wanted to give a background for the Prime Minister to get –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do not abuse this opportunity. No preamble, just ask the question.

MR MAJEGERE: Okay, the question is: do we have a policy on information security as far as IT is concerned?  I thank you.

3.16
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, yes we do.

3.17
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, KAYUNGA): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question is about the grabbing of prime Government land, particularly agricultural research land.

THE SPEAKER: No, that question was asked last week.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, it was raised last week but, Madam Speaker, I was not happy with the response and I have since come up with more facts on this matter, particularly on the land at Namulonge, under Minute 13/2013 A – the Uganda Land Commission made an offer of 1,000 acres to Methods, Foods and Livestock Africa Ltd, to establish a large scale tomato production and tomato paste processing plant.

The processing of the land title is at the field survey stage. But now would the Prime Minister help us to reverse this process because this is very vital land for the agricultural sector? The agricultural sector cannot survive without the work performed by NARO.

Two, is about the land pertaining to Kawanda Research Station. This land has been re-entered by a land owner who subsequently sold it to a housing estate developer. This developer in an attempt to gain vacant occupancy slashed down many experimental crop fields of the research station conducted by Kawanda Scientists.

And this re-entry occurred because the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries did not pay ground rent for the land owner for over 50 years. These are facts from a very undisputable source.

Mukono District Farm Institute, where my father went to study agriculture just like I have been doing – this land has also been re-entered by the land owner upon the Ministry of Agriculture defaulting on rent payment for 50 years.

Madam Speaker, the question to the Prime Minister is: with all this overwhelming evidence, I want to know whether he is aware and if so, what action is being taken or should we say it is a policy of Government to sell off this prime land?

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a long and detailed question for which I require time to get details about the issue at hand. I will, therefore, undertake to come back to Parliament – either myself or the minister responsible for land – to give a comprehensive response. Thank you.

3.21
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For over 12 months now, about three quarters of my constituency has been devastated by draught resulting into massive immigrations and displacement of people. I would like to know the programmes or plans Government has to provide some relief to these suffering people.

3.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, most of Uganda has been affected by draught including Isingiro South. We have been praying – (Laughter) – that the rains come and with these prayers, we are beginning to see signs of the rains coming. We definitely have our warning systems in place and when we detect that a situation needs response, we will adequately respond to it. Thank you.

MR ABIA BAKO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. For the last 10 years, the Ministry of Agriculture has had a sub sector budget for water and production. And what the honourable member from Isingiro is asking is a very serious matter; other factors constant, if in this country it does not rain for two years but when the Prime Minister and I are praying, what will be the fate for this country?

What the honourable member is raising is a very important matter. So, is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order to just simplify this matter into prayers when for the last 10 years, there has been provision for water and production in the Budget of Government of Uganda where he works as the Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: You should raise a formal question to the Minister of Agriculture.

3.24
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is: is the Prime Minister of Uganda about to be arrested due to internal power struggle hence causing insecurity in Uganda? (Laughter) Secondly, is he aware that Kitgum District has had the lowest results of only 50 first grades and what is the Government doing to reverse this? Thank you. Can I repeat the question, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You know the way you have asked that question, I do not know whether one can answer it. Yes, hon. Winnie Kiiza.

3.25
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you may be aware, on 1st May last year, the people of Kesese woke up to a terrible moment the Rwenzori Mountains poured a lot of water and caused floods to the population of Kasese District.

I take this moment once again to thank Parliament of Uganda, the Members who came in handy with interventions and the individual organisations that came in to help the situation.

Madam Speaker, in the process, the Government of Uganda committed itself to a number of interventions. The floods left the area devastated, bridges broke down and Kilembe Mines Hospital was in a sorry state like I mentioned here. The rainy season is beginning and I must tell this House that it is frightening the lives of the people-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether you have not yet understood Prime Minister’s question time. You are not supposed to be submitting. Ask the Prime Minister, why has the government not yet honoured its pledge to Kasese? Finished. But now, you are going round. Hon. Members, we have bought you IPads. Use them to watch Prime Minister’s question time every Wednesday in the House of Commons. Maybe, you will learn.

MS KIIZA: To the Prime Minister. Government committed itself to de-silting River Nyamwamba so that when the rains start, they do not wash away properties and the hospital once again. What is Government doing to arrest the situation?

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, indeed, Government intervened, minor repairs were done immediately, relief was provided and we have been doing a lot of work since then. Of the three bridges that were destroyed, two have already been repaired and we are about to start the repair of the third and last bridge.

The pace of our work is determined by resource availability but we are totally committed to attending to that situation that occurred in Kasese and we hope that when the rains come again, they will find us better prepared this time. Thank you.

3.28
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2010, Government asked ex-combatants or war veterans to fill forms and open bank accounts. Those in my district did so and since 2010, at least from my district, I know of about five people who have been paid of the thousands that filled the forms and who have since had their bank accounts closed. When is Government going to roll out the payment for war veterans, Madam Speaker? 

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, it is true that the Ministry of Defence asked the war veterans to register and open bank accounts. What the ministry received was a flood of –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. This is Prime Minister’s question time and I had asked a specific question to the Prime Minister on whether he is going to be arrested hence causing insecurity in this country and he has not answered. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order not to answer my question and proceed to answer other questions? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is still here until 4 o’clock.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was saying that yes, we received very many applications and so, we had to go through the exercise of verification, which took very long. I am happy to say that the verification was completed, the list submitted and actually, payments had started but because the number is so huge, the actual figure is now - I do not know the current figure because the update has been going on. I would ask those who have not been reached in terms of payment to please be patient, you will be reached.

Of course, there was a question of those who fought in the First World War and in the Second World War. As I have had occasion to state in this Parliament in the last 20 years, this category had been catered for by the government responsible for them. What we tried to do was to find some ex-gratia payment for them as well. All these payments add up to colossal sums, which obviously this Parliament has not appropriated as you know we do not have it. We will pay as we go along. Thank you.

3.32
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that there is no recruitment function that can be done for Government ministries and institutions due to the absence of the Public Service Commission? The contract for its members expired in November last year. What has caused the delay for that, Mr Prime Minister?

3.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, it is true that the Public Service Commission is not staffed because their term came to an end but the President has submitted names to Parliament for approval so as soon as Parliament approves - Oh, I am advised that  Parliament did make a comment and it went back to the President; so the President should then be submitting them as soon as he is ready. Thank you.

3.34
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About seven years ago, the Uganda Government ratified the United Nations Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. Later on with the MPs representing people with disabilities, a Bill was drafted to enable Uganda to comply with the provisions of the convention on the rights of people with disability. We came to this august House to introduce a private Member’s Bill. This House granted us leave – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you move closer to the microphone?

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, as we were speaking- certificates of financial implications- the Executive took over management of the Bill, promising that the Bill would be coming at the end of 2011. Now, it is four years down the road and the Bill has never come to this House. 

Now, my question is, why has the Executive refused to bring this Bill? Secondly, when is the Executive bringing this Bill? Our people are eagerly waiting for it. 

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): This Act my brother is referring to is going through the normal process of enactment; the drafting has been done. Cabinet considered it some weeks ago; there were some amendments that were made and actually, today, Cabinet finalised those provisions that we had asked the draftsman to look at. So, it is being handled. Thank you.

3.37
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. How does Government plan to conduct successful and peaceful census without resolving internal border disputes? 

3.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): My honourable friend most probably means the internal border dispute between Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan – 

MS AURU: Let me repeat; my question is about internal border disputes. How does Government plan to conduct successful census without resolving the internal border issues?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I was worried about the internal boundary because that would be a real obstacle. But yes, we have some internal boundary disputes, which, as you know, we have set up teams that are doing this – teams of professional people; surveyors and other concerned people and we hope that this will be resolved. 

But I do not expect this to affect the counting of Ugandans because all these are within Uganda. You do not need a visa to cross a border. So, I do not expect this to hamper that exercise. 

3.39
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question I would wish to ask the Prime Minister is, What is the status of the development of the stretch of land that once comprised of Naguru – Nakawa Housing Estate? 

3.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): That project was launched by the President. The master-plan has been approved and I expect the construction to begin soon. 

3.41
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister aware that the rule of law and order has broken down? Those of us who watch Bukedde TV on a programme called “Agataliko Nfuufu”, we see how citizens are handled in the presence of police. A case in point is last week in Mubende. There is a gentleman who was arrested with his wife and he was caned. We know that corporal punishment was abolished in this country. But he was caned with his wives. 

I am surprised that even women activists did not care about this. So, is the Prime Minister aware of this? We watch these things on TV and the police sees it and they do nothing. 

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I am not aware that the rule of law has broken down in Uganda. I am aware of the opposite. But I am aware that we have experienced a number of bleaches of the law. When you talk about the rule of law, it is the whole system. That is not the same as saying there are acts of criminality; for example, when people act in violation of the law. Yes, that has been happening and it is a serious concern of Government and we have been looking at the way we can best handle it. 

As you know, the security infrastructure or the policing we had for a long time was meant for a much smaller population than we have because we had the lowest – I do not know whether they called that highest – our ratio of police officer to population. Ours was one of the highest – one for tens of thousands. That is when we had only 12,000 officers in the force. But now, we have been recruiting. We recently carried out a massive recruitment and we think we are getting adequate numbers to enforce the rule of law. 

I would like to use this opportunity to assure the public that we are determined to do everything possible to make the state enforce the law; protect everyone who lives in Uganda. There is no doubt about that. 

3.44
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is on record that last year, the Rt hon. Prime Minister made a promise before this House to rescue Ssembule Steel Mills from sale by public auction; and they did so on three consecutive occasions. Ssembule has been sold as I speak right now at a price of Shs 5 billion, far from its asset cover of Shs 20 billion. 

Why did the Prime Minister make empty promises before the 40 year old, steel manufacturing company that has been employing over 300 people and has kept the image of industrial production in Uganda stable for many years? Is it too late for this Government to rescue Sembule? If it can rescue the likes of Basajjabalaba why can’t it rescue that industrial network?

3.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, my friend and colleague, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, is right that I did state in this House that we would look at the possibility of rescuing Sembule Steel Mills. The reason was – because as you know this Government would like to encourage the growth of internal capacity. And Sembule Steel Mills, belonging to Ugandans offered an opportunity for us to build a home-based capacity in building industries. I have discussed this with the President and the Minister of Finance and officials. I have also discussed it with the proprietors of Sembule many times. 

I would like to inform this House that Government had actually intervened before; Government had spent – I do not remember the figures but it was something like $5 million to rescue them. Now, they needed many millions of dollars to rescue them again and it was not possible – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister should speak from facts; the company we are talking about required only Shs 7 billion to be rescued from turmoil. What is he talking about?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I can crosscheck the facts. But now, I have to choose which of the facts are true; those from hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi or the owners? I will have to make that distinction and see where to go.

This case has been difficult because the matter was already in court – court had made a decision on it. And the only way we could rescue was not by pledging or anything of the kind; it needed raising actual cash, which we did not have at hand. So, it is not for lack of desire to help our local entrepreneurs – but you see, that company unfortunately has undergone many misfortunes; the partners were brothers but one died; and they have had a lot of problems of losing lots of money because some employees stole billions of shillings. So, it is a very problematic situation; I have the greatest sympathy for them and if we could help we would have helped. But unfortunately, as Government, we do not have the money to help and there was no way we could have acted against a court order. So, we still hope we can help. 

I last talked to Mr Sembuya about two weeks ago and he was supposed to give me some information so that I can call the Minister of Finance and others to discuss it and I am still waiting. Thank you.

3.50
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know why then 500 Police cadets recruited and appointed in 2010 have not been confirmed up to now and when is the government going to confirm them. Thank you.

3.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Now, these individuals were recruited and trained and they were passed out. So, they are properly enrolled in the Uganda Police Force. The confirmation is a process that the authorities in the Police go through. So, my expectation is that this confirmation will come as soon as the process has been completed. Thank you.

3.52
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is: How far has Government gone in the process of rolling out the Land Fund to safeguard innocent squatters from possible eviction by their landlords? Thank you. 

3.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, of course, as you all know, it is Government policy – as a matter of fact, it is law – requiring Government to set up a Land Fund to handle the many issues that we try to correct in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution and the enactment of the Land Act.

We have been trying to build this Land Fund – most of these land issues are actually historical; they go back to colonial times. And the President of Uganda did present to the government of the United Kingdom – Her Majesty’s Government – a proposition that since what we now have is what we inherited from them, could they contribute to this Land Fund so that we can have a win-win situation. This is because in trying to correct a historical wrong, we decided not to create a wrong ourselves. 

Hence a win-win situation, where people who have title – they own land by holding title – and people who actually till the land and they are the original occupiers of that land will have a situation where you have a win-win situation – where the nontitle holder is paid and the settlers are given certificates. So, I hope that we will move reasonably fast so that this land is fully in place do what it is intended to do. Thank you.

3.55
MR KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, media reports indicate that a loan of Shs 90 billion from the World Bank to the Government of Uganda has been terminated. And that this may have negative impacts especially in the Ministry of Health where some contracts have already been signed. What is your comment on this?

3.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Ssekitoleko, it is not true that the – first of all, it is not Shs 90 billion but $90 million. This was money to top up what we had got from the World Bank for a project to build and repair hospitals and health care centres. And because the previous loan had been processed going through the normal procedures, normally this top up would not have been subjected to the same procedure and so, we expected this money to flow. 

Now, the World Bank has apparently decided that they will go through the process mainly to evaluate the import of the Anti-Homosexuality Act and what they are asking is whether these hospitals that they are building will treat homosexuals or not – things like that. So, they have not terminated but only postponed the withdrawal of the money. 

So, our intention is obviously to continue consulting with them to see whether those – by the way, there are specific countries that have objections and there are others that do not. So, we will engage them to see how to handle this one and my expectation is that this money will come. 

But should it not come, we have already entered some contracts to build some of these hospitals. We are determined through the readjustment of the budget – reprioritisation to continue with this project to make sure that health care is available to our people. I thank you.

3.58
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to tell Ugandans and this House as to whether he is aware that Government has lost over Shs 40 billion in compensating the purported landowners who are encroaching on the road reserve of the Mbarara-Kabale Road and if so, why have they delayed to take action?

3.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am not aware that we have lost Shs 40 billion and because even if we had compensated people, it does not tantamount to a loss –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But he is still on the Floor. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, we have had a problem, Madam Speaker, as you know, of people building in road reserves. The clear case is Entebbe Road where we have had to compensate people many times. 

We need to make a strict law like in other countries so that if you build on a road reserve, it is an offence. But in Uganda, the practice has been that when people are even on the road, then we compensate them, especially these days and in my view, misinterpretation of Article 26. That is what has been going on and we need to settle or straighten it out by legislation. I hope that it will come with legislation soon to do that. I thank you.

4.01
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the country is losing a lot of money, year in, year out in construction. You have heard of the district shoddy works, you have heard of theaters, which never worked and the Government is now spending money to demolish them.

Just last week, in the report on the OPM and Northern Uganda reconstruction, you heard challenges where everybody has become a builder. I do not know Prime Minister but would you want to re-introduce the department that used to be in Ministry of Works and Housing in charge of inspection and monitoring all Government construction so that not every ministry, department and agency stands alone in construction so that there is some semblance of central supervision and procurement so that the Government and this country stops losing money and we also have standards in construction and value-for-money in this sector?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister.

4.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, the policy of Government is that construction of Government buildings is the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and that has not changed. 

There has been, I think a deviation especially relating to special projects and this is something we obviously are looking at to see how we can once again streamline the construction of Government buildings to ensure that they conform to the well-known Government building standards. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that concludes Prime Minister’s Question Time. Please, join me in welcoming district councilors and heads of departments from Katakwi District represented by hon. Alupo, hon. Alengot and hon. Eriaku. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, earlier on, I forgot to inform you that our colleague, hon. Amongi lost her mother. She will be buried tomorrow. I invite you to stand up for one minute of silence in honour of Mrs Phoebe Agnes Ongom. 

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY, 8 MARCH 2014

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR (GENDER) (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, 8th March of every year is designated by the United Nations as the International Women’s’ Day. Member states have commemorated this day since 1975, which was International Women’s Year.

In Uganda, the International Women’s Day is gazzeted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at both the national and local government levels.

The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by Government to the goals of gender equality and the empowerment of women. Gender equality is upheld by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which guarantees the equality of all citizens irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, faith and ability without discrimination.

On this day, Government takes stock of the achievements towards improving the lives of women and girls and also reflects on the progress and achievements made by women. It also celebrates acts of courage and termination by women who have played extraordinary roles in the empowerment process of the women of Uganda.

We also remember that women’s struggle will be won by democratic means organised and led by women but with the support of men. The day is further used by both the Central and local governments to take stock of the contributions made towards the empowerment of women and what more needs to be done to accelerate the empowerment process.

Hon. Members, over the years the day has been celebrated under the guidance of given themes selected by the United Nations. The United Nations International Women’s Day theme for 2014 is “Inspiring change.” Inspiring change encourages advocacy for women needs advancement in all spheres of development.

The theme calls for women’s vigilance, inspiring positive change in research, development, campaign, corporate responsibility initiatives, a role for both men and women advocating for change in women’s lives.

Hon. Members, this year round, the theme selected by Uganda is in partnership with men and boys for the empowerment of women and girls in Uganda. This theme recognises that the empowerment of women enables them to build their capacity to make choices and have their voices in decisions that affect their lives and participate effectively in public dialogues and decision making at different levels to determine the future of their families and nation at large.

The national theme further recognises women’s contributions in the social, economic and political spheres and the importance of partnership with all stakeholders towards achieving full and potential empowerment of women and girls for equitable and sustainable development.
In addition, the theme draws the attention of all development actors in Government, the civil society and the private sector to review and re-examine the extent to which their respective policies and programmes have responded to the needs of women and girls.

Also the national theme for this year emphasises the importance of men and women working together as partners for gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in all aspects and calls for male involvement and partnership to provide support to women and girls for the effective participation in the socio-economic development process for sustainable transformation.

Hon. Members, as we celebrate this year’s International Women’s Day, I wish to note that with the 2015 target date for the achievement of the eight Millennium Development Goals, fast approaching and stock-taking of the challenges and achievements of their implementation for Ugandan women and girls is paramount importance.

An analysis of Uganda’s implementation of the MDGs from a gender perspective reveals that although the proportion of people living below has dropped, the number living below poverty has not changed significantly and the inequality of incomes has worsened.
Uganda experiences poverty with most women employed as peasant agriculture and subsistence workers are in informal employment and other primary caretakers. Although there is relative gender parity in the primary school enrollment, there is a high dropout rate for girls especially in upper primary classes. Girls’ completion and performance is affected by socio-cultural factors such as teenage pregnancy, early marriages and domestic cores.

20 women still die daily due to pregnancy-related complications. 44 percent of them are young mothers aged 15 to 24 years only. The current maternal mortality ratio is 438 per 100,000 live births, which is far above the MDG target of 131: 100,000 live births. The prevalence of HIV for women is 8 percent compared to 6 percent for men.

Hon. Members, it is within this context that the national theme for this year calls for partnership of men and boys for the empowerment of women and girls to work as a team together and address, among others, the above issues of concern that still impact on women’s lives.

As we prepare to this year’s International Women’s Day event where H.E, the President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to officiate. Let us all direct our effort towards enabling men’s involvement programmes and campaigns including building capacity and raising awareness about gender equality and the empowerment of women for socio-economic transformation.

In conclusion, the day is usually preceded by the women’s week 1 to 7 March during, which various actors engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women.

In this regard all actors in the various sectors including district political leaders, women leaders, the civil society, government departments, the media and the private sector are expected to participate in the preparations to ensure this year’s International Women’s’ Day is memorable.

Therefore, I call upon you to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the International Women’s Day to be held in Kumi District at Ujini Secondary. I also call upon you to support constituencies to commemorate the day. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

4.13
MS NABILAH SEMAPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for bringing a statement especially now that we have just a few days to the celebration of the International Women’s Day.

The UN declares an annual theme and this theme means something to all the women in Uganda. Last year’s theme was: “Time for action to violence against women.” This year’s theme is: “Inspiring change and involving men and boys in empowering women.”

In 2012, the theme was about empowering rural women to end hunger and poverty.

Now, can the minister reassure the women of Uganda that the impact of the themes selected on women’s days are not just mere words but action follows the International Women’s Day? Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. You are aware that the women Members of Parliament had tabled here the complaint on what happens in their various constituencies when they are celebrating the Women’s Day. We raised this matter both in the previous Parliament and at the beginning of this current Parliament.

The problem we have as we celebrate women’s day, which is internationally celebrated - in Uganda and in my constituency, it has become a political activity where the ruling party takes it upon themselves to do the politicking but two, there is still a pending problem of who could be the guest of honour during these women celebrations in view of the fact that we have women representatives in each district. 

At these functions, we have ended up struggling on who should be the guest of honour. Could the minister come up and clarify on this? In the constituency where women Members of Parliament are concerned and we are celebrating the achievements of women internationally, who should be the guest of honour? I thank you.

4.16
MRS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender for this opportunity for Kumi District to be one of those districts that are hosting. Hon. Members, Kumi District is where I am born and it is indeed a pleasure for me to welcome you, with the team that is in Kumi District, on that day. 

I just wanted to raise an issue of concern. Hon. Members, I am a Member of Parliament National, so, I have leverage and interest everywhere in the country. My interest here is the fact that we are organising- Like I informed you, I come from that district and this theme is very important. I am an activist of women’s empowerment and I appreciate that this theme has come from very far and by the time we have it as a national theme, it means that we do acknowledge the role that men play in terms of advancement of women empowerment.

What is on the ground is quite different. The national organising committee charged with this duty of organising this very important international day does not seem to reflect this national theme. This is because the people that are being identified to participate in the various activities are mainly women. 

We are concerned about this because we have men who want to come and participate to show their solidarity. We have youth who are out there organising and they want to welcome everybody and show solidarity with women on this day. 

I want to give the minister information that regarding your team at the district and here at the centre, coordination is lacking. We would like you to take note and ensure that men and women participate on this day because it is very important for all of us. Thank you very much.

4.18
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Gender for bringing this statement to Parliament. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for ensuring that this Women’s Day is celebrated every year and rotationally so that people from different parts of Uganda can benefit from these celebrations and women can learn some things.

I am happy that the women of Uganda have come a long way. We have improved in terms of political representation; we have many Members of Parliament down to the local government. Economically, women are doing business. I am even hearing comments that women are more involved in business than men and women are now catering for their families. That is a big achievement because of women emancipation.

Madam Speaker, this theme of partnership with men and boys to empower women and girls is real. As women have advanced so far, we have one hindering factor. We live together in partnership with men but because of gender and let us say cultural beliefs, men believe they must decide on behalf of women. So, when it comes to decision-making for some women to go to work, the men must decide.

Also in terms of resources at home, the man must decide. In terms of land, even if we are the ones producing, you find that the men are the ones deciding whether to use the land or not. So, if we really sensitise the men and work together, definitely, we shall realise our empowerment.

Quite often, women can raise funds but if the man is the sole decision maker of how the money will be used at home, the woman will never develop because first of all, she is not benefitting from what she has got and also, what she has cannot change and she will not be encouraged to grow or participate.

So, we urge the men and boys to work together with us. If you take gender violence, especially sexual violence, this is mainly by men. Men believe it is their right to have sex with a woman they have married any time, so, if they are sensitised to know that there is a certain time when the woman is not willing, the men may understand and that way, all will live in harmony.

So, it is very important that our men are sensitised and understand the problems of women so that we move together. Madam Speaker, I urge all men and women to come and join together at the national venue. If you are not able to come, you will be able to celebrate at your district. Welcome to International Women’s Day. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us use three minutes each.

4.22
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. minister for that presentation. We are ready to support the women on this International Women’s Day. My concern is that most of the men in this country have abandoned their responsibilities when it comes to caring about their women, homes and families, excluding men in Parliament maybe.

This is a big concern. Women have been abandoned and left alone miserably in their homes to feed and pay school fees for their children. Men, where are you? You are moving around adding on sugar mummies. This is very bad. As we celebrate this International Women’s Day, it should remind us of our responsibilities. Take care of only one wife and pay the school fees and the rest. It becomes bad to make these women look like animals. They are totally abandoned and unloved. Why do you go on looking for them if you cannot take care of them?

I call upon the minister and this government. You are now involved in sports betting, wasting all the money there instead of caring for your women. You are watching European football; you are coming late at home and not fulfilling your conjugal rights. This is very bad.

So, hon. minister, as we celebrate, let us unite and resurrect this solidarity of taking care of our women, paying for their children’s fees and the rest of it. This is my concern, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Reverend.

4.24
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to equally thank the minister for the statement and I want to wish both the women and men of Uganda nice celebrations come 8th of this month.

This morning, when I was coming to the House, I picked my invitation to attend the celebrations in Kumi. However, I found another invitation in my office inviting me to attend the same celebrations in Hoima. My mind was at cross roads. I wish to attend that celebration in Kumi as a Member of Parliament where I should participate and represent my constituency. But at the same time, I want to be with my voters because they had also invited me. So, I found myself in a situation sending me to go to where my bosses will be while causing me to neglect the national duty on the other hand. 

I want to propose, Madam Speaker, that in future, we think about the national celebration days. The line ministries propose to different districts to celebrate on different days from the national days. Most of my colleagues here are in the same situation. 

Having said that, I come from a background of leadership of youths, which moves with women councils. There are a number of challenges regarding resource mobilisation especially when it comes to running days like this. 

I want to get it from the minister; what arrangement have you put in place, or do you plan to put in place to assist the districts to celebrate these days? 

I ask this because while I was still the youth chairman of Hoima, I used to share office with the woman chairperson of Hoima. Often, we would move up and down, harassing Members of Parliament – at that time, I was harassing Members of Parliament, now I am being harassed because I am now seen as a source of money for such days. We would move up and down to companies – now that we have oil; we are turning these oil companies into semi Governments in that we think we should go to Tullow –(Member timed out_)

4.28
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity on behalf of my district to thank the minister for the report she has given us. In most cases, we celebrate these functions without any information from ministers. But this is good that you have provided beforehand. 

My concern goes to the team; first of all, I appreciate – most cases we say, when you want to send messages of women emancipation or that of girls, we talk to girls instead of involving men and boys. These boys are the ones who cause havoc to the women and girls. 

For example, impregnating women; who does it; the boys and men? If it is about spreading HIV/AIDS; who does it; the men and the boys. So, it is very important that we involve the men. (Interjections) 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I am perplexed because the honourable member is giving very wrong insinuation that actually, it is the boys and men who spread HIV/AIDS as if HIV/AIDS is only a preserve of boys and men. Is the honourable member in order to give a wrong picture that at the time when Ugandan men and boys are respecting the rights of women and making sure that women are empowered; is she in order to give such a wrong picture that women and girls are free from HIV?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not established the statistics of who infects the other more. So I cannot rule on that one. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you for the guidance and wise ruling. Unless there is a homosexual here, everyone has a partner who is of the opposite sex. So, I am talking in that line. So, in that sense, the men share their women with girls and then HIV is spread. 

The other issue is, we are going to celebrate in Kumi, but when a national function is taken upcountry, the city remains yearning for such functions. I wonder if there is any arrangement to do something similar in the city when functions are taken upcountry so that we can have a big impact felt in the city. If there is none, then there is a gap that the women of this city fail to get anywhere to celebrate from unless you make a special arrangement. The woman Member of Parliament cannot handle a whole city like Kampala. 

4.31
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are all aware that women have been struggling on their own to advocate for women empowerment. When the ministry considers this theme of partnership, I am very happy about it because I know that if men and boys join us, then we shall achieve what we want. 

We are all aware that women have struggled a lot and they have been side-lined. When we talk about women empowerment, our partners the men have been saying, “No wonder, it is women”. But now, I am happy that they are coming on board to help us advocate for women empowerment. 

Madam Speaker, in some cases, women have done so well advocating for our empowerment. But you find a situation that at times men shy away and come down. This is the time for us to save the situation, which I fore saw  that in years to come, men will no longer be men –(Laughter)– why; we were soon going to advocate for men empowerment because women have become so aggressive; we have been advocating for our empowerment and men have been put below us. So, this is the time that we come to equality. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.34
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable minister for her brief and I want to say that women’s contribution towards the national economy and human life is really immeasurable. I also want to say that certainly we want to use the Women’s Day in both the districts and the national venues, first of all to recognise the contribution of women and appreciate them, but also to use them as opportunities to educate the women-and men-folk on the issues you have mentioned, hon. Minister.
The only problem is that many districts cannot afford, like the former chairman of Hoima said, to take women to the national venue. Like now, we have it in Kumi, in Kalungu, we have organised to take some women on a bus but what about the others? Many other districts have not done this. And yet again, we are going to organise a district function, which is very expensive to some of these small districts.

I want to suggest that we can budget Shs 5 million per district every year; Shs 600,000 is not really much considering the importance of our women. So, I would like to suggest that we have some money for this function – it is once a year. And it would be more appropriate and more organised than leaving it “to whom it may concern”.

4.34
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for coming up with this statement and for continuously bringing us issues concerning women in the country. Like my colleague has said – actually, that is one of the issues that was touching me – that when it comes to celebrating women’s functions in a district, it becomes a burden of women Members of Parliament. And given the fact that districts do not have enough revenue, they just appropriate like Shs 1 million or Shs 500,000, depending on the finances they have. And being the only day that women celebrate in a year, they expect celebrations to take place.

So, like hon. Ssempijja has suggested, we would like Government to come up with a budget through the Ministry of Gender, to support women Members of Parliament to ensure that this celebration actually takes place in the districts.

Madam Speaker, you have noticed that in this statement, the minister is talking about feminised poverty, which has continued to surround and the 430 per 1000 women that continue to die – this is disgusting and it is something we would not want to see.

You are aware that Ministry of Gender is one of the important sectors in uplifting the standards of women. Through the little money they have been given, transformation among women has been achieved. So, in order to address the feminised poverty that is surrounding women, we need a special fund – increase funding – for that specific sector so that our women can come up. We know that a majority of women are in the informal sector and this is a neglected sector. And yet the informal sector contributes to national development in terms of taxes because those women are taxed yet little is given back to them. Can we have more funding for the women so that this business of women being poor now and then is reduced?

And by the way, if this feminised poverty was eliminated, maybe we would not be seeing many women dying while giving birth; they would be capable of supporting themselves; they would be capable of going to see the doctors and attending antenatal sessions.

The theme itself is very good, “…in partnership with men”. We want to call upon the Members of Parliament, especially men that support us when we are celebrating the Women’s Day; do not leave it to women. This is because – you can see women applauding this – they bear the burden of transporting women to different venues and giving them everything. Please, support us.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue that the women Members of Parliament were complaining about through our UWOPA office – getting the chief guest. This is a Women’s Day and in most cases, they want the women themselves to stand up and talk about the issues of women. But we have very few women ministers and I understand that they cannot run up and down. 

Can we request the women minister available that when the women Members of Parliament approach you – they are tired of seeing our faces at the district and so they want new faces? And you cannot call your fellow MP to officiate a national function. Can you, please, avail yourselves to the women members of Parliament so that this day becomes more meaningful to the people we represent. Thank you.

4.41
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe that the best way to empower a woman politically is by allowing her to have a wide number of political choices. I am saying this because I remember that one day in Mpigi, where the national celebrations for the Women’s Day was taking place, some women were arrested for wearing blue and green colours, instead of yellow. In fact, somebody was arguing that the colour was offensive to the President.

Since then some women do not attend the national celebration because they fear. This is because they have preferences for different colours. And as we speak now, we have women leagues – there is DP Women’s League, identified by a green colour; those in FDC identified by blue and I wonder if the NRM Women’s League identified by a different colour is also in existence.

We would like to get an assurance from the minister that this time, women wearing blue, green, orange or yellow or red will not be arrested for attending their own day in Kumi. Thank you.

4.43
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always wonder whether women in this country have anything to celebrate on this day. The minister has just given a very disturbing statistic of 20 women dying every day; that translates to 7,300 women who will for sure die this year. 

Therefore, I wonder whether this should be turned into a celebration or mourning. This is because I imagine that on such a day it would be a call on Government to say, “What is the action point?” We have moved from 16 to 20 – the next time we shall be slipping into 30. And so, what is there to celebrate? 

Madam Speaker, under your able leadership, this House passed legislation against female genital mutilation but we still get reports that young girls are being taken to Kenya for this practice; where is the implementation of this law? And, therefore, do we sit as a country to celebrate that these are massive achievements that are on paper? Let alone the fact that as we sit here, the women of Kamuli are calling you for financial aid. What is the actual implication women empowerment in this country? It is a call to duty on the minister; not only to sit in that ministry when things are grossly going wrong. You have ably stated that poverty in this country is taking the female domain. Now, what are the action points? Instead of people sitting in those ministries, saying, “I am the gender officer here looking at issues of distribution of resources.” These resources have not even been translated in your own ministry that has the most expansive sub-sector.  And so, do you sit there and celebrate or you actually mourn?

Madam Speaker, that actually brings me to the issue of women who are actually on the political frontline. You realise that the councilors either in Arua, Kamuli or wherever in this country – specifically the female councillors, they are representing two or more sub-counties and therefore, that is never even translated on the pay slip. 

So, what kind of empowerment is this that we are going to celebrate? Is it just a ritual that every 8th of some day and some month, we will gather as women and say we were given this kind of empowerment by a certain Government and therefore, we celebrate on paper when in actual sense, nothing is happening to transform the lives of women. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to call on the minister to take the platform on this day when you are inviting His Excellency the President to highlight some of these issues to him because we can no longer sit there and glamorously wear our clothing and say you know what, “Thank you.” What is the thank you for if you have 7,300 burials; if you have the school dropout rates? It is your responsibility, Madam Minister, that when you take that platform, you will re-echo to the President that the dropout rates in this country cannot be going on the way they are because in this House – probably in the Seventh Parliament, there was a call on duty by the Minister for Finance to waive taxes on sanitary towels –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes, please.

4.47
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to associate myself with this statement and the statement previously made and particularly, that one of hon. Bakaluba Mukasa.

If at all I was to organise this function, I would have invited you, Madam Speaker – you happen to be a woman of character and a woman who is distinguished as a leader in this country and you happen to sit in a neutral position where you have Members of Parliament on the Opposition and those of the Government sitting side by side and discussing – if at all, I was to organise this function, I would have invited you as a Guest of Honour to come and celebrate the womanliness of the women in Uganda. 

Now, because you are not going to preside over as the Guest of Honour, it is going to be very difficult for many people on this side to be associated with such an event simply because previously, they have been ostracised. So, in another event to come, let us even consider that kind of neutrality so that when women are celebrating, they are celebrating the woman, which is a very great virtue that God has given you. You must celebrate it.

Madam Speaker, we can celebrate the fact that we have, as Uganda, passed the 30 per cent of inclusiveness in decision making processes where women have reached. At least, it is 30 per cent and this is greater than many other countries in the world. But that it is quite important that we realise even 50:50 per cent. And for me, the party I come from, the Democratic Party, we think that this is going to be just a starting point and we are working towards 50:50 participation between women and men on the political scene.

Therefore, it is not yet Uhuru or celebration because we need to do more to ensure that our women participate on the 50:50 per cent inclusivity. 

The other thing that we must celebrate is the strategic importance of education. I remember that we had problems as boys when we were competing with girls to join the university level when the girls were given 1.5 points extra. This was a bone of contention but it has done a great job because we have seen many more women graduates coming onto the scene and taking decisions. We need to celebrate that as well because we have done a great job to ensure that women participate even in education, especially higher education.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I am worried that as we are continuing to focus our development on women and not focusing on the family, men are going out of activity and leaving these women to take over the role of looking after the family, the young ones, the sick, going for burials, attending to church and so on. The women are sweating with hard labour as men are receding - (Member timed out­_)

4.50
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to associate with the statement given by the minister in partnership with men and boys for the empowerment of women and girls in Uganda. This is an important day in the lives of our women, mothers and sisters. But what is happening on the ground leaves a lot to be desired from the NRM Government of today.

As I speak now, in Arua and particularly, West Nile, out of every 100 children who enroll in P.1, only three or five complete the primary cycle and you can ask yourself what happens to the over 95 who enrolled along the way.

In Arua where we have no stable source of energy, for any woman who has any complication with giving birth, the chances of survival or remaining alive are half.

Madam Speaker, the women in the West Nile region are still carrying the burden of looking after families; from paying school fees, feeding and even dressing the men. To me, this is a serious day, which I am sure the people of Kumi are yearning to celebrate but also with mixed feelings. 

I have a proposal; that we should just not celebrate these international days for the sake of celebrating them. For a district like Kumi to host such a day, there should be a physical landmark or feature that should be left behind either in form of a modern hospital where women can receive health services or a school but at least something that these women will remember the Government for that on the 8th of March, there was International Women’s Day celebrations in this district. I thank you very much – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka. Time up. (Laughter) What is happening?

4.54
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to commend the ministry for the theme of this year that is, “…in partnership with men and boys to empower women and girls” We should add, “for socio-economic development and transformation.”

Life is full of challenges but we choose to focus on the positive and we must celebrate life on a daily basis. St Paul, while writing to the Thessalonians in his First Letter in Chapter 5:16-18 says, “Be joyful always; pray continually; give thanks in all circumstances because this is God’s Will for you.”

So, although some of my colleagues think that we should not be celebrating because we still have challenges in life, we must focus on the positives. And the world has achieved milestones in the area of empowering women. So, there is a lot to celebrate about.

Madam Speaker, the minister recognises that we still have the challenge of high levels of poverty and that these levels are not going down and we still have feminisation of poverty. So, it is very important that we mobilise every individual in Uganda – men and women, boys and girls to work towards the further empowerment of women. This is because we recognise the fact that women form the majority of the population. Of course, we now talk about the youth but among those youth there are also women. So, it is very important that they are empowered.

We must not lose the sight of why the world undertook the struggle to empower women. We must also not lose the sight of the fact that when you empower the women, you will have empowered the nation because their role in nurturing and their role in socio-economic development and transformation. That is why we must work together with the women; that the men support their wives and encourage them to carry out economic activities for uplifting the standards of the homes because that is the firm foundation for national development that we look out for.

We know that when a woman gets involved in raising income in a home, indeed, the standard of that home will go up. She will know how to look after herself and the children, which will take the standard of the higher.

So, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the women of Uganda and all Ugandans and all the women in the world upon this occasion of celebrating yet another International Women’s Day. We should hold our heads high because we have achieved a lot. Yes, the struggle continues but we are equal to the task.

4.58
MS GRACE BYARUGABA ISINGOMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to express my appreciation to the minister for the presentation she has made. I also appreciate the theme for the day.

But on a lighter note, Madam Speaker, yes we are calling upon the men and boys to partner in empowering women, but I want to raise an issue relating to entertainment for that day. If you are talking about partnership, I would like to call upon the men and the boys to come up to entertain these women. (Applause) Yes and the reason I am raising this matter is that on the past occasions, I sometimes failed to enjoy the scenes because I saw miserable women in their poverty, but in the name of celebrating – but celebrating before these men who are rich with big tummies – really, that entertainment has not been comfortable for me.

How I wish some men could come out to dance in order to bring some life to these miserable poor women.
I was happy to hear that the minister recognises that Uganda experiences feminisation of poverty. But sometimes, some of our policies also tend to entrench this. If you look at the Youth Fund that was recently passed – why we did not think about the women fund, if we are aware of this feminisation of poverty?

Madam Speaker, we recently passed the Students Loan Scheme. However, when you look at the courses that are being recommended, for example, engineering or being doctors, you realise that some of the women cannot afford to access this student loan scheme because they cannot compete with men.

So, I do not know whether we can have an opportunity to have a way of favouring the women in terms of courses. We all know what courses our girls take up. We are not going to have a fair share of this student loan scheme.

But also, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to help us – during this commemoration – to give us information regarding the women councils. You know it is becoming very difficult for us to mobilise the women down there– (Member timed out_)

5.01
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for presenting this paper this afternoon. Further, I would like to congratulate the women and men of Uganda for the day we are about to celebrate, come 8 March.

However, I wish to draw the attention of the Ministry of Gender - and many of us in this Parliament know that gender does not only refer to women. It also refers to the male counterparts. So, when we talk about the Ministry of Gender, we should not only talk about women. This is one of the reasons our men have gone into the backyard; they left the women to come to the forefront.
 
So, may I ask the Minister of Gender to reorganise and re-evaluate the programmes that we have had in the past? Many of the meetings, programmes and empowerment opportunities were arranged for women. So, the men felt they had been ignored. 

As we talk about men not being productive and waiting for women to bring the bread in the home, women being the people to attend meetings at schools, when the men are doing work that is not productive, we need to evaluate the past achievements to see how we can bring men on board. It is a threat for our economic development. 

Many of us know the constituencies from where we come – many of our men are not interested in economic development. Many of the MPs here have said it. So, it is something we should plan for and see how to bring men on board.

Secondly, I would like to thank the government for creating opportunities for women empowerment in Uganda. It is not a mean achievement that we have a female Speaker of this Parliament. Many other parliaments have not been able to have one. So, this is a good opportunity that was created for us. However, we still demand for more. We shall always rise to the occasion to ensure we achieve more than we have now. However –(Member timed out­­_)

5.04
MS SARAH KAYAGI NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the voices of those who have thanked the minister for presenting this statement.

Despite the challenges we have gone through as women. It is right for us to celebrate the achievements that we have realised in this country. We have come from far and that calls for a celebration.

I want to take this opportunity to thank the men who tirelessly and continuously advocated for the rights of women. We are in this House – and you will agree with me that we have male Members of Parliament in this House who stood with women, to advocate for the rights of women. (Applause) I believe these men deserve to be encouraged and thanked so that we can win more men to come, support and advocate for the rights of women.

Madam Speaker, it is time for us to advocate for district budgets to celebrate Women’s Day. Let us not look at only women Members of Parliament being facilitated. Let us advocate for a budget to be allocated to all districts so that this day can be celebrated well. There are male Members of Parliament who have contributed towards these days so we should not only facilitate women MPs when it is Women’s Day and leave out the male MPs because some of them have been so supportive to us.

I know it is time that we utilised the theme we have got to encourage many men and boys to support the girls – (Member timed out_)

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TESO AFFAIRS (Ms Christine Amongin): Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for Gender for this statement and I would like to take the opportunity to join her in welcoming you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, to Kumi District. I am going to be your host. Kampala to Kumi is four hours and I would be grateful to also have your spouses come to Kumi.

Madam Speaker, the theme is very strategic because men and boys, girls and women are involved in this coming celebration. We need to grow as partners so that we are able to support our households in the development of this country.

As I have been going around Teso to mobilise women, the key thing has been “woman”. A woman is a woman; women in church, in politics, in business and even in our households. So, we need to stand together on this day without bringing violence and conflict as we celebrate the Women’s Day.

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that the last time elections for women councils were held was in 2002 and they are long overdue. We need to have an election to fill up the gap. 

On behalf of the people of Kumi, I want to thank Government for identifying Kumi because as things stand, it is another 111 years before this celebration comes back to Kumi as every year; it is another district that hosts. So, I am very grateful. My colleague hon. Amuriat and I are very grateful and with open hands we will be happy to see you. “Eyalama anyun.” Thank you.

5.09
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We cannot run away from commemorating Women’s Day as it is a very important day for all of us. I want to say that facilitation should not go to Members of Parliament but to the districts. Actually, women Members of Parliament are overburdened because first, you have to give financial contributions for district celebrations. Then, you have to see different groups, which come to you for transport and many other things. 

They focus mainly on women because it is Women’s Day. This day is not supposed to be for women only. It is supposed to be for discussing issues or unfinished agenda concerning women. We know that empowerment is very important and empowerment is about education. 

Sometime back, I went to Noro Memorial College and there, I found mostly boys. In S4, there was only one girl and that was last year. I asked one of the boys, “get up and tell me. Do you have sisters?” He told me he had four sisters. I asked, “Where are your sisters?” He said they had all gone to their homes. I asked which homes and what level they had reached. Some did not even reach P7. He told me they did not reach P7 because they were not supported by their brothers.

In Acholi, we have a very good culture. We cannot say that all aspects of culture are bad. Some aspects are very good, for example, where brothers have to support their sisters and they do so in very many ways. If education is very empowering, they should also try to encourage their sisters to move on with their education and not drop out in primary or secondary. They should move on and be encouraged. I talked to the boys and told them please, encourage your sisters to be in school and to try and finish the cycle of education. 

So, the theme for this year is right and fitting; that men and boys are our partners in empowerment and this empowerment should be all round: socially, economically and  politically. So, I support it very much.

I know that at district level, it is also a challenge to some of us women - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, before you answer, there is something I have wanted to ask you. You have been going to the CEDAW every four years to report about Uganda but you have never brought a report to this House. This has never happened in the life of this Parliament. We would like to know, when is the CEDAW report coming here because we are supposed to discuss it before you go to present it.

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Isanga Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the CEDAW report. We are supposed to go this year for the CEDAW meeting and right now, we are preparing to come and consult with you or inform you of the preparations of what is going to be presented in Geneva. We cannot come before we complete our draft. We need to come when we have issues where you will find gaps that Members can fill. So, we will be coming anytime but we are still preparing.

THE SPEAKER: That is a government assurance and Members have heard.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank Members for the support especially on the theme of this year’s International Women’s Day, “In partnership with men and boys to empower women and girls.” This is not mere talk like the hon. Shadow Minister was saying but it is the real talk. This can be observed from this Parliament where you see that the Members of Parliament who have been contributing about the theme are both men and women. They would have left it to the women alone.

As Government, we are trying our best to see that we emphasise mainstreaming gender because at the local government level, many had abandoned issues concerning mainstreaming gender. So, we are emphasising this to see that mainstreaming gender is done at the local level. 

Regarding legislation in budgeting, we want to see that mainstreaming gender is done at the local level and the legislation and budgeting should ensure that both men and women are involved. 

Then on coordination of this function, we want to have it done as a local and national – (Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the fact that your ministry has never presented any of those CEDAW reports. May I request at this point that even if we have spent many years, that you give us a background on the reports that have already been presented? Is that still possible or is it too late?

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you. We can bring the report but we did not have a slot where we could report from because we were doing this as Government but we did not have a slot at this level to come and report. But since you have requested for it, we shall bring the last report that we presented.
 
I was talking about the coordination of the national and local organising committees. They are supposed to involve the men and most of the people on these committee are men. So, if they are denying men the opportunity to participate, then that is not right. We need both men and women participating in these activities. 

On holding the function on the same day when other districts hold it - this is a public holiday. If we deny other people the opportunity to hold this function on that day, then they will be redundant because not everybody has means of reaching where the national function is held. Those people are at liberty to hold their function if they cannot come and participate at the national venue. 

So, we leave it open to those who can hold it in their areas. And as Government, we always encourage the other districts to officiate on the national day because we expect the ministers and Members of Parliament to be at the national function. That is why we said that those held on 8th March should be officiated by the RDCs. Then about the fund – (Interruption) 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, with due respect, we have had several women Members of Parliament complaining on the Floor that they struggle for the seat of Guest of Honour every time they are celebrating International Women’s Day. 

While we were debating the minister’s statement here, this same issue came up and we thought the minister had considered the cry of the Members, this being the only day on the calendar on which we recognise the achievements of women. We also bring out their challenges. So, it being the only day women can – 

THE SPEAKER: What is your point of order?

MR ATIKU: I find it perturbing for the minister to continue insisting that the RDCs who have been at the centre of this commotion on all the International Women’s Day Celebrations – this woman minister here is continuing to tell the country that RDCs will continue being the guests of honour on Women’s Day Celebrations. Won’t this put the lives of our Women Members of Parliament in danger? Is she in order to continue insisting on something that puts our Women Members of Parliament in danger?

THE SPEAKER: What I heard was that those who are celebrating on the same day – because they are expected to be in the main celebrations as MPs. So, if it is going on that very day, then their district is supposed to officiate because it is the national day. But let her explain. 

MS NAKADAMA: I said this is Government policy that on that day, if you are celebrating on the same day, then these people are the ones to officiate because we expect you, hon. Members, to be at the national function. 

Madam Speaker, talking about the budget for the national function - 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. On the national celebrations, the RDCs by nature of their appointment are equally national. Are you suggesting – I know this could have been discussed earlier but I thought it was in this House that it was proposed that when we have such national celebrations, the districts can push a little bit forward. Like in Tororo, my Woman MP, the minister did it on Sunday because we are all expected to be there. It is a political question for me not to be on the women’s day celebrations. Why would you have our backs open to our opponents when we are absent –(Laughter)– are you plotting against us?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that this matter had gotten settled in the last Parliament. I recall very well the same issues being raised on the Floor and the Prime Minister then told us that for Women’s Day Celebrations, if we cannot get a person higher in political hierarchy than the woman MP of that area, then the woman MP automatically would be the Chief Guest. That is what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, said on the Floor of this Parliament in an attempt to tame the chaos that the RDCs and other people had put the women of Uganda to.
 
Madam Speaker, you have heard the attempt to undress women MPs. This is a day we are celebrating the woman. What role-models are we going to present to the girls if we say, “You can be a woman and succeed like that man talking in front there”. That is distortion. Let me invite the honourable minister not to reopen a Pandora’s Box. 

Anyway, for me, my gender training tells me not to allow any man to be Guest of Honour on that day. Hon. Alupo knows that I do not allow it in Serere. I ask you to first prove that you are a woman. If not, you pack your bags aside and I preside over. For me, I handle them that way. 

But for the sake of my sisters who cannot put up a fight, let the honourable minister declare here so that we do not leave with confusion, that we the women MPs and the women ministers will preside as chief guests on that day. 

MS NAKADAMA: Hon. Members, now that we have this theme in partnership with men and boys. This is an International Women’s Day where we can invite the men to come and officiate so that those men who we are talking to and have neglected many of their responsibilities can come in and – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order, first of all aware that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued to this Parliament an order of protocol of who is who in the district to suggest that an RDC, who is No.30+ after the chairman LCV, should come and preside over Women’s Day, leaving her, the Minister and me, the Member of Parliament, who is about No.13; leaving the chairman LCV, who is about No.20? Is she in order to disregard the established policy of Government?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think this matter has to be resolved so that Members get their true status that they are comfortable in their constituencies and we end these skirmishes. So, if you are not sure, can we get a pronouncement tomorrow? This is because we need to resolve this matter.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, like I said earlier, this has been government policy; so, we are going to revise it so that we come up with something different so that Members can be chief guests in their constituencies.

THE SPEAKER: So, let us have that answer tomorrow; we ask the Leader of Government Business to come and make a pronouncement on this issue tomorrow because the Women’s Day is on Saturday.

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will now conclude because the question has been answered. We were talking about funding; local governments are supposed to budget for this day like any other national function. But our people at the local level always ignore this day. When they are budgeting, they can give the Independence Day Shs 3.0 million but when it comes to Women’s Day they give Shs 500,000. So it is just a matter of mainstreaming and emphasising that this is equally a national function like other days.

Secondly, as Members of Parliament, we can also advocate for this and either specify the amount of money to be put aside so that we can organise a successful Women’s Day because the money always set aside is very little. As Parliament, the ball is in our court.

We were talking about the city dwellers. We always rotate this day according to regions; if we are supposed to be in Central Uganda, we get a district willing to host the day. They write to us and they host it like any other region and in most cases, when we do not have the money to go upcountry, these days are celebrated in the capital city, in Kololo. So I do not think there is any way we have left the city dwellers out of the celebrations.

We are also working towards creating a fund for the women because like I told you, poverty is now feminised. This is because women have been left out of many of the programmes that have been taken down there. So, if we can come up with a fund like we have the Youth Fund, women can easily come out of this poverty. And since it is Parliament that appropriates, should it come, please support it.

Most of the things were observations; I thank the Members who supported, especially those who know that women had been left behind as men abandoned all their responsibilities. And this is the right time now to see to it that all the men are on board and can work together with the women. As a ministry, we advocate for working together; we are saying that women and men should plan together so that they can achieve together. But because men tend to ignore their responsibilities, they tend to abandon women alone. Thank you once again for your contributions and support. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe what the minister did not mention was the issue of the colour code on national days. In the Eighth Parliament, that matter was brought here and it was agreed that on national days we do not have colour codes; you wear everything else so that you do not inconvenience other members. That is why you will not see me in my party colours on national days. So, Members, feel free to go and attend; nobody will stop you. We took that decision in the Eighth Parliament that it is free dressing for national occasions. 

Now, to hon. Aporu, I hope we shall see some men actually in the parade in Kumi because if you see only women in the parade – I hope hon. Adolf Mwesige will bring some men from Toro – (Laughter)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, we shall see members of both gender, including people with disabilities. We have both men and women; boys and girls for purposes of balancing the theme. We have been working with the Ministry of Gender and the District Organising Committee and Members of Parliament are also going to march and so you will be fully represented on the ground.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, my ministry was requested to make a comprehensive statement on the payment of salaries to Government employees of Kisoro, Kabale, Mbarara University, Tororo and others. I wish to respond as follows: 

It should be noted that Government took a decision to implement a new Human Resource Management Information System known as the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) to strengthen accountability, in 2011. The system comprises of automated human resource management –(Interjection)– It is on your iPads.

THE SPEAKER: I understand that it is on your iPads; even hon. Mugume confirms.

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The system comprises of automated human resource management functions right from the recruitment function to the retirement function. However, a decision was taken to start the IPPS implementation with the payroll management function so as to address the challenges of wage shortfalls, ghost employees and consistent payroll data to inform decision-making. 

In this respect, the entire Government payroll is supposed to be managed on the IPPS. Consequently the payroll has been migrated from the old payroll system at the Uganda Computer Services (UCS), Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to the IPPS. 
 
The transition from the old payroll system to the new one has been characterized by challenges some of which have been pointed out by hon. Kwizera in his question such as the non-payment of health workers in Kisoro District, among others. I wish to respond to those concerns as follows: 

One, non-payment of salaries to staff in Kisoro, Kabale, Mbarara University and others for January 2014. January 2014 was the deadline for paying staff through the Legacy Payroll i.e. the old payroll system at the Uganda Computer Services - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

As a result, all records that were still on the old payroll system totaling to 23,430 of which 18,777 traditional staff in local governments, 4,289 in agencies/departments and 364 teachers had to be migrated to the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). Out of these, Kisoro had 123 records, Kabale 795 records, Mbarara University 467 records and records for other local governments are attached in the annex for details. 

The process of migration required verification hence it was not possible to complete it within the payroll processing timelines, so as to facilitate submission of the payroll to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the 24th and payment of salaries by 28 January, 2014. Those are the timelines we abide to every month. 

Accounting officers were accordingly notified that since the migration was not completed in time, the affected staff were to be paid their January 2014 salaries together with the salary of February 2014. A copy of the letter that advised accounting officers has also been attached as Annex II. 

January 2014 salaries for these staff have been paid with the February 2014 salaries except for the 4,494 records that were not successfully migrated. Of these, three records are for Kisoro and 23 for Kabale. I want to confirm that all 537 records for Mbarara University have been paid. The remaining records are being addressed with the respective accounting officers to facilitate payment of their salaries for the month of March 2014 including salary arrears. 

Payment for the months of November and December 2013 

Madam Speaker, in November 2013, some of the Government employees in the 18 votes indicated in the table below did not receive their salaries due to under provision of salary releases. 

My Ministry of Public Service made a request for supplementary salary releases and I have indicated the communication to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I also indicated below a summary of the payments for the 18 votes for the period November 2013 to February 2014. In that table, it indicates that in the month of November - where there is a dark shade - those salaries were for the districts of Busia, Kanungu, Kiboga, Kyenjojo and Bukomansimbi that were not paid in November.

But subsequently, the months of December, January and February have been paid. 

My ministry is preparing a request for reallocation and supplementary funding from the Ministry of Finance to facilitate clearance of outstanding payments highlighted in the above table particularly indicated as “Not Paid”.  

Madam Speaker, for December 2013, a total of 8,713 were not paid as a result of inconsistencies in the payment file format in which these records were. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reported that the error was rectified and 8,672 records were paid in January 2014. I want to clarify that when we say “a record”, we mean the individual officer in the pay schedule. However, within that 8713,41 records were recorded as invalid records because the accounts of those 41 were not sufficient enough to allow the payments go through. We have asked the accounting officers to ask the officers to give proper accounts to which the salaries will be submitted.

Underpayment of salary to health workers and other public officers is mainly attributed to: 

    i) Omission of lunch and health consolidated allowances while preparing schedules for migration of records from the old payroll system to the new. In the case of Kisoro, 154 cases are outstanding and have been submitted for payment of the missing allowances with effect from March 2014. The arrears will actually also be paid.

    ii) Another issue is placement of officers at wrong salary scales or salary levels arising out of either inconsistent payroll data and in some cases arising out of sheer errors.

    iii) Double Taxation of PAYE in December 2013. It was noted that PAYE/NSSF for some records was not being deducted yet they are not tax-exempt. Accordingly, the records were identified so that PAYE/NSSF is instituted on their payroll record. In this process, some records were wrongly included yet they already had PAYE/NSSF deductions leading to double deductions. 

All affected records were identified and all the PAYE/NSSF deductions stopped on the January 2014 payroll to facilitate recovery of the over deduction. The PAYE/NSSF will be reinstated in the month of March 2014 to facilitate resumption of normal deductions. 

Conclusion 

Madam Speaker, my ministry is committed to ensuring that there is a streamlined salary payment system that enables payment of salaries by the 28th of every month. In this regard, the following measures have been put into place:

    i) The months of March, April and May 2014 have been dedicated to resolving all salary payment and payroll errors that arose out of the migration process, including award of arrears in cases where the errors resulted into salary arrears.

    ii) Payroll management guidelines have been issued to payroll managers to inform them of the new processes, their roles and obligations.


    iii) Technical and functional support is being provided to all ministries, departments, agencies and local governments. The ministry is undertaking a continuous training of payroll managers. Recoveries have been instituted to identify cases of overpayment.

A preliminary payroll will continue to be provided on a monthly basis to all ministries, departments, agencies and local governments so that they can identify records for deletion and anomalies for rectification.

Madam Speaker, effective salary management is only attainable if there is a commitment from all the key players. The issue of integrity and professional ethics is very critical for this function. These two aspects must be handled and looked into. The need for continuous improvement, including process and system changes is imperative.

The transition into the new system has come with challenges. So, I call upon all the stakeholders to understand and support us as we endeavour to overcome these challenges. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the workers but only two minutes.

5.47
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Public Service for enlightening us on the issues relating to the anomalies that have been realised in the performance of her workers. It is very absurd to mention this but it is real. You find some civil servants transferred from one district to another and when they start to work in the new place their names are wiped off the payroll. They have tried to continue working patiently without pay but nothing comes soon. They have tried to raise these issues with the respective districts but still with nothing coming up. I found these complaints in Nakasongola District. 

In Hoima, I got this situation. Nurses are recruited but not provided with uniforms and so, they buy them by themselves but at the same time they are not on the payroll. They have never received a salary since they got recruited. So, I just don’t understand what is going on in the Ministry of Public of Service. Why are these things happening throughout the country? What is the problem?
I also would like to find out what efforts the ministry has put in place, much as she has just tried to elaborate what they are trying to do, to rectify this situation. Thank you.

5.49
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for presenting this report. Last week, I got an opportunity to carry out a ward round in the Eastern Region with some members. But while there, we got to know that many of the health workers have not been getting their salaries since December last year. When we tried to inquire from the Ministry of Finance and that of Health, we were told that the problem was with the Ministry of Public Service. They actually assured the Minister of State for Health, who was with us, that by 28th February, they would ensure all health workers get their salaries and arrears. However – 

THE SPEAKER: Which district was that?

MS NALUBEGA: We visited Buikwe, Tororo, Butaleja, Busoolwe and Tororo hospitals – Kawolo Hospital and some other health centre IVs in the Eastern Region. Throughout these, we got to realize that most of the health workers had not been getting their salaries for a long period. 

On Sunday, while at a function for health workers, they told me they had spent long without being paid salaries, but I told them their salaries were already in their accounts – (Member timed out_)

5.51
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the Members’ attention to page 2 of the statement made by the minister. It says that the Ministry of Public Service made a request for supplementary salary releases in a letter dated 18th December, which is referred to in here. But as we talk, the Ministry of Public Service is already asking for a supplementary for salaries. We are working towards paying off all civil servants because she has promised in that statement that by the end of May of this year, all civil servants on the payroll shall be fully paid off for their salaries, medical expenses and their lunch allowances. 

But my question is, how come, since a salary is a statutory charge, you always come back to ask for supplementaries to pay salaries of civil servants who are already known as being employed by the Government of Uganda, regardless of their positions as teachers, health workers and so on? How come somewhere along the way such workers’ salaries go missing prompting you to come back to Parliament for supplementary?

As we speak, there is a request before the committee for Shs 60 billion for the police because they say that somewhere between this and last year, 3,500 police officers have been recruited and trained. So, how does Public Service plan to employ? This is a big question because across the board, we always receive requests from different ministries ranging between Shs 200 to Shs 300 billion in form of supplementary for salaries, which must be the first charge on any account for a ministry, department or agency. How does this happen when we have a fully-fledged Ministry of Public Service responsible for the welfare of people employed by this government? And the numbers are known. For example, teachers are about 130,000, local government staff are also known, those – (Member timed out_)

5.53
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the explanation. However, I want to continue reporting that as of today, the situation in Kalangala is really appalling. By yesterday, almost half of the district staff had planned a sit-down strike because many of them have not been getting salaries for the last six months. And what has made things worse is the fact that these people were supposed to get hardship allowances but for a year now, this money has not been paid to them and you know how hard it is to work in areas like Kalangala.

I have been following this situation closely with the district administration and got to know that the CAO and his staff have been migrating data for the anomalies to occur at the Ministry of Public Service. So, what has happened is that you find people who were paid, for example, last month after sending the anomalies are not there the following month. So, you find another group missing. Then they continue collecting the data and you get more chaos. Hon. Minister, can you give a reason as to why all this is happening in your ministry?

Secondly, what happened to the hard-to-stay and hard-to-reach allowance? I just appealed to the workers in Kalangala because I talked to the minister yesterday and the other day and he promised that he was going to bring a comprehensive report but I am not satisfied with it. I appealed to them saying, please do not hold these strikes, I will give you a convincing answer but as I talk, I have not got a convincing answer to this situation. So, I do not know what to communicate to these people in Kalangala. Hon. Minister, can you please give more clarification about this matter?

5.56
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got only two concerns for the minister to answer. Normally when we have a shortage of employees either in schools, health centres or elsewhere, we are told that the Ministry of Public Service has not yet approved the recruitment and the ceiling. Later on when they are going to recruit, it is the Ministry of Public Service that approves. What I want the minister to clarify to this House is, why does it take a lot of time after the Public Service ministry has approved, for these people to access the payroll? Usually it is three to six months or even a whole year.

Secondly, some of these people that access the payroll soon get deleted and after deletion, they are told to pay some money to facilitate the computer to capture them. Of the few computers I have looked at, I have not seen a slot where you insert cash so that it is able to catch you. So, is the minister aware of this practice in the ministry and in case she is not aware, now that we have told her, what is she going to do next? Thank you very much.

5.57
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I want to appreciate the minister. I expected the minister to give us a comprehensive report because I am aware that this problem is not only in the districts that have been named but covers the whole country.

Just last week, the Committee on Education returned from a trip from the North of Uganda. We were looking at schools that received loans from ADB and the World Bank but we were surprised to find in one school called Abata SS, a head teacher who has taken two years and another one of his teachers one year without receiving salary. This poor man is continuing to teach because he feels that it is his destiny and he is looking after the future of the children of Acholi land. But two years without receiving salary - even as the minister is saying by April or whatever time this will be done, I am wondering whether you have undertaken a comprehensive census to know what is going on. How many people have gone without salary? How many people are getting less than they are supposed to get?

The other issue that we came across was people getting more money than they are supposed to get. In addition, the hard-to-reach areas allowance has not reached certain districts like Busia. Madam Speaker, there is a school where there is only one teacher present. The government constructed buildings but there is nobody teaching because it is considered a hard-to-reach area and yet teachers do not get their allowance so they have abandoned the school. However, some of them are still getting their salaries. I think the ministry has to undertake a comprehensive census to survey what is going on among the workers that fall under your ministry.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the minister is aware that this migration left out a lot of civil servants including teachers and health workers with some completely deleted from the payroll. Others get payslips stating a certain figure but when they go to the bank to check on their accounts, it is a totally different figure. One teacher tells me he has been getting Shs 14,000 for the last so many months.

I do not know what the ministry is doing and where this money is going because definitely, this money has gone through the budgeting process yet it does not reach the beneficiaries. Where does it go?

6.00
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By yesterday, health workers in Tororo from Mulanda Health Centre IV and Tororo main hospital were just holding on to get a confirmation from the hon. Minister of State for Primary Health Care. The minister was in Tororo recently and had assured them that they were going to be paid.

One of the civil servants there called Kaburu telephoned me 10 times today. He was at the bank with his ATM and he actually proposed that I should ask the minister, hon. Sarah Opendi to send each one of them Shs 200,000. Is this a plan from Government? This is the time that most workers are taking their children back to school. What do we expect from these people? They are handling the lives of the people that vote us into office and yet their matters of payment are just a nightmare.

Is Public Service still a public service? Is it still serving the public? Is it still in public interest that we should even have a Ministry of Public Service?

We are getting stressed and tired every day. There have been numerous reforms in this ministry. We hear about the payroll. If the payroll is so long, why can’t you make the payroll so short that it is manageable? Maybe we should get a better word for a “payroll” because with a computer, you can’t still call it a payroll. I do not see the roll. Are people planning to steal money? People who work must be paid. 

Concerning the teachers in Tororo, I have personally gone to the Ministry of Public Service. You find that they are not paid any money while others are paid Shs 18,000. One time, hon. Omach here intervened –(Member timed out_)

6.03
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report he has given but I just want the minister to give us a deliberate desk within the ministry that is basically supposed to work on errors and omissions in the payroll. This is because right now, no civil servant who has a problem with the payroll system or their salary can access the ministry and get their problem sorted out. It has now become the work of Members of Parliament to go to your ministry and see that the people from their districts are helped. This is a very big problem. Please tell us that within your ministry there is a desk of this nature. If you cannot have it within your ministry, let us have it some other place where we can all go and follow up to get these issues sorted out within this month.

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that there is a very big problem. Hon. Osegge was talking about teachers who have gone without salaries for years but there are even teachers whose salaries are being routed to other people. They know the names of the people getting their salaries but there is nobody in the ministry who can come out to solve such a problem. A primary teacher may get his or her salary but the same teacher is getting the salary of a secondary teacher as well and the person who is supposed to get this salary is suffering for years. These are problems, which are intentional and deliberate within the ministry and we are coming out with such scenarios because when we move out, we come across them and we need your ministry to help us. Those people cannot come because they also have people within who are beneficiaries of such errors and omissions and, therefore, they cannot sort it out so early. So, these are some of the problems and we would like to know how they can be sorted out.

There is a problem in my district, Busia. There is a school where I took Members of the Committee on Education, which has never had teachers. The school has eight teachers on the government payroll but these teachers come from Mpigi and other deeper parts of Buganda. They claimed that that part of Busia which is the furthest part of Busia District is a hard-to-reach area. It is true the members moved there; it has to be demarcated as a hard-to-reach area; there are no teachers in the schools. I told the members that these are some of the problems we presented to the ministry and there is nothing being done. 

We may have to request the minister to allow recruitment from around the locals to allow people from around the district who can offer services to their area other than posting people who are not willing to come and work there, and there is nobody doing a follow up on them. This is what I wanted to bring up because it touches on the performance of the schools. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Maganda, are you suggesting that there are buildings there and the children have stopped coming? Do they come? What happens when the children come?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, the government has given us the buildings; there are laboratories, there are libraries – we have all the facilities to facilitate a secondary school. The problem is that we do not have the human resource. The people we send to the schools through Government are not willing to teach because it is a hard-to-reach area. So, we ask the ministry to allow us recruit from the locals who – local professionals; boys from Busia who are willing to go and teach in the same school.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Maganda, does that mean the school is not operational because if there are no teachers there cannot be students. 

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, the school is operating, but we are soon going to close it because the teachers are not going there. 

THE SPEAKER: Name the school; I think this is a serious allegation. 

MR MAGANDA: The school is Busime Senior Secondary School in Busime Sub Country, Busia District –(Interruption)

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the House is that such type of schools indicate on their payroll that they have about 13 teachers. The teachers that are present, those teaching, are about three. So the others earn a salary from that school yet they refuse to report because the place is hard-to-reach and the ministry reluctantly gives up. 

6.07
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for the statement you have made. Like it has been noted by other colleagues, I have a similar concern of teachers who have not received their payment for the previous month. This is a recurring problem month after another. 

Today, in her statement, the minister gave us cases per district like Kisoro, Kabale and others – that makes me question the minister. Are those statistics you are giving us true; have you verified them? If you have this information clearly identifiable like you say, why do these problems reoccur every month? 

The minister talked about the salaries and arrears but we have cases of pension; people who retire and never get their money. They spend years without getting their money. I have been following up these cases with Public Service and nothing seems to be forthcoming. 

Madam Speaker, it is also common knowledge that the ministry is shifting salary payment from the centre to the local governments and many people are uncomfortable with it. Remember, there are issues of arrears which people have not got. They are sceptical that if salaries are shifted from the centre to the local governments, they are unlikely to get their arrears at all. 

The other concern of the teachers is that they are likely to lose on their payment through mismanagement of salaries. We still have issues of ghost teachers today. Many of these emanate from the districts. Now you are pushing this problem back to the districts where it comes from; how safe are the payment of the teachers; moreover, salaries are going to be paid quarterly. Is the money of our workers safe?

Finally, on the issue of supplementary, at first I thought it was a mistake. I thought an error was made but later I found the minister was seriously requesting for a supplementary – (Member timed out_)

6.10
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. The minister’s statement is revealing and I think it is high time we came up to rescue the civil servants, especially the teachers. Whenever I go to my constituency, I get the same complaints about payment. 

The issue of the payroll has to be investigated further. When you look at the minister’s statement, it does not seem to have a permanent solution to this problem. Much as the problem is bigger than what we can see on the surface, the minister is suggesting in the second last paragraph of the statement, “Honourable Speaker and Members, effective salary management is only attainable if there is commitment from all key players.”

I am disturbed by what she is suggesting. If there is lack of commitment from almost everybody, how are we assisting our people? I would like to ask the minister to further clarify on this statement. When I go back home, I need to explain to these people who have not been paid for all this time. The people were removed from the payroll and they have no answer and yet the minister comes up with such a statement – (Member timed out_)

6.12
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement. But on the list, I want to request the minister to add Rukungiri District because since December, especially in the Municipality, most of the people have not received their salaries. It is a point I want you to note. I know it is your district but of course as a minister, you have a very big area to cater for. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need to have a special programme for the municipalities because most of the time these municipalities are left behind. So, I ask the minister to tell us whether in these trainings where most officers have been trained are the managers within the municipalities also part of these trainings? Whenever I am there, they are complaining that they do not receive these trainings you are talking about. 

Another point is about late release of funds. I have been the Shadow Minister for Public Service and we have talked about this issue much of the time. Sometimes there is a problem with the Ministry of Finance. In one of my communications, we requested the Government to have focal persons mainly on the payroll. Like in the Ministry of Finance, Education and Health – (Member timed out_)

6.15
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement but I would like to inform her that there is a big problem in her ministry and extends to the districts. And the districts that are majorly affected are those that are upcountry.

Madam Minister, I will give you an example in Amuru, where I come from: In 2010, there was a teacher who was conniving with people in the Ministry of Public Service and that teacher was recruiting teachers from Amuru. And if you needed your name to be entered onto the payroll, you had to pay him some money. We did not understand what would happen but he would collect teachers’ names from Amuru and bring them to the ministry and they would access the payroll immediately. And if it were the officer in charge of salary and personnel to fill the forms and bring them officially, those teachers would never access the payroll. So Madam Minister, allow the committee to travel all over the country and they will get that information. You need to clean up the Ministry of Public Service.

Madam Speaker, there are other teachers and medical personnel who normally receive abnormal amounts of money. There is a teacher in Amuru who received Shs 20 million as salary on her account. After receiving that money, it disappeared and she took over six months without getting salary. She tried to come to the Ministry of Public Service and access the payroll once more but all in vain; she filled various forms but nothing happened.

Therefore, Madam Minister, there is a big problem in that ministry; it looks like the technical officers are conniving –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I wanted to inform my colleague and the House at large – and the Minister of Public Service is my aunt; so listen to me. Now, Madam Speaker, hon. Sezi Mbaguta, who is my aunt, is a long-serving minister in that ministry. Even before she became minister, she was a director of pension. How was pension money stolen? One of the reasons is that people in that ministry created accounts that never existed and they had people who would travel to Arua or Kisoro and they would come back with ATM cards which they would use for withdrawing the money. This is because they knew where the money was and the owner – who are themselves. And they withdrew the money – and that is why this man called Obey is the richest man. And hon. Minister you know these things and those people – Obey’s accomplices – are still there. Do not fear; act like a Mukiga and get those ones who are still there. If you do not do it, who will? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, for that information. Hon. Minister, finally, people are willing to give information; if you go to the offices of the CAO, DEO, personnel and OC salary, they are willing to give you information. We are ready to mobilise them so that it can help you in cleaning up the ministry.

6.19
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement. The issue of payment of our workers has become political. Any organisation cannot be better than the people in it; the level of motivation of our people, even with the little salaries we pay them not being paid for six months – Madam Speaker, we are here as Members of Parliament; can we sustain ourselves for six months without being paid? We cannot! So how on earth do you expect somebody who is being paid Shs 250,000 as little as it is to be at the place of work when not paid for six months? Are we running an expensive or cheap government? What kind of government are we running? That government cannot be better than the people it employs. What kind of people are we employing that we cannot pay for six months?

Madam Speaker, let the Leader of Government Business create a crisis committee in Cabinet to sort out this issue; it is really disheartening –(Member timed out_)

6.21
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement. My people and I looked at the new strategy developed by the minister as a ray of hope. But during the presentation by the minister, I got perturbed and a bit taken aback when she said that the new system has come with challenges. I find this outrageous because looking at a new programme that has just been designed and whose implementation has just started, I expected the ministry to be proactive and probably design a strategy that would address the challenges early enough. And looking at the statements that have come from Members, this is gospel-truth that we have had our people deleted from the payroll; we have had them underpaid; we have had active civil servants not paid and serious suspicion of those who do not exist remaining on the payroll. This implies that the ministry probably needs to get back to the drawing board and this subject matter was comprehensively covered by the report of the Auditor-General.

Madam Speaker, at this point in time, I expect the ministry to update the House on the extent to which they have gone in addressing the issues raised in the Auditor-General’s report. So, my humble appeal to the ministry is that they should update this House on how far they have gone in cleaning the payroll. Otherwise, the issue is appalling and like you have heard from my honourable colleagues, we are not doing well in our constituencies –(Member timed out_)

6.23
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, the situation in Kisoro and other areas in Uganda is that you will find teachers and health workers suffering. When we reached Bata Secondary School in Northern Uganda, we found out that the head teacher and another teacher were not on the payroll. The head teacher was deleted two years ago but there are six teachers, who he does not know, who are on the payroll.

Madam Speaker, during the Christmas period, I was at the bank and a woman came to withdraw some money but she discovered that she had only Shs 4,000 instead of Shs 400,000. Look at such a situation! Another one got only Shs 3,000 instead of Shs 300,000 and now the minister comes here to convince us that this is a new system. A person who is feeding this system is intentionally doing this; it seems there is a place where this money is going! 

Madam Speaker, I request and propose that this ministry be investigated because – in fact I pity the minister; she should only appeal to us for help because when I went to Kisoro to some Health Centre III called Kasugwere Health Centre III, I did not find health workers and yet patients there were about to die. So, I spent the whole night taking them to Mutobere which is a private hospital. What is this? People are dying in the villages and we are not assisting them because they are not being paid. 

And when I stormed the district to see the DHO, do you know what the DHO told me? He said, “I have been running after them but they are telling me that they have not been paid for six months. I failed to get what to do.” Really, the Minister for Public Service should come out and tell us - these people could even be stealing this money. How do you plan, for instance, to get health workers? Somebody called ‘Opio’ or ‘Okello’ and others and yet we do not have those names. These people are aware; they create these names and they are aware. I beg the ministry not to even protect them because when you continue protecting them, we are even aggregating the problem.

For sure, if we do not make any step to go and investigate this ministry, this means that all sectors are going to die out: education, health, local government because we all rely on you. So what do we do? Madam Speaker, I rest –(Member timed out_)

6.27
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the hon. Minister that Members of Parliament have become ministers for public service in their constituencies. We are being asked questions that are supposed to be answered by you simply because civil servants, more especially teachers and health workers, are not getting their salaries. 

Hon. Minister, how long does it take to clean the payroll? Since Manafwa District was created, we are cleaning the payroll of Manafwa. The names of the teachers who are teaching in Manafwa schools appear in Bududa District and Bududa being a baby district of Manafwa, I expected the teachers of Bududa to be in Manafwa. Now, you tell my teachers to fill the forms to correct and clean the payroll; they walk and fill the forms but the following month, they are deleted from the payroll. 

You fill the form expecting your payroll to be cleaned but instead it becomes worse. Hon. Minister, what do you expect these teachers and health workers to do? Someone is working for six, seven, eight months and they are not being paid and you expect them to stay in these schools and teach?

Hon. Maganda was talking about recruiting teachers in the school because the ones we sent there cannot report. Hon. Maganda, you have no capacity to do that. According to Public Service, you have hit the ceiling as you have enough teachers and yet in actual sense, you have only three teachers teaching and the others are on the payroll but are not at school. You cannot recruit those teachers until the Ministry of Public Service says so because your school is already covered.

Hon. Minister, I want to agree with Members who are saying that you need help. Unless you come up clearly to say that, “Hon. Members, come to my rescue.” I can see you shaking your head but – (Member timed out_)

6.29
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I really thank the minister. First of all, to my understanding, the statement she has given is answering a certain request that was made on the Floor of this Parliament. I do not believe that it covered all the areas and sectors of Public Service. If it did not, then it has not been compiled well. But if it is answering one or two particular areas which were asked on the Floor of Parliament, I request that the minister maybe at a certain time or point brings another report because the complaints are becoming very many. But this one should be accepted because she has answered the questions which were raised at that time. But again, what do we do on the ones that are emerging?

In the last budget, we had provided for some little money to allow the recruitment of staff in health centre IIIs and IVs but we did not consider recruitment of staff in the national referral hospitals and regional referral hospitals. If you went to Mulago, Madam Speaker, there are centres with only one or two health workers who are working from morning to evening and nobody will come to their rescue. If you went to the trauma centre, there is only one worker from morning up to 6.00O’clock who is handling – (Member time out_)

6.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am trying to follow up the minister’s response on page 4 in regard to underpayment of health workers. 

I appreciate the explanation as to why it happened but the trouble that I have with it though is that then the minister chooses to tell us the prescription she has made for the 154 health workers for Kisoro, and she says that the names have been submitted for payment but what about the ones for Serere? I told her about the ones for Serere as well but she has only made a specific prescription for Kisoro. 

Let her tell this House whether she has made or she is going to make or whatever she is going to do to specifically deal with the health workers in Serere, or any other part of the country because the only solution here is now the Kisoro solution. What about the rest who were underpaid and are health workers?

Secondly, every time there is a systems change at the Ministry of Public Service, people really suffer. I would like to ask the minister, do you do a systems test? Do you pilot these systems? Do you try to have a phased migration so that that small sector alone gives you some lessons and experiences? Do you have a pre-systems audit in place? Do you just lump all Ugandans there and then you begin to experiment with the entire payroll system?

Madam Minister, the truth about your ministry is that there is a lot of rot. At national level, you need an overhaul of that arrangement and if you do not do it, you will continue having this type of problem. Consider overhauling the whole thing that manages the Public Service – (Member timed out_)

6.34
MS PHYLISS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to talk about the hardship allowance that was not mentioned in the minister’s statement. Hardship allowance goes together with the salaries. This morning, somebody, a teacher, called me from Moroto complaining about not receiving hardship allowance for now eight months and they are wondering why. So, I would like to ask the minister why this is so. They are really crying and they are asking why you can’t help them out of this.

We know very well that hard-to-reach places are really harsh; they have harsh climate and conditions. We really have to sympathize with such people. 

In the Karamoja region, we have many of our people who teach there. The teachers come from all over the country and, therefore – the one who called me this morning is from Kapchorwa District though I asked him to inform his Member of Parliament. But because he is my voter, I have tried to present their problem but also, take note that this is a problem for all the districts which are benefiting from that hardship allowance.

Sometimes I feel this term “hardship” should also be called “hard-to-live”, not “hard-to-reach” areas. Those areas are very hard to live in. When you look at Karamoja, you can’t imagine, for example, that during this hot season, all the trees have lost the green leaves and one can’t find a shade. Even getting food is a problem and that means the little salary that is given to those teachers is not enough for them to buy food; it is very expensive. Therefore, the little money that these people are entitled to should be paid to them really. Honourable minister, kindly do that.

6.37
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In the medical ethics – and this is very important and hon. Dr Stephen Chebrot and hon. Dr Lulume Bayiga will support me – they say that you should never give anybody’s mother a drug that you cannot give to your mother.

Two, ministers of Public Service and Finance, can you stay without salaries for six months and survive? You led to the theft of drugs from government hospitals; you have caused teachers to steal chalk and fail to teach. Actually, you are government saboteurs. You are sabotaging this government because I don’t think that somebody should come and sit in this House when teachers and health workers are not getting their salaries.

By the way, Madam Speaker, one of the policemen who guard you – I met him just at the gate and he told me, “Honourable member, when you get there, tell the Speaker and the Minister of Public Service; I received salary but a very big number of people who guard you haven’t got their salaries and that also includes policemen.” Hon. Minister of Public Service, I know and I pity you so much, hon. Prisca Sezi, because surely you have suffered with us and I am at pains to tell you these things when your senior minister is not here because tomorrow when I go back to my village, my mother is going to harass me that I am harassing my own aunt. But painfully, I am telling her.

Madam Speaker, I am the one who raised this issue of Mbarara University. I sent two messages to people in the personnel office at that university and they told me that they have a total of 488 workers but in the minister’s statement it is indicative that she has paid 539, which means the extra 51 are likely to be ghosts –(Interjections)– yes, this is because I told you that a woman who peels matooke at the kitchen in that university was retired. However, when the daughter checked on the account of her mother, she got money paid to it.

Additionally, drivers were sacked because they made some mistake; they got the money but there are some other fellows who got the money yet they are not supposed to be there, which means there are ghost workers –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to tell us how they steal.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, in the Ministry of Public Service – and I am going to say it and I am here and I cannot deny because this thing is very obvious – the people who are stealing this money are known. The CAOs are the ones who form these ghosts and now she is here saying they are going to consult the very CAOs on the names of the teachers and policemen who never got salaries. I can tell you, Madam Speaker, they are going to add more ghosts and we will get more problems not until this Ministry of Public Service has been rejuvenated and possibly hon. Prisca Sezi given more people to work with. Hon. Minister, you are going to fail because the thieves are still with you. I thank you.

6.40
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The comprehensive statement by the Minister for Public Service is unsatisfactory. That is why it has attracted the debate that you are listening to from both sides of the House.

Indeed, the Minister of Public Service needs help but she has kept away much of the information, maybe because the statement was just made for her by the public officers who themselves are causing this omission. Nobody has been reported fired from work or reprimanded for the omissions done while preparing the payroll. And, therefore, it looks like the minister didn’t care about this.

Madam Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers a motion, without notice, under Rule 50(1)(k), given that this matter and the statement by the minister on non-payment or underpayment of salaries of health workers and teachers is not satisfactory and requires that this House resolves that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government undertakes an expeditious investigation into this matter and reports to Parliament in one week. I am talking about one week because this is a matter of urgent public concern and it needs effort of an expeditious and aggressive Committee on Public Service and Local Government to undertake an investigation to give this Parliament a comprehensive report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is seconded. I noted that but let us hear from the ministers of Finance and Health and we take a decision.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to appreciate the Members’ concerns about non-payment of salaries of our employees. The advent of this process is that the Ministry of Public Service, together with the accounting officers, have been generating the payroll and when they do that, they bring it to the Ministry of Finance on the basis of which it now executes payment of all the salaries that have been captured by the Ministry of Public Service in consultation with the accounting officers.

Over time, it was realised that there were a lot of inconsistencies in numbers. In one year you could have this set of numbers and another set in the next quarter. So, we asked ourselves whether the accounting officers did not know the correct numbers of their employees; that is how we ordered for a forensic audit by the Auditor-General, which reflected a number of discrepancies and inconsistencies in the numbers of workers –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, if I am left to explain, it might be better for Members to know the advent of this and what we are doing to rectify the situation.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us hear from the minister before we go to the motion.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this audit was done, it was found that a number of workers were non-existent. The Auditor-General advised us to clean the payroll. That is how in the meantime some payments were stopped. That is why there was a big outcry of people including policemen, health workers because they were not being paid.

The Ministry of Public Service was asked to clean up the payroll and whatever was cleared has been paid by the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of Public Service.

Concerning the issue of supplementary budgets, if we knew the actual number of workers, the issue of supplementary budgets would not arise because if you know the actual number of your workers in the ministry and in the districts, you would give us an accurate number and we would pay.

So when the Minister of Public Service kept giving us supplementary requests, this meant that it would take time to process that supplementary funding and that would mean delay in salaries. Because of challenges such as lack of an accountable person for the details of the payroll, this paused an inherent risk of issues in the Uganda Computer Services payment system. There was neglect of ownership of Votes and accounting officers, low reconciliation of salaries; low returns for deductions and low follow up of unpaid monies. 

We thought there were too many transactions being handled by one entity - the Ministry of Public Service - because that was occasioning delayed salaries and processing of salaries was also being done outside the payment system of Government. So, as Ministry of Finance, we decided to decentralise the payroll. 

What does this mean? That if the district of Kasese knows its workers, they must generate their own payroll. Every accounting officer, every ministry and district will generate a payroll, which will be transmitted to the Ministry of Finance and instead of paying through the Ministry of Public Service, we will pay directly to the accounting officer.

Madam Speaker, this system started in January this year and we piloted 27 Votes mainly from Central Government ministries, agencies and commissions. For the month of February, we piloted 36 Votes. In March, we are going to pilot nine Votes including public universities, KCCA, Police and Prisons and phases four and five will cover all the local governments.

Madam Speaker, what are the results? To date, we have 63 Votes, as outlined in the action plan whose payroll payments we have decentralised. I can tell this House that from this system and out of the 63 that have been decentralised, only five accounting officers have not been able to access the payroll. What is the reason? It is because they were required to generate and submit salary invoices and they have not submitted them.

I want to tell this House that of the 63 Votes in this decentralised system, only five have not been paid and there are no complaints from what we have paid so far. We intend to continue with this system up to July when we shall have finished all the Votes. So, the accounting officers now will be directly responsible for non-payment or for generating ghost workers that are non-existent.

What are we doing regarding arrears? We have said, and these circulars have been communicated to the accounting officers, that concerning all salary arrears, provided the accounting officers are able to authenticate or write to us that the following people have not been paid, we shall pay them.

Some of the accounting officers actually fear to generate some of these unpaid workers because some of them were supposed to be ghost workers. On our part, if the accounting officers give us the number of public servants that are not paid, we shall pay whatever arrears that are existent. Those are the steps Government is taking to rectify the payroll through this decentralised payroll system. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members.

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague, the Minister of State for Public Service, for his report to the House. We have had a bit of a challenge especially regarding health workers as reported by most of the Members here but I want to inform you, colleagues, that we did have various meetings with the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance to resolve this challenge.

It is true that when we were in the field with Members of Parliament in Kawolo, Butaleja, Tororo and also when I went to Kalangala, this issue was raised and I did get confirmation from the ministry then that the salaries would be paid to all affected health workers before the 28th. 

Yesterday, I was shocked, when we were leaving State House, to receive an SMS from a medical superintendent confirming what hon. Oboth said that the health workers had not been paid and that they were laying down their tools!

As explained, there are challenges in payroll management and I believe that some staff in the Ministry of Public Service may be deliberately doing this to create a problem. However, the statement I want to make here is for Members of Parliament to understand that sometimes non-payment of salaries is the reason why we have poor service delivery by health workers. Sometimes you find that nurses, medical and health workers are rude. Please be understanding because that is the reason. There is no way you can serve the public when you are hungry, when you have children demanding for school fees and all that. 

However, the Prime Minister held a meeting with the relevant ministries including the Ministry of Health and as reported by hon. Kajara, I believe this problem will be solved. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this issue of payment is one of the most recurring questions on the Floor of this House. I do not know whether there is any month that goes by without Members bringing complaints about failure to pay, half salary, deletion, reinstatement or removal. So, there is a motion that the Committee on Public Service expeditiously investigates this matter and brings a comprehensive report to the House and not just for particular sectors.

(Question put and agreed to.)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

    I. QUESTION 38/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

6.54
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. “(i) What is the statistical classroom deficiency in Uganda? (ii) What measures are in place to address this problem? (iii) What efforts is Government making to construct staff houses in government-aided schools?”

6.54
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj (Rtd.) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, all the copies of what I am reading here have been posted to the iPads of all Members of Parliament. However, I have given a copy to hon. Kenneth Lubogo and I have given you one copy. 

The response is that the current pupil-classroom ratio in government schools is 68:1 with a desired ration of 40:1 and an enrolment in government schools of exactly 7,090,338; a stock of 177,259 classrooms is required against the current stock of 104,270. Therefore, the classroom deficiency in the government primary schools is 72,990 classrooms. 

The second part of the question required the ministry to explain measures that we have put in place to address this deficiency. The response is that we have, in a phased manner, constructed additional classrooms in our educational institutions specifically primary schools. Against that background, an estimated total of 2,100 classrooms is expected to be constructed from the US$100 million on Global Partnership in Education which we are currently trying to implement in the ministry which is a grant in the next three years. 

The third part of the question is that what effort is Government making to construct staff houses in government-aided schools? The efforts are that a total budget of Shs 4.5 billion is provided for teachers’ houses annually and this money is allocated to 20 local governments with each local government allocated Shs 270 million. We expect that at a cost of Shs 68 million, a local government can construct a four-unit house. So, for 20 local governments, therefore, if each of them constructs four-unit houses every year, they could accommodate 80 teachers. 

Furthermore, from the Global Partnership in Education which I have already alluded to, a total of 75 houses accommodating two teachers each are expected in the next three years. That means that these 75 houses we are going to construct are going to accommodate 75 times two teachers. 

Madam Speaker, that is the end of the response that I prepared for hon. Kenneth Lubogo from Bulamogi County and I am prepared to take supplementary questions. 

6.58
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ratio given shows that we have crowded classrooms. The statistics are true but many schools do not have classrooms at all. If they do have, they may have only two classrooms. I gave the minister pictures of some schools in Kaliro. 

My supplementary question is, considering that you appreciate that we have insufficient classrooms - in places like Kaliro, pupils do not learn in the rainy season - how do you expect those pupils to fairly compete with others? They sit for the same examinations with pupils of Greenhill, Savio and others. How do you expect these primary schools without classrooms and who study for a few months of the year to compete evenly with the schools which have all the infrastructure? Do you have any preferential treatment for those pupils to compete fairly with the other pupils?

6.59
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, it is true that we have insufficient infrastructure as I stated in my response. But I would like the Members of Parliament to support us in our undertaking to have classroom deficiency filled up in a phased manner. We are doing this because of resources. We appropriate resources here every financial year as Parliament and when we come to Parliament, we come with the number of missing classrooms. The budget committee looks at all sectors and that is how they came up with Shs 4.5 billion for the ministry to keep on constructing these classrooms. 
So, I assure the Member of Parliament that Government is committed to ensuring that we have sufficient infrastructure in our education institutions but we do it according to availability of resources. Thank you. 

II. QUESTION 62/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

7.10
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker: “(a)Would the minister explain to the House why private schools, public secondary schools and universities charge exorbitant fees despite the tax incentives and funding they get from Government?

    i) What specific interventions have been put in place to promote science education in public schools?

    ii) What measures has Government put in place to strengthen the inspectorate function in a bid to improve the quality of education in the country?

    iii) What efforts are being made to address the disparity in performance between rural and urban schools?

    iv) What is the status of rolling out seed secondary schools in the country?”

7.13
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj (Rtd.) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, the response to question one is that, public secondary schools that charge exorbitant fees do not receive capitation grants and the fees are agreed in the PTA meetings and parents are very willing to pay; they are not forced. Actually as a ministry, when we charged the technical officials to give us evidence that the parents are willing to pay, they came with very many files showing us the minutes and signatures of the parents. 

Secondly, public universities are in fact charging private students at a low unit cost as compared to the actual unit cost being brought down by funding from Government. You may wish to note that on average, a government-sponsored student costs Shs 12 million a year compared to Shs 3.5 million the private student pays per year. 

Thirdly, the private schools also charge fees in consultation with the ministry and also PTA meetings and the agreed positions are the ones that the ministry endorses but after the private schools have produced all their plans and programmes and their budgets and how they spend the money. 

The second part of the question was that, “What specific interventions have been put in place to promote science education in public schools?” Firstly, Government has constructed laboratories in public schools as the hon. Member for Busia has just articulated. And Government has also provided science kits and equipment and chemical reagents to all public schools. Government also undertook to review the policy to ensure that science subjects are compulsory and science textbooks have also been provided to all schools. Science teachers, through the SESMART programme are being trained and re-tooled annually and science teachers are given an additional 30 percent allowance of their basic pay to motivate them. Those are some of the interventions that Government, through the Ministry of Education, is putting in place to promote science education. Members of Parliament may wish to encourage parents and students to get interested in doing sciences from the lower classes. 

Madam Speaker, the third part of the question was, “What measures has Government put in place to strengthen the inspectorate function in a bid to improve the quality of education in the country?” And the first part of the response is that we have enhanced allowances to district inspectors of schools and district education officers and every year, we have Shs 4.5 million for this activity to motivate them to do their work on a daily basis.

Secondly, we have provided vehicles for regional directorate of education standards officers. Madam Speaker, Members know that the Directorate of Education Standards is decentralised: we have offices in Mbarara, Gulu, and Mbale and in Central Uganda. So, these offices are operational and we have provided them with strong vehicles to undertake the inspection function at the regional level. 

Thirdly, under the Global Partnership for Education Project which I have already alluded to and where we have $100 million as a grant which we are now implementing, all inspectors of schools will receive very strong motorcycles for their inspection work.

Now, the fourth part of the question was the efforts being made to address the disparity in performance between rural and urban schools. And the response, Madam Speaker, is that first of all, Government introduced hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay allowances for teachers in rural schools in 18 districts demarcated as “Hard-to-Reach” areas. And these areas are demarcated by the Ministry of Public Service and it was with a view to encouraging these teachers to stay there throughout the time they are required to be in those schools.

Secondly, there is also a deliberate effort to construct teachers’ houses in worst performing districts using SFG funds. This started in financial year 2011/12 and 20 districts get funds each year. Initially it was Shs 544 million but now they get Shs 270 million each annually.

Thirdly, we have also undertaken provision of computers with a solar system to rural schools. This is so that they can use computers as much as the urban schools which are connected to the national grid.

Then no.4 is sensitisation of parents to eliminate absenteeism has been scaled up by the ministry. This is because as you know, in rural areas, some parents encourage their children to go and fish or to the plantations or swamps to plant rice. And in some areas where there is cattle-keeping like Karamoja, you will find young children herding cattle and sheep while others are in the classroom. So I would like to welcome members of Parliament to help us sensitise parents that absenteeism is a danger because children will not be able to cover the syllabus in time –(Interjection)– like in Amuru there.

The fifth part of the question, “What is the status of rolling out seed secondary schools in the country?” Now, we are currently constructing seed secondary schools in sub counties which do not have secondary schools using funds from ADB III and IV and under development of secondary projects funded by Government. Madam Speaker, you may wish to note that out of the over 1,000 sub-counties we have in Uganda, we now have 273 sub-counties without secondary schools and we are looking forward to – with the availability of resources – cover all the remaining sub-counties with seed schools. I also have one in Katakwi without a secondary school.

Thank you, Madam Speaker; those were the responses and now I welcome the supplementary questions. 

7.17
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for responding. The supplementary question to answer (i) you are saying that public schools charge higher fees with the consent of parents but I also know that the ministry has to regulate; so, where is the regulatory work of the government in making sure that parents are safeguarded from schools that – because I know of many schools that increase fees in the middle of the year without asking for the parents’ consent and many parents complain about it.

Secondly, in part (a) of your second response, are you sure that all public schools – even in your district – have laboratories and textbooks? In my district and most schools in the Acholi sub-region, there are no science laboratories and textbooks.

On No.(iii) (a), where you are informing us that Shs 4.5 million is provided to facilitate inspectors of schools and DEOs to inspect schools in their district, I wonder whether such an amount, Shs 4.5 million per year, is enough for these officers to round up all the schools in the district?

Then in part (c), you are talking of provision of motorcycles which are yet to come under the GPE Project. Will Government make a provision for fuel? This is because you are talking about motorcycles that will be bought using grant money and not government funds. So will Government provide the fuel for them?

Lastly, on No.(iv) (b), you say, “Deliberate effort to construct teachers’ houses in worst performing districts using SFG funds.” My question is: Must districts compete to be worst performers in order to have classrooms constructed? My thinking is that it should be government’s deliberate effort to ensure that teachers are accommodated in schools countrywide. Thank you.

7.19
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj (Rtd.) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Akello for the supplementary questions. According to the Education Act, schools are not allowed to increase fees in the middle of the term or semester because it disrupts both the students and parents and that is what I know; that schools increase the fees after consulting with the parents and the ministry but not in the middle of an academic year. If there are isolated cases where this has happened, I undertake to go and do my homework and take action accordingly and correct it.

Secondly, I am very sure that Government sends science kits or reagents to all schools for practical work. I am also very sure that there are some secondary schools – I may not quote the number now – that do not have physical infrastructure in terms of the laboratories. But that does not mean that they cannot carry out the experiments. I have gone to some of these schools and I have personally asked the teachers, “Now that you do not have the laboratory, how do you prepare practicals for the children when they are doing practice?” They told me that they have an alternative classroom and sometimes they use part of the library to do some of these practicals and prepare for the children. 

So, I am certain that we will send all secondary schools the reagents and chemical kits for doing the practicals. Part of the problems that we have is to complete constructing physical laboratories in all our secondary schools. 

Madam Speaker, I noted with concern that the Shs 4.5 million that we send –(Interruption)

MR DEO KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I want to give the minister is that where you have constructed laboratories, in most schools we do not have teachers who can handle science equipment. Are you aware of that? The equipment is provided but the teachers are not there.

MAJ (RTD.) ALUPO: I know that we have a deficiency of science teachers to the tune of 6,703 and we are in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service to recruit that number of science teachers to fix that gap. 

On what hon. Franca Akello said, the Shs 4.5 million is not adequate but it is the one that we have in our hands and that is why it is the one that we are using for that function of giving allowances to inspectors. 

The motorcycles that I have talked about are not yet in our hands but we have the money to buy them and the difference is going to be that this time, the ministry has taken a decision to buy strong motorcycles and not those that are normally procured and then they get spoilt within two years. This time, we are going to buy those motorcycles that are called Honda. I am told that they are the strongest for the inspectors of schools. 

The fuel will be taken care of because we shall come here to ask Parliament to increase these allowances so that the inspectors can have fuel in these strong motorcycles. 

Hon. Franca Akello is extremely humorous on this one; that “Must schools compete to be the lowest performing in order to get teachers’ houses?” The irony is that one of the circumstances that forces schools to underperform is because, as it was already said by the Member of Parliament from Busia, teachers fear to stay in areas where they do not have sufficient and comfortable accommodation and that is why we think that by addressing the problem of accommodation, we are helping the schools to raise the performance of the children. 

So, it is not true that we are trying to ask schools to compete to be the lowest performing schools in order to attract attention from the ministry, and get teachers’ houses. What is true is that, we are trying to improve the performance of those schools by having comfortable accommodation for the teachers and encouraging them to stay so that the contact between the teachers and the learners is increased and, therefore, performance is impacted on. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I will just allow hon. Olanya to ask a policy clarification that touches on one of the issues.

7.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (INDEP, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the minister. It was in 2012 when Government wrote to chief administrative officers of all the districts implementing hard-to-reach allowances. The letter was instructing the CAOs to stop the payment of hard-to-reach allowances. As I talk, all payments of hard-to-reach allowances to teachers and medical personnel is not going on in most of the districts implementing that. I would like to seek clarification from you and whether you are aware that the payment has already been stopped by the Government.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister?

MAJ. (RTD.) ALUPO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When hon. Olanya stood up, I thought that he was going to talk about land and that is why I feared to give him space.

The response to his question is that, Government is currently paying hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay allowances to civil servants which are 30 percent of their basic salary in only 18 districts of Uganda. Those districts comprise of districts from Karamoja, Kalangala, Buvuma - the Ministry of Public Service under the law, is the one that is mandated to qualify an area as hard-to-reach. Those are the ones that they qualified, 18; and the hard-to-reach allowances have never stopped being paid in those districts from the time the Ministry of Public Service declared them hard-to-reach districts.

So, Madam Speaker, it is not true that all districts that had been receiving hard-to-reach allowances - Katakwi, for instance, is not a hard-to-reach district according to the Ministry of Public Service but according to me, as a Member of Parliament, it is a hard-to-reach district.

III. QUESTION 69/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

7.26
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): “(i) What specific measures have been put in place to curb the increasing rate of teenage pregnancies? (ii) What policy is in place to support victims of teenage pregnancies to continue with education?”

7.27
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, firstly, we are taking care of the provision of the girl-child and boy-child in our schools by providing separate latrine stances for boys and girls. We are also providing girls with washrooms at schools and there is strengthened counselling of pupils and students.

Madam Speaker, we have a very popular programme called “Peer Say” where we preach total abstinence by all learners up to the university. They are not supposed to be having sex until they finish graduation and get married. We also preach strongly on HIV/AIDS prevention and awareness programmes and we would like to welcome Members of Parliament to help us to preach “abstinence” because with abstinence, no girl-child can get pregnant. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary, hon. Amoding?

7.28
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you very much. I would like to appreciate the minister for her effort to look into this particular question and the other questions as she has responded. But I wonder if the minister is aware that despite all these initiatives that she is talking about: the washrooms, the stances and the “Peer Say” which is now not very functional as she seems to point out that we still have a percentage – in every 10 children, you find four of them getting pregnant. I think that the other question that we needed to verify clearly is how these issues have been addressed despite what she is telling us about the school health policy because we are still having so many of these girls getting pregnant, and some even abort; some drop out of school. 

Madam Minister, we have heard rumours that you are working on a school health policy that would tie up all these issues including sanitary towels, which is not coming out here very clearly and of course other issues, knowing the fact that in the sick bays, you have small treatments – panadol and all those things but the counselling and adolescent reproductive health services that we would like to see offered to these people maybe are not catered for in the school health policy. So, what is that school health policy about?

Secondly, you have not covered the area of the dropouts. I think that I highlighted it in the second question – sorry, I think the minister is coming to that but just a little bit because the challenges are still persistent every other day. When you read the newspapers, Madam Minister, it is a big emergency and disaster in this country. So, would you really think that the initiative that you have put in place now are sufficiently addressing teenage pregnancy in this country?

7.24
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, as hon. Monica Amoding has just stated, the ministry is in the process of initiating a school health policy that will holistically address the challenges not only of the girl-child but also the boy-child including matters of sexuality, hygiene, moral decadency, sanitary towel usage and sanitation in general. But most important is the fact that as a ministry, we have continued to believe that the cure for HIV infection and early pregnancies is abstinence for the school going children.

I want to call upon the youths Member of Parliament to note that there is an HIV/AIDS policy that talks about the ABC. When you read that policy, you realise that abstinence is for the youths in schools and being faithful is for adults like hon. Gilbert Olanya –(Laughter)– who got married recently. And the other category is the one that uses condoms.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask Parliament to continue emphasizing the fact that abstinence is the best choice for school going children because that way, they all get infected with HIV, STDs and early pregnancies. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I also want to thank the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition and all the Members for your co-operation. We have done most of what we wanted to do today. But before we adjourn, I would like to inform Members that on 7th March, we shall have the End of Year Staff Party and the venue is ground level parking of South Wing. So, on that day, Members are advised to park in the North Wing parking of Parliament so that they do not disrupt the arrangement for the staff party.

Otherwise, I want to thank you very much. House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 March 2014 at 2.00p.m.) 

