Tuesday, 10 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The National Planning Authority is in its final stages of developing the second National Development Plan (NDP) 2015/16 to 2019/20 under the theme: “Strengthening Uganda’s competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, employment and inclusive growth”. 

The process of formulating NDP II has been consultative and participatory involving all relevant stakeholders including Parliament. To this end, the National Planning Authority is further requesting for an opportunity to engage Parliament by holding a half-day consultative meeting with all Members of Parliament to validate the plans in preparation for its being tabled in Parliament.

After the NDP II has been tabled, Parliament will be required to give its approval. Following the request from NPA, I wish to inform all of you to attend the half-day consultative meeting on this matter, which will take place in Parliamentary Conference Hall on Tuesday, 24 March 2015, beginning at 9.30 a.m. Please mark this activity on your calendar and accordingly attend.

Honourable members, notice is hereby given to the members of the Appointments Committee that the committee is scheduled to meet on Wednesday, 18 March 2015 at 9.30 a.m. in the South Committee Room to consider His Excellency the President’s nominees for various positions in Government. I am directing the Clerk to Parliament to circulate required documentation to the concerned members. Members of the Appointments Committee are requested to heed this call.

Honourable members, the second aspect of my communication is supposed to be a clarification and guidance on a matter that has come before the House, but we have just received documentation; it may be proper for it to be handled tomorrow. It relates to the issue that affects the people of Lwemiyaga in some LCs I. I will be making the statement formally tomorrow so that we can see how to move forward.

I am advised that some people from Lwemiyaga have come and they are here, but I think it would be proper for me to handle this tomorrow when we have looked at the documentation properly. Thank you.

2.16
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, at around 9.30 a.m., fire gutted a factory of mattresses in Ntinda on Stretcher Road. Six workers are confirmed dead and others are still missing. The cause of the fire is not yet confirmed. 

However, when I contacted the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, they said the investigations have commenced. Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development Department of Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) is responsible for protection of workers or supervision of the buildings that are work places in this country. Sections 57 to 60 of the OSH Act require the employer to guarantee the security or safety of the work place –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance. As Parliament, we represent people and there is a Government and when we speak or communicate - we communicate on behalf of the people to Government. Is it proper according to our rules that a Member is speaking on a very important matter and there is no single minister out of the 70 or so - not even a minister of state? Is that an abuse of your authority or an abuse of the authority of Parliament? I am seeking for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the honourable member of Tororo County to go and bring the ministers? Please proceed.

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Similarly, section 42 requires the commissioner in charge of OSH to approve all architectural drawings of workplaces. I request the following from the minister who is not around –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you so much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that matters of occupational safety and health are very important. In late January, a worker of CNOCC in Kingfisher exploration area died and almost nothing was done about this worker.

Last month, more than three workers died in Tororo Cement Factory and nothing was done about these workers. This shows that matters of occupational health are neglected. As he pursues this matter of national importance, he should include these matters that seriously affect our workers.

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you so much, hon. Member, for that information. My request is that Government or the ministry constitutes a committee to investigate this and it should involve the department of Occupational Safety and Health, Police and the Ministry of Works and Transport to make sure that they find out what happened exactly and we get a report.

Mr Speaker, the department of OSH should start - because the Act empowers them and these people could be taken to court if they did not follow the OSH standards. The department should be empowered to start taking these people to court –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable member, holding the Floor. I was a bit constrained to rise on a procedural matter, but looking at the gravity of the matter and what the honourable member has enunciated as a way forward over this tragedy, knowing that we have a Government, and fully constituted parliament - we have Government represented by Cabinet. We have the Opposition and us Members of Parliament. 

I am reliably informed that members of the Executive are within the precincts of this honourable House enjoying themselves and yet they want to drive very comfortably, chauffeured and well-guarded while such matters of public importance are going on without their hearing or input. We end up as if we are talking to ourselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying that the ministers are within the precincts of Parliament?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Speaker. One was just here a while ago and the bag is still here; it makes us look bad. Is it procedurally right for this Parliament that is under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to go on talking to ourselves when critical members of the Executive are clearly absent and missing? Are we properly constituted to proceed on a matter of such gravity when we know that there are members of the Executive and they cannot be here to hear the people’s voices and take action or give an undertaking to this House about a matter of such disaster? 

MR RWAKAJARA: My last request is that the architectural drawings and plans should be approved with the contribution of the OSH department in the Ministry of Labour.

2.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I am a neighbour to that factory in Ntinda so when this fire gutted that factory yesterday, we all got scared.

Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament, I raised a matter regarding that factory in this House. I was shocked that no action was taken by the Executive, especially KCCA for that matter. We saw the factory owners gradually encroaching on the wetland; they even blocked a well. There was a protected water well which KCCA had put for the Police barracks. Women would go there to collect water and even the people who stay in the vicinity would use the water if there was a water crisis. Nothing was done about it.

The next thing, we saw them extend the boundary and fence off the place. It ended up becoming a yard. Over the weekend, they started grading and pouring soil into a stream across. We raised an issue and said that that was going to cause a problem. It is highly suspected that they cut the electricity wire and these are the things which sparked off the fire in that place yesterday morning. 

The issue is that Government is not taking action when we raise the matters in this House. When Members raise important issues here, I think Government must take them seriously and address the matters.

My request to KCCA and Government is to take a stern action on the owners of this factory because we have seen them encroach on the wetland erecting illegal structures. Now we have lost lives. Are those families going to be compensated or not?

I would also appeal to the Committee on Gender and the Workers’ MPs to visit that place and see for themselves. I could join you because I am a neighbour there –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The information I want to give to the House is that I am a member on the Committee of Labour, Gender and Social Development. I have been a member ever since I came to Parliament. Our problem with that committee and the ministry is that we have decided to make labour disappear in the gender issues.

We have been struggling to create an independent labour ministry; we have done consultation with the guys from South Africa, ILO and everywhere else. An independent labour ministry will give focus on labour matters including occupational health and safety.

This has been lost somewhere; there is no country whose economy is not propelled by labour. You go to America, the Democrats are about the workers, the Republicans are about the employers and same is true when you go to United Kingdom. Mr Speaker and colleagues, as a country, if we cannot give attention to labour, these issues will continue.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, as the Member is making prayers, I would also appeal that that committee urgently visits that place and sees for itself. This can be tomorrow together with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness who is here and he is very effective. He should be able to join us and we assess the situation and be able to make a report as we wait for Government to address this matter –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I see us flogging a dead horse. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness is here, but we have had many disasters; he only sends posho and beans when schools are burnt.

The matter in front of us is about KCCA and the ministry for industries. I am of the view that we privatise the fire brigade in Uganda. I watched the burning of the factory they are talking about - the fire brigade could not even reach there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure?

MR SSEWUNGU: The procedural issue I am raising is that members of the Frontbench are not there. Do we have any remedies from the two ministers in front here about the matters being raised? The minister for disaster normally sends posho and beans when we have disasters, why don’t we get the ministers here? 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have noted the concerns of the honourable colleagues particularly on this very sad development in this factory. I just wanted to let these honourable members know that in the next few days –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I want to raise is that all of us have been seated here and we saw hon. Ecweru coming in just a few seconds ago. Now he is standing here to tell us that he has noted all the points raised by the honourable colleagues. Is he in order to tell a lie to this august House that he has been here noting the issues as raised by the honourable colleagues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know the last time you interacted with God to know what Members were going to talk about before they had said it. (Laughter) He has noted, but he has not said what he has noted. You have not noticed any gap, yet you are rising on a point of order, please!

MR ECWERU: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker. This morning, the first thing that we did in office when I reached was to discuss the question of these unfortunate accidents and also the typhoid that is ravaging the city. As a ministry, we have requested particularly the police to do a thorough investigation on what happened in the factory and communicate to Government so that we can give a comprehensive report that will be produced by the team that is assigned to do the work.

First of all, they will find out whether there was action. This is the matter that the police should be handling. Secondly, look at the possibility of how the disaster management, together with the department of labour can advise people to avoid reoccurrence of incidences of this nature. I would like to say –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the minister is that we have a lot of problems. Recently, there has been a boom of petroleum products being deposited around residences. I do not know whether the minister is aware. Apart from the accidents we are having in factories and these industries, what remedies are there; what plans do you have? 

For instance, if you go to Kanyanya, it is fully parked with petroleum products, even Banda, Nabingo and many other places. I believe at one point in time, we are going to face a disaster where all of us may perish. I would like the minister to react on this information.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister said he was going to act, especially to urge the police and other departments of Government to carry out investigations on the causes of this disaster. Given the fact that we have had fires in this country including burning of schools, markets and the same institutions that you are talking about were also involved in investigation, to date this House has not seen any report of the school fires and market fires. Is this industry not going to take the same long period as the previous ones in reporting to Parliament? Why don’t you think of other alternatives or methods of investigating since the previous ones are proving to be unreliable?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Musa Ecweru. Hon. Ecweru, are you aware that those people who perished are from Tororo District? What is Government doing to ensure that the interests of the families are taken care of? We would like Government to meet the burial costs because I got a call today and I am struggling to raise money. Police have not yet released the bodies; the family members are in town. I am constrained with resources to keep the family members here. May I know from you, as the Minster of State for Disaster, what support you are going to give us to get the bodies and support the families?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to speak on this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed you to raise a procedural point.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Hon. Ecweru is the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. The issue we are discussing concerns the workers in this country. Within a short time, we are going to celebrate the 1st of May which is an international day for workers all over the world. 

When you look at the conditions in all working places, they are terrible and we are going to continue getting so many accidents. I would like to request that the Minister of Labour makes a statement because the conditions of our workers in this country are terrible. That is why I refused the medal, which they wanted to give me on the 1st of May since the workers of Uganda are working in terrible conditions. We are going to experience a lot of accidents. 

My procedural point is that can the minister make a statement on this Floor so that we discuss the conditions of our workers? The so called investors we brought to this country are making our people go through hell.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter that is before the House is about the disaster that happened in Ntinda. It was brought but of course there are bigger issues of labour. The matter that has been raised is about this incident that has taken the lives of six Ugandans in a very unfortunate situation. The bigger issues can always be handled at the proper time, but now we have a specific matter. Can we deal with that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

MR ECEWARU: Mr Speaker, I would like to –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You have indicated that you have entrusted the police to investigate this occupational accident. However, the Occupation Safety and Health Act, 2006 gives mandate of investigating occupational accidents and diseases to the department of OSH. So, how are they going to connect with each other in a way that we are able to get something substantial to discuss?

MR ECWERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The truth is that any matter to do with investigation must always be led by the police; whether they delay to bring the reports or bring reports that may not be very convincing - we have no choice. We must accept to trust and work with our police. 

Therefore, against that background, we have requested the police to do a thorough investigation and make sure that we come up - as to whether they will second some other expertise’s to help them do the job, I think that is something that they are going to determine.

On what my brother Ekanya indicated, it is true that the ministry would handle that even if it were not our people from Tororo. A disaster of this nature must concern us as Government; we are certainly very concerned. What we are going to do and what we have directed the technical person in my office to do is to look at the humanitarian arm of the intervention. We shall do whatever is possible within our mandate but we shall also request the other sectors - particularly when you look at it in the face value, you see there is a certain challenge of development going ahead of planning in the city.  There is lack of planning.

Against that background, it is very critical that KCCA comes here. It is also very critical that the Minister of Labour comes here to indicate to us what they are doing to rectify the mess that they may have inherited and if it is happening, when the ones in charge, will be able to do that.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was listening in to NTV. Whereas we appreciate that we need a comprehensive statement on the intervention of Government, there are those urgent and immediate actions that need to be taken. How about the dead bodies; how about the stranded families and how about the so called missing persons? People cannot be missing in Ntinda unless they are declared dead or otherwise. 

Can you put to rest the hearts and souls of those suffering by outlining to Parliament the actions that are being taken to cater for this case or as efforts by Government to be awaited? I need to hear the intervention being taken.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, mine is to handle the humanitarian angle of the intervention. We shall support my people from Tororo and all those who are affected to the best of our ability as a sector – (Interjections)- hon. Nambooze, I know you have always interfaced with me informally -(Laughter)- do not invite it here.

I would like to let this House know that as a government, we will do what it takes. Mr Speaker, in the next two hours, we are going to have a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister to discuss among other things, Typhoid that is ravaging the country. In that meeting, we will find out what other sectors have done so that when we converge here, in the next meeting, we should be able to brief this House comprehensively on what has been done sector by sector and particularly what my sector will have done on the humanitarian field.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This matter remains open until it is closed by the statement that will come from the government.

2.42
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the last 15 years or so when Uganda got linked to the mobile telecom companies and five years ago, when mobile money was introduced, many Ugandans registered and are operating this business.

However, to my surprise, Government allowed telecom companies; MTN, Airtel, UTL, to mention but a few, to operate mobile money transactions in total absence of a proper legal framework. To that extent, very many Ugandans, including me and my own family were being robbed and have lost substantial amounts of money. 

Many poor women and men cannot withdraw their money when sent to them by a Member of Parliament or people in urban areas; and after a given period of time should they lose their phones or the SIM card gets lost - the system is so complicated that they lose the money. Government has never declared this money on the Floor of this House, nobody has been arrested and people are suffering seriously across the country – in hospitals, schools and other places.

I would like to seek clarification from Government; two years ago, the Minister of Finance, while reading the budget, informed the country that there was a serious gap in regulating mobile money services in this country. The minister assured this country that they were going to introduce a Bill to amend the 2004 Financial Institutions Act –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable, for giving way. These people are holding a lot of money that is not regulated by Bank of Uganda and UCC. They tell us: “We have a network problem for two or three days”, then they do overnight lending, which carries a very big interest rate. They are looting a lot of money from our incompetence in knowing what they are doing. They lend out the money and after getting the profit, they say, “The network is back.”

Secondly, assuming something happens to this company, with all that amount of money on your mobile phone, where will the subscribers go? UCC says, “We are not regulating this”. Bank of Uganda says, “This is not our business.” Yet the core business of the telecommunication companies is not mobile money.

The honourable member is very right on this matter; Government should urgently come up and regulate this sector. Otherwise, Ugandans will be robed at any time. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, the information I am giving is so pertinent. It is not only the absence of the law and it is not only ordinary citizens being robbed. Even Government itself is being robbed through a programme called SAGE. Government engaged MTN to pay the old people, like those in Nebbi, using the mobile money system. 

Overtime, there are two ways in which they are cheating Government. If an aged person dies, they are supposed to be paid a terminal benefit for four months. After the four months elapse, MTN still continue paying almost up to nine months and then they ask for terminal benefits of four months. Under that mobile money arrangement, where does the money of the five month go?

Two, they accumulate and at the end of the month when they are supposed to pay the elderly, they say there is no network. Until after five months, then they come and compress and pay for only four months. 

For the years our elderly people have been paid in Nebbi, at least two months go missing each year. Last year, the whole of November was not paid, but they lied to these elderly people saying, “We compressed and paid you once.” That is how mobile money is robbing us.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Based on that, the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 is also supposed to be amended to take care of urgency banking and Islamic banking. We have so many investors from the Middle East, who would like to bring money so that our people can engage in business without paying high interest rates. However, some people with networks in the banking sector are frustrating this. 

May I know from Government, when a Bill to amend the 2004 Financial Institutions Act will be in this House? Or Mr Speaker, grant me permission to introduce a Private Member’s Bill next week. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know that a Speaker does not grant permission for Private Member’s Bills; you know the procedure. Do the right thing and it will be handled.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, again I have noted with a lot of concern, the issues that have been raised, particularly the level of cybercrime that is now afflicting our country.

I will communicate to my immediate supervisor, the one I am standing-in for at the moment, the Prime Minister; so that he draws this to the attention of the minister of finance. I have also seen other issues that have been raised. Particularly, matters that concern the sector of the elderly and I will indicate to the Prime Minister to draw it to the attention of the minister for the elderly. They must come and explain to the House what they have done. I will do that.

2.50
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hoping that the ministers in the canteen are following this debate, and that the acting Leader of Government Business, hon. Ecweru, will communicate the matters I am going to raise, I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning a fuel storage facility that is being constructed in my area near three primary schools.

Mr Speaker, on 12 August 2013, the Town Clerk of Mukono, Innocent Ahimbisibwe, approved a plan for construction of a fuel filling station on Plot 1776 and 1775 at Seeta in Gongobe LC I. This was contrary to the laid down procedure because the National Environment Management Authority had not issued a certificate to the developers, Synergy Oil Uganda Ltd. They awarded this certificate a year later, in 2014.

Further to that, the certificate was awarded to Synergy Oil Ltd, but the Ministry of Energy gave the permit for the construction of this fuel station to a company called Ainu Shamsi Energy Uganda Ltd.

Mr Speaker, in May 2013, the construction company Winslet Associates, on behalf of Synergy Oils Ltd applied for a permit to create an access road off Kampala-Jinja Highway, which was granted by UNRA. Again, in November 2014 UNRA granted a similar permission to a Chinese company called Chinese Nanjing International Limited to construct a fuel storage facility for another company called AS Energy Ltd at the same premises. 

In the circumstances, therefore, we have had three different companies issued with permission to construct a fuel filling station at the same location by different government departments. 

The other issue of greater contradiction is that two different plans have been issued for the same plot; one for a fuel service station and another for a fuel storage facility. On the ground, it is AS Energy, which is constructing a fuel storage facility at a place near three primary schools namely: Seeta Central Primary school, Seeta Boarding Primary school and St Augustine Primary School. The three schools have a total of 1,500 pupils. 

We the people of Mukono find this a very big problem to our people, especially the fact that the facility being installed is not compatible with institutions in its neighbourhood. The construction of this oil storage facility is being done at night. During day these people never show up. At night, they come and start installing their tanks. We have been to every office such as NEMA, the Ministry of Energy and to the local authorities in Mukono but we have not got any assistance.

I am here, on behalf of the people of Mukono, especially residents of Gongobe Village in Seeta and more so the 1,500 pupils of the three schools I have mentioned, to pray that this August House orders the relevant ministries to call off this development until this matter is investigated. At the moment, we are confused; we do not know which of the three companies is constructing this installation. Secondly, we do not know whom to approach. Thirdly, we do not know what will happen to our people once this facility goes into action. 

We request that this Parliament urges Government to lay before this August House the guidelines for construction of fuel stations and oil storage facilities in the country. When I checked on Ministry of Energy page on the internet, I found out that what they have at the moment is only a draft of the guidelines and they have indicated that they are in the process of collecting public views on those guidelines.

Can we, therefore, as a country continue allowing constructions and developments like this one without guidelines? My answer is “No” and I would like to request that this august House orders Government to call off the licencing of the construction of fuel stations in the country and oil storage facilities until such a period when the country shall have guidelines to guide developers.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, given the danger caused by fuel installations, the modern trend is that such facilities are built in isolation and are not manned. In Uganda, however, fuel stations are mushrooming everywhere exposing the general public and the workers are paid very little money without any insurance whatsoever.

Our prayer is that we look into the conditions under which Ugandans work at fuel stations and also call upon the authorities to consider closing down some fuel outlets, especially in the metropolitan districts of Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi and Kampala.

Finally, we should be having an authority called the greater Kampala Physical Planning Authority to guide development in the districts of Wakiso, Mukono, Mpigi and Kampala. That authority is provided for under Section 21 of the Kampala Capital City Act. However, it is now five years since this Parliament passed that law; the Minister for Kampala has deliberately refused to constitute the authority. 

In the process, so many developments are taking in the greater Kampala Metropolitan area without a physical planning authority and this is a very big problem to the country. I, therefore, request you, Mr Speaker, to ask the government that they immediately constitute the greater Kampala Physical Planning Authority. Otherwise, we, the people of Mukono and Kampala, Wakiso and Mpigi are going to stop all developments in our areas because they are not guided. 

We also hope that Government will heed our prayers and call off the construction of a fuel storage facility taking place right now –(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for giving way. Mr Speaker, this does not only apply to Kampala and Mukono. The whole country is being attacked in terms of environmental degradation. When you are going to Mbarara, after Kyengera, there is a swamp, which is being wiped away by the construction of fuel storage tanks. Even fear for the Rosebud; a report came here in Parliament talking about the degradation of the area where rosebud is growing flowers. This report was brought in this Parliament and we have never seen the outcome of that investigation.

Even last week, we engaged the director of NEMA at the Committee on Human Rights. This man totally failed to explain why swamps are being wiped away. He only says that some people have land titles. However, even where there are no land titles, we are going to have a big problem, including the swamps of Bushenyi. In my municipality, everyone is doing whatever they please in the swamps. 

Therefore, it is a big concern for this country and this Parliament should come up with a very stringent law. Otherwise we shall have a big disaster. My friend here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point did you rise?

MR TAYEBWA: I was giving additional information to hon. Betty Nambooze. There is my friend here the minister of disaster; we were talking together as we had lunch on this season that is coming up. We expect heavy rains and there will be no protection for these rivers because everything will be wiped away since water has nowhere to settle. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: I would like to thank hon. Odo for the very important information he has given me. Mr Speaker, our last prayer is that we shall not wait for a disaster; let this Parliament not wait for a disaster to happen in Mukono. We pray that Parliament directs NEMA, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Mukono Municipal Council to call off this project until all issues concerning it have been rectified.

With that, I beg to lay on Table the documents I have been referring to. First, this is a certificate awarded by NEMA to Synergy Oils Uganda Limited on 12 August 2014 -
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are those original copies?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, these are photocopies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will not allow that.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, you allowed hon. Betty Nambooze to raise a matter of national importance as per our Rules of Procedure and the standard of how you raise a matter of national concern is known. 

According to her presentation and exposition, it is quite clear that she is presenting a petition from the people of Mukono and the honourable Member of Parliament knows clearly our Rules of Procedure regarding a petition. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for a Member of Parliament to raise a matter that is of great importance, speaking on behalf and for the concerns of the people and also bring her prayers to move Parliament to take decision without following proper procedure and the rules of our Parliament. 

Is it procedurally right for a Member of Parliament to raise a matter of that great importance and also move Parliament to act without following the proper procedure of raising a petition properly signed by the people for us to know whether she is rightly speaking on behalf of the people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that the matter raised by the member for Mukono Municipality exceeded the provisions of the rules under which she had sought the attention of the House. The honourable member knows how to move this House to take decision; you go through the door and not through the window – (Laughter) 

Honourable members, this matter to the extent that there is construction going on in the proximity of the primary school should be dealt with properly.

3.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I rise to raise a matter of national importance. It is a constitutional matter that every Ugandan has a right to a clean and healthy environment and the National Environment Act under sections 57 and 58 creates an obligation on the polluter to ensure that the citizens enjoy a clean and healthy environment.
I have a big problem in my constituency in Jinja where a factory by the names Nile Agro Processing pollutes the environment without treating the fumes from the factory. Specifically referring, there is a church called JCC, which neighbours the factory. Mr Speaker, good enough I was with you there last year and you saw the airborne particles that were coming from the factory, which affects the health of the people in that area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall not make the Speaker a witness - (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, there have been efforts by Jinja Municipal Council to write to Nile Agro Processing to install a treatment plant within the factory and this has not been taken heed of.

Finally, the National Environment Management Authority carried out an assessment and discovered that the fumes getting out of the factory in that area of operation are dangerous to the environment, health and have safety risks which have catastrophic effects on the lives of the people and workers within that area. 
Mr Speaker, all efforts have been made to raise issues to do with this pollution and it is a known principle of law that the polluter pays. May I know from the Prime Minister because under the law, he is the head of the inter-ministerial Government Committee on Environment and the Minister of Environment, what action they are taking to ensure that they attend to such a very serious matter which affects the lives of our people? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, you had ruled earlier that we only lay original documents but I am not the author of this document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already spoken to the documents, they are on record. If it comes to somebody else handling it, those documents will be brought forward and will be handled at that stage. Is there any response on this issue of the factory in Jinja?

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not get that question properly because I have just – (Laughter)- come in from the caucus but what he is telling me is about NEMA polluting an industry -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not NEMA; there is a company called Nile Agro Processing. It is running a factory within the proximity of a church and other institutions. There have been complaints of pollution. It has been investigated and confirmed that such pollution is actually being emitted in the air. 

They have been asked to stop, they have not stopped; they have been asked to install equipment that can regulate this thing and they have not done so. What is the way forward? That was the issue. 

MR WAKIKOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is a serious matter and I will have to dig further on why they are not obeying lawful orders and we shall obviously take serious action to make sure that they comply with the environmental requirements. They should not pollute because initially, there was another factory of leather which had combined with another in Busia and we seriously acted and even stopped them temporarily and they have now stopped.

We are going to follow it very seriously and make sure they comply, like the one in Busia did. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.11
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, I wish to lay on Table the following financial statements for the years ended 30 June 2014 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. 

    i. The Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAP)
    ii. The Uganda Embassy, Beijing
    iii. The Uganda Consulate, Guangzhou
    iv. Norwegian Programme for Capacity Development in Higher Education and Research for Development (NORHED) funded project
    v. Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project 1 (CAIIP – I)
    vi. The Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project – IGG Component IDA 4626 – UG
    vii. Development of National Urban Solid Waste Management Strategy Grant No. TF099697
    viii. National Enterprise Corporation Tractor Project Limited
    ix. National Enterprise Corporation Construction Works and Engineering Limited
    x. National Enterprise Corporation Tractor Hire Scheme Limited
    xi. Uganda good governance Programme – Ministry of Local Government Component
    xii. District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP) – IFAD Loan Nos. 707-UG and Grant Nos. 895 – UG, 1164-UG)
    xiii. The Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF  2)
    xiv. Coordinating Office for Control of Trypanosomiasis in Uganda (COCTU)
    xv. National Enterprise Corporation Farm Katonga Limited
    xvi. Uganda Seeds Company Limited
    xvii. Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase 2 (VODP 2) IFAD Loan No. 806- UG
    xviii. Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) Project - IDA Credit No. 5223-UG
    xix. Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services Project (ATAAS) IDA  CR. 4769-UG
    xx. Transforming Settlement of Urban Poor in Uganda (TSUPU) – Project P122475 & P121015
    xxi. Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project 1 (MATIP-I) ADF Loan No. 2100150019294
    xxii. East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project IDA CR. 41470 –UG
    xxiii. Ministry of Energy And Mineral Development – Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP)
    xxiv. Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD)/Project Coordination Unit (PCU) Component
    xxv. Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project – Operations Accounts
    xxvi. Leveraging Municipal Improvement Infrastructure Investment (LMIII) Project – Global Development Grant No. OPP1053920
    xxvii. East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project IDA CR. 4147 –UG
    xxviii. Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project II (CAIIP – II)
    xxix. Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project III (CAIIP – III)
    xxx. Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity (EAAP) Project – IDA CR. 4672-UG

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. They all stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts to handle within the framework of the rules and laws and guide the House on how to proceed with this matter. I thank you. Next item.

STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED ILLEGAL DEMOLITION OF A GOVERNMENT OWNED COMMERCIAL BUILDING ON PLOT 60-62 ALIDINA ROAD, JINJA MUNICIPALITY EAST

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister for Internal Affairs.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, the minister and his team are still engaged. I beg that we defer this so that we draw their attention and at the next sitting, they could be able to present that comprehensive report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We will receive it today. Just advise the minister that we will be waiting for that statement today.

MR ECWERU: I will do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Next item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDENT) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I hope that we shall be able to proceed and finalise with this Bill today as it will go on the record of our performance as another Bill finalised.

We had some discussions and we made some steps on this, if we can make progress.

Clause 9

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairperson, I stand on a point of procedure. We agreed in this House that we shall never debate and pass any Bill when we do not have quorum and when I look around, we do not have quorum in this House to proceed with this Bill. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, this is a Government Bill. 


MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I know it is a Government Bill but we know that there are ministers responsible. Is it in order for a minister who has never read the Bill to come here and say the House should resume?

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINIRALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Chairperson and honourable members, I have been delegated with full authority. I beg to move that the House do resume.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House, which was debated be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, the stage is for reporting; Report of the Committee of the whole House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Don’t you think that it would be procedurally right that you conduct some tutorials to this Frontbench on how to deal with Government Business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, report of the Committee of the whole House.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not reported yet, honourable minister.

MR WAKIKOONA: There was nothing discussed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please report first before you move for adoption. Can we have a report of the Committee of the whole House?

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikoona): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that we did not proceed with committee stage because of lack of quorum. I beg to report. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, motion for adoption of the report.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikoona): Mr Speaker, I have been ambushed today -(Laughter)- but I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. I have noticed you come to this House on time to transact business but on two occasions, a procedural matter has been raised which frustrates the business of the House. I am only wondering whether it is not procedural that then we fully comply with rule 23, which requires that once a procedural matter is raised, a bell is rung for 15 minutes so that we see whether Members can come in and then proceed with the business of the House. I am afraid that if we do not comply with the rules, we may be engaged in this type of business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is certainly a valid point but we are not going to deal anymore with that Bill. That matter was closed; we have other items to discuss, so we must move.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $110 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE MUYEMBE–NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD PROJECT

3.28 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion on the proposal to borrow up to US$110 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. 

This 92-kilometer road is part of the national network located in North Eastern Uganda. It has been in a very sorry state. We need this road to be upgraded starting in Muyembe and ending in Nakapiripirit Town and it will contribute to national development. It will ease travel to that very important area - Karamoja - and it will join with the other projects that are already ongoing between Nakapiripirit and Moroto up to Kotido.

This loan was presented to Parliament and it was considered by the Committee on National Economy and they have developed a report to present to the House. I beg to move.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose a question for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $110 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe– Nakapiripirit Road project. That is the motion, which I now propose for your debate and the committee has examined it. I will now allow the committee to report. 

MR SSASAGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. The minister has rightly informed the House that the committee is yet to submit the report to the House. Don’t you think it would be procedurally right that we first wait for the committee’s report before we can discuss the motion to borrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you hear what I just said? I said that this is the motion that I now propose for your debate but the matter had gone to the committee. I now call the committee chairperson to report.

Honourable members, today in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have the Executive of the Africa-Arab Youth Council. They are here in Parliament this afternoon to understudy what we do here as the Parliament of Uganda. We have:

    i. Mr Abdul Haddi Lahweeg who is the President from Libya
    ii. Mr Abbas Agaba, the Vice-President from Uganda
    iii. Ebenezer Oyetakiu – Member, Supervisory Board (Nigeria)
    iv. Alfred Muzwake SigUdhula (South Africa)
    v. Ali Zarzour (Egypt)
    vi. Talal-Tareq-AlBasher (Iraq)
    vii. Kasamba Yaqopuba Diabi (Burkina Faso)
    viii. Kawther Ahmed Fituri (Tunisia)
    ix. Mutesi Mary (Uganda)
    x. Rabha Al Farissi – Secretariat (Libya)
    xi. Fatuma Hussein – Secretariat (Egypt)

They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here in accordance with rule 166(2) (b) of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure to lay a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow US$110 million from the Islamic Development Bank, to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project. Mr Speaker, before I read the report, I wish to lay on Table minutes of the committee meetings. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture those minutes.

MS KAABULE: I also wish to lay on Table, the brief to Parliament and the resolutions, the proposal appraisal document, the project agreement and the annex computation of the capital cost in US Dollars. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture all those supporting documents to the request.

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow US$110 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project in accordance with rule 166 (2)(b) of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 26 November 2014 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

I will not go through the methodology; you can see it there. The committee also studied reference letters to the documents. The committee also undertook a field inspection to the implementation site of the proposed road project in the districts of Bulambuli, Kween and Nakapiripirit.

Background 

The provision of an efficient road network has been an important focus and a key ingredient in the development efforts for African governments and the donor community in the recent years.  Government has, therefore, accorded significant importance to the provision of a sound and well‐coordinated transportation system. 

Transport infrastructure has been considered as a pre‐requisite for ensuring sustainable socio‐economic development and consolidation of both national unity and security of the country. The linkages of transport to poverty reduction and to long-term economic growth are significant and need not be emphasised. Infrastructure has been a priority in the Government’s comprehensive development strategy and its benefits were anticipated to be reflected in better incomes and higher economic growth.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road is part of the national road network located in the north-eastern part of Uganda and has earthen/gravel surface. The Muyembe–Nakapiripirit project area is a growing agricultural region, which traverses the districts of Bulambuli, Kween and Nakapiripirit. The road is used for transportation of raw materials to Tororo Cement Factory for making limestone. Other items that are transported on the road include dairy products, beans, rice, groundnuts, maize, potatoes, cassava, fruits and vegetables to trading centres in the north-eastern region. 

The road is also used to transport marble and connects to Kenya through Amudat. The current poor condition and limited serviceability of existing earthen/gravel road link has resulted into considerable high vehicle operating cost and economic losses. 

Upgrading Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road will provide a linkage with Nakapiripiriti-Moroto Road, whose funding was approved by Parliament a few years ago and is currently under construction, hence providing a continuous all weather road between Moroto and Mbale districts. Therefore, upgrading of this road to a better standard will result in socio-economic development in the project area and the surrounding areas.  

Alignment of the Project to the Country Strategy

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the project is in line with the National Development Plan (2010/2011–2014/2015) and is anchored on two pillars of the NDP, for example, infrastructure for development and improving capacity skills development for poverty reduction. The project is also within the context of Uganda’s 10-year Road Sector Development Strategy (RSDP 3). 

This identifies critical transport infrastructure that has high development impact for the reduction of poverty. The project is also aligned to the Government of Uganda’s National Transport Development Policy, which defines strategic objectives for the development of the transport sector to address the deficiencies in the transport system.  The project road will also support the tourism activities at Pian Upe Park area and Mt Elgon National Park.

Furthermore, Government of Uganda’s 2002 National Transport Policy and Strategy places emphasis on technically sound, economically justified and financially sustainable transport infrastructure.

Project objective

The development objective of this project is to facilitate socio-economic development by upgrading the existing earthen/gravel road to improve its capacity, serviceability and safety in order to meet the present and future transportation demands and enhance the overall efficiency of the road transport system. 

The specific objectives of the project are:

    1) To upgrade 92 kilometers of the existing gravel road between Muyembe and Nakapiririt towns to asphaltic paved road standard and improve the 25 kilometers of access road links.
    2) Accelerate economic activity by improving access of people to social amenities, market places, business and employment opportunities in order to improve internal and sub-regional connectivity and economic growth.

Project benefits

The expected key benefits of the project include:

    1) Improved regional and national connectivity.
    2) Reduction in travel times and cost savings.
    3) Increased economic and social interaction of the communities and unlocking tourism potential.
    4) Increased access to markets, employment opportunities and income.

Project Description and Components

The project comprises of all works related to upgrading the existing 2-lane gravel road to a 2-lane 3.65 meter wide traffic lane, with a 2-meter paved shoulders on each side; improvement of the 25-kilometre access roads, drainage works, provision of weighing and axle load control equipment, road side facilities, additional land acquisition for adjusting existing alignment and roadway expansion and other associated civil works.  The project components are outlined in the table which you have on page 5. I need not read the details of the table since you have it. The source of that table is the project appraisal reports of May 2014. You should take note that the numbers are parenthesis

Project Cost and Financing Agreement

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the project cost estimate is US$ 128 million or approximately Shs 329.60 billion. You should take note that the rate at which we calculated that is at Shs 2,572 per dollar. That is at March 2014. 

The project cost includes the base cost, physical contingencies of 5 percent and price contingency of 15 percent and this is due to foreign currency variations and domestic price changes. The project cost by components and source of finance are shown in Table 2.

Financing 

The cost of the project will be financed by the Islamic Development Bank and Government of Uganda. The financing from IDB will be through the Istisna’a amounting to US$ 110 million which is equivalent to Shs 283.25 billion and it is to cover 86 percent of the total project cost. 

You should take note that Istisna’a is a contract whereby a party undertakes to produce a specific thing which is possible to be made according to certain agreed upon specification at a determined price and for a fixed date of delivery. This undertaking of production includes any process of manufacturing, construction, assembling and packaging.

Table 3 on page- indicates disbursement projection by component for the entire project implementation period. Civil works will claim the largest amount of the disbursements constituting 74.22 percent of the project funds. This will be followed by contingency costs which we calculated at 16.66 percent which will be met by both IDB at 86 percent and Government at 14 percent.

Land acquisition costs will amount to US$ 5 million which is equivalent of Shs12.86 billion in the first year of implementation. That is this year, 2015. 

The average cost of civil works for up-grading of this road at 92 kilometres is estimated at US$ 85 million. This implies that the estimated unit cost of up-grading this road is US$ 0.92 million/kilometer, which is approximately Shs 2.38 billion. This is in contrast with the average unit cost of Vurra-Arua-Oraba-Koboko Road which is 92 Kilometres whose contract price was Shs 132,123,510,816, and therefore a unit cost of Shs 1.44 billion.

Loan Terms and Conditions

The terms of the loan, that is the IDB are as follows:

    • We have the loan amount at US$ 110 million. 
    • The loan period is 19 years, including four years of grace.
    • The interest rate is 6 months: US$ LIBOR plus 155 points.
    • The road life span is 20 years.

The conditions of the Loan

Mr Speaker, in addition to the entry into force of the loan agreement, the following conditions are attached to the loan:

    i. Disbursement of approved funds for the purpose of the civil works under the contract shall be subject to provision of evidence to the effect that the portions of the land required for the relevant phase of the project implementation has been actually and legally acquired in accordance with the approved Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and land valuation report;
    ii. All procurements are conducted in line with IDB procedures which are in line with public procurement principles enshrined under our PPDA laws;
    iii. Issuance by the Attorney-General of Uganda of a legal opinion on the validity of the loan documents to the Republic of Uganda; and
    iv. Submission to the IDB on regular basis, of financial reports including Quarterly Progress Reports and Annual Audited Statements of Accounts on the Project.

Financing Conditionality

Table 4 below shows the conditions required for financing this loan. The present value of this loan is US$ 93.294 million which is less than the nominal value of this loan contracted; that is US$ 110 million which implies that the country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the amount to be borrowed in present times. 

However, the loan is non-concessional since its grant element of 15 per cent is less than the threshold of 35 per cent for concessional financing and it is lower than 25 per cent for non-concessional borrowing provided in the Uganda Public Debt Management Framework, 2013. You have the table which indicates the debt indicators of this loan. I do not need to go through it.

Implementation Arrangement

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the executing agency of this project will be the Ministry of Works and Transport through Uganda National Roads Authority. Overall project implementation period is estimated at four years and was meant to start in January 2015 ending by December 2018. The overall construction period shall be three years after the commencement of the project.

Observations and Recommendations of the Committee

Project Istisna’a Financing Mode

The committee observed that the Islamic Development Bank will make available US$ 110 million for the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project and sell the same to the Republic of Uganda; that is the Istisna’a Financing. 

This implies that the bank will finance the upgrading of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project at a capital cost of US$ 114.12 million and sell the asset to Uganda at US$ 163.88 million. This sale price represents the repayment Uganda has to make to the lender for a period of 15 years. 

Since the interest is based on a six months’ London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) on the market plus 155 point, that is the 1.55 per cent, this loan is a market based loan (Non concessional) which requires that this project starts generating revenue for Government within a period of not more than five years as provided for in the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013.

The committee notes that due to high non-concessionality of this loan whose grant element is 15 per cent, despite its economic viability, it does not generate revenue to Government explicitly in the medium term to qualify for highly non concessional financing. Therefore, the project is not suitable for the above financing modality.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should desist from negotiating non-concessional loans at market rates for projects that will not generate direct revenue within the medium term. 

Government should further ensure that such non-concessional loans fall within the prescribed PDMF 2013 category of non-concessional financing of 25 per cent grant element.

Prioritisation of Development Projects in Karamoja Region 

The committee noted the high concentration of development projects in mainly the southern part of Karamoja, for example, the Moroto–Nakapiripirit road project, Dry Land Integrated Development Project and so forth leaving the northern part of Karamoja with very limited development interventions especially in the areas of infrastructure development.
Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should show serious commitment to the people of Karamoja by ensuring that the Lira-Abim-Kotido-Kaabong road and the Moroto-Kotido- Kaabong road are also given urgent attention.

Project Management Unit 

The committee noted that the Project Management Unit established for the implementation of upgrading the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa–Kamonkoli road project will also double as the project management unit for this project. 

However, the upgrading of Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa –Kamonkoli roads has not yet taken off. The effectiveness of managing this project in different localities will constrain its timely implementation.

Therefore, the committee recommends for a dedicated and separate project management unit to be established under Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) for the implementation of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project with definite time-lines for completion of work.

Project Benefits

The committee observed that this project has many positive impacts that will lead to increased urbanisation, improved transport services, reduced travel time, reduced public transport costs and improved access to social services that will better the standards of living and above all, boost rural economic development especially through tourism and value addition for the agricultural produce in the project areas. 

Implementation delays 

The committee observed that delays in the implementation of road projects that are debt financed, for example, Masaka-Bukakata Road (41 km), Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkholi (111 km), Mbarara-Bypass (40 km), Kigumba-Masindi- Hoima–Bulima-Kabwoya (135 km) and Kamwenge–Fort Portal (65 km), is still a major challenge for the government and might as well be a major source of risk for this project. 

The risk of delays in fulfillment of conditions for loan effectiveness and other risks associated with implementation delays could result in failure to achieve the project objectives in time.

The committee recommends, therefore, for the close monitoring of the procurement process by the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA to ensure the recruitment of suitably experienced civil works contractors and supervising consulting firms. 

The close supervision and more pro-active role by UNRA during project implementation should reduce the risks of implementation delays of this project.

Land Compensation 

The committee observed that land acquisition and resettlement may result in some delays during road construction activities. Though 85 per cent of the land acquisition payments have already been made, cases of residents claiming to have been left out still keep cropping up in a number of road construction projects. 

There are also cases of residents who get cleared but refuse to move off the compensated properties claiming that they were undervalued. Such cases force the contractors to skip some sections interrupting their work schedules.
Therefore, the committee recommends that Government ensures that valuation and actual compensation for land for this project is made in time so that land acquisition does not delay the implementation of the activities of this project. Government should also ensure that people who have been compensated vacate the land to pave way for development.

Government Counterpart Financing 

The committee noted that Government is supposed to pay counterpart financing that is 14.06 of the project costs amounting $ 18 million (equivalent to Shs 46.35 billion), of which land compensation costs will amount to $ 5 million (Shs 12.86 billion) in the first year of implementation, that is 2015.  However, Government has provided Shs 0.5 billion in the financial year 2014/2015 to UNRA for land acquisition. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that the required counter-part funds as a result of this project are adequately budgeted for and timely disbursed during the implementation of this project.

Supervision and Contract Management 

The committee further observed the slow improvements in supervision and contract management by UNRA due to the high project cost, that is, UNRA staff attachment ratio where a project engineer is handling more than four projects. 

These staffing gaps continue to impact on the effective supervision of projects. Due to staffing gaps, a number of debt financed projects in the roads sub-sector continue to be supervised by hired consultants whose charges are exorbitant. 

In some circumstances too, there is also laxity among UNRA and consultants who have not taken their supervisory responsibilities seriously. The committee recommends that UNRA expedites the recruitment of competent staff while giving due consideration to gender and further ensures that supervision of road projects is taken very seriously. 

Road Safety Considerations 

The committee observed that on a number of road projects, road safety concerns are not considered a priority during execution of civil works. 

Furthermore, occupation health safety for a number of road projects is not adequately addressed due to lack of protective gears for workers, among others. Safety guards, if neglected, pose adverse effects to the environment and the population. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport together with UNRA should ensure that adequate safety measures for this project and other ongoing and future road projects are effectively provided and enforced. 

Project designs and Bills of Quantities (BoQs) for this project and other future road projects incorporate such measures to prevent, minimise and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social effects of projects. For contracts where the safety furniture is included in the BOQs, final payments should be withheld until there is compliance. 

Inter-Ministerial /Agency Coordination
The committee observed the continued lack of coordination between ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs)such as the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Water and Environment as utility providers. 

There are a number of electricity distribution lines along the projects road that are likely to be affected necessitating their relocation in the future, an expense which would have been avoided.  

The committee recommends as follows:

Government should strengthen the coordination capacities between MDAs in the implementation of projects in order to minimise wastage of limited available resources. Service lines should be provided for laying cables thus preventing disruption and repetition of work once the road works have commenced.

The Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and Ministry of Energy should consider reviewing road designs and laying underground cables for future road works to minimise environmental degradation, vandalism and for optimal utilisation of space.

Sanitary Facilities along the Highway

The committee noted that the appraisal of this road project had not included the construction of sanitary facilities along the highway.  This is in line with the recommendation by Parliament that all new roads should provide for such facilities and resting areas.

The committee, therefore, recommends that this provision be catered for and that Government devises a lasting means of setting up and maintaining these facilities along all new highways.

Contingency Fees

The committee notes that the 16.67 per cent contingency fees provided for in the project costing is too high and  this could be better utilised in other areas of the project to benefit the people of Uganda.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the amount for contingency for the project be reduced to 10 per cent and the remaining 6.67 per cent be utilised to construct the 26 kilometer stretch from Nakapiripirit to Amudat, which connects Uganda to Kenya.

In conclusion, the project as a whole is technically feasible and economically viable. It	will open up the Karamoja region and is expected to promote agriculture 	and tourism. The committee, therefore, recommends that request by Government to borrow $ 110 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the upgrading of the Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road project be approved. I beg to Move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, Madam Chairperson for a very good report. Honuorable members the question has already been proposed for your debate and debate starts now. We will be using three minutes each. Is that okay?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

4.02
MRS	MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and also the borrowing of money for constructing Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. 

I would like thank the Government of Uganda, and NRM in particular, for emphasising the construction of roads as the backbone for development. Without roads you cannot do anything. We need the road for transporting our goods and commodities. We need the road to link Uganda with other countries. 

I support the loan because of experience. I remember when we were begging for our road from Arua-Koboko-Kaya to be constructed, it took us a lot of time. Today, I am happy that the road is constructed. It takes only 30 minutes to move from Koboko to Arua unlike those days when it would take about two to three hours. It is important that this part of Eastern Uganda also enjoys good roads like other parts Uganda. I support the idea that we need to connect Nakapiripirit to other parts so that we can go to Sudan. 

However, I would like to raise an issue of compensation. It is very important that we compensate- even now, in Koboko, there are some people who are not yet compensated and they are still waiting for their money. They were generous, they let the road be constructed but they are not yet compensated.

I beg the citizens to allow the road to be constructed. If you insist on compensation, it will delay yet you need the road. Let the road be constructed and then the people are compensated. 

I thank Government for funding this road. I pray that they will construct it in time and in good condition. Otherwise, we do not want any shoddy work whereby within a very short time, the road has potholes.  

I would like the road to consider some areas for utility like constructing pipe lines. Sometimes, a new road is being cut across to fix water pipes and this destroys the road. Therefore, we need to plan for cables and for water pipes so that we do not destroy the beautiful roads, which are made for us.  I support the motion. Thank you very much.

4.07
MS JALIA BINTU LUKUMU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I stand to support the motion that the loan be passed. The Muyembe–Nakapiripiriti Road is a major road, indeed. It is only when you take that route that you will appreciate the agricultural products; the industrial raw materials that are carried from the different districts within Karamoja region to other parts of the country.

Of recent, the committees have been delaying their country- wide tour to the Karamoja region because of the fear that if it rains when you are on that route, then you pray to your God that you do not get washed on these roads. It is the right time that Government has brought this loan. I beg the House to pass this loan so that the other parts of the country have a good and reliable road and that the whole country is covered by tarmac. 

Mr Speaker, as we pass this loan, I pray and urge Government that the delays, which have affected other roads in the same way got loans, are addressed, to be specific, the Kigumba- Masindi-Kaboya-Kenjonjo. This road hit a snag and yet this House passed a loan a year ago, which has not been put to use. Yet this loan has started accruing interest. Therefore, I urge Government to address those other delays and challenges so that this road does not face similar challenges. 

In the report, I have not seen the provision, which addresses the environment, particularly the planting of tress along the high way. I am seeking clarification. The country is facing climate change. It is very hot; the temperatures have been at 32 almost everywhere in the country. This is partly because the tree cover is not up to the expectation in order to cover the heat, stop the heavy winds and also allow us get enough rains. I would like to find out from the minister. I do not want to task the chairperson. In this loan, why haven’t you included the component of environment? I would like to propose that in our recommendations, we include planting trees along that road so that we may start addressing the issues of climate change.

I have not equally seen the access to homes, institutions and trading centres in the report of the committee. I also would like my fears to be addressed. Why haven’t you included access to homes, institutions and trading centres in the report? 

Lastly, I am happy that in the committee’s recommendations, they have talked about the inclusion of the sanitary facilities along the road. This will help us a lot in addressing climate change. (Member timed out.)


4.10
MR NATHAN	NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very interested to know the interest rate at which we are borrowing money. According to the committee, it is saying LIBOR plus 1.55 percent. At the current rate on London market, the LIBOR rate is 5.5 percent. It means 5.5 percent plus 1.1 percent, we are talking of 7.05 percent. Is this a commercial loan or what? If it is a commercial loan why didn’t you go for IDA loan, which is about 1 percent instead of going for this expensive loan and yet the Islamic Bank  is supposed to give free interest loans.

My second point is about heavy trucks, which are on that road. Whoever has seen heavy trucks, which are using those roads have spoiled the road especially from Sironko through Mbale up to Tororo. Have you made a provision that this road will last long because the trucks you are talking about are the ones carrying heavy stones. What provision have you put in place? What is the life span of the road you are going to construct?

The road reserve and the compensation - Mr Speaker, if you have been to Nakapiripirit and Amudat, this is a game reserve. Whom are they going to compensate on that road?  A game reserve belongs to Government and most of the land is Government-owned. Whom are they going to pay this $18 million? Is it another way of embezzling? A game reserve belongs to Government.

Furthermore, I see the contingence he is talking about is 20 per cent; 5 plus 15, which is 20 per cent. I do not know where the committee is getting 16.7 per cent, unless the price is 15 and the physical is 5, making it 20 per cent.

Having said that, if you compute using your rate, the money you will save, if you change the conditions will be about Shs 9 million and yet, 92 km is going to take $ 120 million. How can Shs 9 million construct 26km are you joking?

Again, the price of the road is already known by the contractors. That means the tenderers are already aware of the price. They know it is about $128 million. This business of letting tenderers know the price in advance, we are not going to get value. They will tender around that.

What plans did the committee put in place to deal with these people who have already known the price? As we debate now, the contractors are watching and know that the road price is $ 128 million.

Finally, I would like to look at financial audit; they have said $120,000 is for financial audit but they have not included value for money audit. The big problem we have in these construction projects is that financial audit is just paper work audit. You need to do value for money audit. I do not see any provision for value for money audit.

If we do not include that provision, we are going to waste this money. We shall not do what the Member for Koboko said. She said she wants a real road. You will not get value for money audit with financial audit. Without it, we are doing nothing.

Mr Speaker, this road is overdue; whoever has been to Karamoja knows it. I operate there and we have suffered for the last 30 years. Even if you did the road yesterday, you must compensate us for the losses we made in 30 years. 

This road should have been built long ago, being a Karimojong from Moroto who knows this road better than these ones who come to eat in Kampala. We have suffered. The road should have been built. (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to support the motion. This road needs to be worked on because we have been hearing stories about those roads, much as I have not been there.

However, I am interested in knowing what the committee refers to as roadside activities, as mentioned in the report. What are those roadside activities? Do these include the roadside markets that we talked about that whenever we are passing a loan, the markets should be in place for our women to benefit?

The issue of staffing at UNRA keeps on coming up. But we keep on passing loans for construction of many roads across the country. 

Since the Katosi scandal, there has been a very big gap at UNRA. When you travel along these roads that have been constructed, especially Mbarara-Kabale Road, you saw recently when we were coming from Women’s Day celebrations. They are reworking on the roads that we thought had been completed.

This implies that there is a gap in terms of supervision. This means that if we do not strengthen the implementing agency, we are borrowing this money to waste because it is not doing the right thing. Why should they work on the road, then after two or three months, it develops potholes? 

This road they are proposing has a lifespan of 20 years, which leaves me with a lot of doubt as to whether it will reach the 20 years because of lack of supervision on the side of the implementing agency, because they failed to recruit staff to do supervision.

Mr Speaker, the issue of inter-ministerial coordination is very critical. Recently, we have been talking about “kaveera” and the Ministry of Water and Environment have been giving excuses about Ministry of Trade and others. Do we serve different Governments? I thought that whenever there is a project that is going to be implemented by Government, the different ministries and sectors should come together to avoid double work.

Look at electricity lines, the poles are here, tomorrow they will shift; that is wasting money. We borrow money to pay for energy; we are borrowing money for the roads. Government needs to come up such that projects that involve more than two or three ministries, let them sit together rather than waste Government’s and tax payers’ money in terms of paying back the loans that have not been well utilised.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the quality of work, I have been quarrelling several times for the last four years. I do not know whether the contractors that are slated to undertaker this kind of work are monitored. They do their work haphazardly; look at the Ishaka-Kagamba Road that passes through Sheema, I keep saying that if I had the authority, I would stop that contractor and get another one. I do not know whether there is proper supervision. 

Mr Speaker, we need to be serious, we borrow money, it should be well utilised. Government is spending a lot of money. Otherwise, I support the motion. I thank you.

4.19
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been to Amudat and Nakapiripirit and I saw the condition of this road. Therefore, I will support its construction.

However, the question I would like to ask Government and the committee is:  Was this the only financing option available? If you read the report of the committee, they ask Government to desist from contracting non-concessional loans. In fact, I thought that at the end of the report, the chairperson would recommend that this loan should not be passed by Parliament. Probably, the need for that road is what the committee go for that non-concessional loan.

Every year, the Ministry of Finance publishes a report on loans and tables it in Parliament. If you read that report, as a country, we have contracted over $6 billion. The total wealth of this country, because of different figures, is just about $20 billion. 

There are two points I would like to make. In the report of the Ministry of Finance, more than $2 billion loans have been approved by this Parliament but there is no absorption capacity by Government.

Last year, we paid $4 million interest on these loans that have been contracted but there is no capacity to absorb the money.

Before we borrow the money for the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, why don’t we first use this money that was committed and we are paying interest? We are turning borrowing into a ceremony.

Mr Speaker, by international practice, countries are not supposed to borrow up to the total wealth of their GDP. Last year, if you read both local and international loans that the country has contracted, we are nearly $ 8 billion; can this Parliament for once first debate these loans, the amount of money we have contracted before we begin sanctioning more? 

These reports are brought here; we carry them home and then wait for other requests to borrow. We are mortgaging this country; we can be happy with roads. You remember in 1992, we were almost unable to finance ourselves until we were forgiven some of these loans. Now, we are back almost; we have surpassed where we were. I can see sometimes we say we need roads, energy, mention it. 

However, this Parliament must also be aware of the cost of borrowed money. Just compare the construction of two energy projects. During the colonial days, using the coffee stabilisation fund, Uganda was able to save money and construct a dam in Jinja. When we brought here an investor and borrowed money to construct Bujagali, you are aware that for each unit of electricity supplied from Bujagali, we pay nearly 11 cents but for the units that we are supplying from our own dam constructed using our resources, we are paying one cent. 

That cost of borrowed money should motivate this Parliament to debate loans other than being happy with roads everywhere. I have heard that Government want to buy the Bujagali project; of course, it will be an exorbitant cost.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, before we continue, let me recognise in the VIP gallery, we have members from the National Legislature of the Republic of South Sudan. They are here on a three day tour to the Parliament of Uganda to learn about the structure of our administration. The honourable members include; (hon. Jasmine Samuel Adakayi- Deputy Speaker, hon. Alalla Younis Loro, hon. Dengtiel A. Kuur, hon. Victor Edward Epafura, hon. Joseph Ngere Paciko, Justice Edward Modesto, Mr Oresto Kenyi Todo and Mr Stephen Gadi Odanwa. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.  (Applause)

4.24
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion whole heartedly unlike hon. Semujju Nganda. For some of us who are coming from places where we travel on tarmac - I can tell you, I drive from here up to Mbarara uninterrupted, do my work and come back. If it can happen to me, I would be very glad if it can also happen to the people of Karamoja.

There was a saying during those days, when I was still a very young man, that “we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop”. I would like to thank the NRM Government for moving along with a Karamojong in development. If we leave our brothers and sisters from Karamoja without a road and say we block this; when in the hearts of even those who may want to debate negatively, we know that we want roads in our own places; we shall have become very uncomfortable and unfair to the people of Karamoja.

When I wanted the Mbarara Northern bypass, Parliament supported us overwhelmingly. I have no right whatsoever, in my heart, to deny the people of Karamoja a very wonderful road. May it happen like it has happened in Mbarara where I come from.

Mr Speaker, I have two points to make. I would like to warn the people of Nakapiripirit and Karamoja in general or anybody who are going to get a loan to be careful with land compensations. In Mbarara, where we have been compensated, some people have acted as imposters and have taken money meant for those who are to be compensated. Right now, in Mbarara, I have four families who did not receive their money and yet, the money was given or the money is available but everybody is claiming ownership of the land.

Therefore, you have to be very careful my colleagues and honourable from Nakapiripirit and Mayende. You will have problems with compensation. However, I would urge UNRA- I do not see hon. Byabagambi here but the Chief Whip is here. Chief Whip, I would like you to go to UNRA and tell them to give people the appropriate compensation for the land. There is no more cheap land in this country and people from that place should be given money that is given to people here so that that money can help them.  

When you have a road, business if very good because even plots near those roads go high in terms of value; trade and tourism should go high. I can tell you, if anybody wants to block a road, that one would have become a “night dancer”. We need a road in Nakapiripirit. I want to thank you very much and I urge my colleagues to support the Karimojong to get this road. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I definitely support the motion because loans are very important especially to developing countries like Uganda. We are now in our fourth year, we have been approving loans and all the loans have an element of contingency. Contingency means that you are budgeting for those unforeseeable factors, which may happen. You may either use the entire contingency or half of it. However, like this loan, 21 per cent is in price and physical contingency. This translates to about Shs 63 billion.

While we support the loan, can I take this advantage to ask Government to at least to promise to give us a report on how they have used these contingencies? Whether there is a balance or whether the balance was returned - because every loan we get, has a contingency. While it is very important to develop our infrastructure, we should also be mindful that these are loans, which we shall pay back. Therefore, we should use prudent means to manage the loan very well. Can I have this chance to know whether we have made a saving on contingencies on the loans we have approved before?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.29
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the chairperson for the report that has been presented. I have three points to talk about.

First, is the cost per kilometre of a tarmac road. The situation we are in, in this Parliament, for a number of times works have always been asked: What is the unit cost per kilometre of a tarmac road? They have not always been giving us a specific answer. But when you look at this particular road, a kilometer is costing Shs 2.4 billion and when compare it with Vurra-Arua Road where a kilometre is Shs 1.4 billion, it means there is an extra Shs 1 billion, in this case, per kilometre. Somebody wonders how this can arise that we can have an extra shs 1 billion as a cost per kilometre on this road. We need real guideline on how we are going to be costing these projects.

Secondly, colleagues have talked about the contingency funds. In this case, it is about shs 63 billion provided for as contingency and the committee is recommending that it should be reduced to 10 per cent such that the other six per cent is used for the extension. The question arises, what happens to this money that is provided as contingency after the project? Is it really 100 per cent spent? It cannot be that 100 per cent of the contingency funds are always spent. Therefore, where does the money go? We would have loved to see this money reflected in Government’s statement or funds that have been brought back and to the Treasury. But this is money which has been stolen -(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I belong to the Committee on National Economy. I would like to share with the august House what is called the end of project report. The end of project report is what I have not seen on the Floor of this House for many of the projects that have been passed as loans or even as Government projects. It will be prudent for the receiving ministry or entity to supply this august House with end of project’s report so that we can see because that is where the details of contingency, savings and others are put. 

Otherwise, for us to pass loans and projects are implemented and no end of project report is presented to the august House, we shall never know whether the project was well done or there were savings or there were adjustments along the way as the project was being implemented. That is the information I wanted to give to the House.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, very much. I therefore, Mr Speaker, would want to propose, as the honourable colleague from the other side has spoken -(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Muncipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to reluctantly support the motion. You will agree with me that when we are to borrow as a country, we mortgage the citizens of this country.

I am very sure the Minister of Finance normally looks at the population and projection of the population and shows that there will be capacity for this country to pay back. The few loans which we have passed in this country, more so, in the construction of roads, we have passed them in construction of roads and there have been no designs at the time of the construction.

I have looked at Mbale and Soroti; when they applied for the loan, they told us it was upgrading at first, then later, they turned it to something else. We passed Shs 69 billion for the upgrade but when it came to the actual work, the cost doubled by more than a 100 per cent and this has been moving on.

When I say that in support of this motion, I would wish to see a revised project design for this road because that is going to show the actual cost. If you went to UNRA today and asked them how they are constructing these roads, there is now what we call the design and construct, so you realise that the cost which has been projected in this loan is very different from what is going to be the actual cost in the construction.

It is very important that that is captured when we are approving this loan, because we have also had instances where we have approved loans in this Parliament and the loans are not absorbed. I can give an example, this Parliament approved a loan of Ministry of Water for construction of the irrigation dams and we were shocked to see that the country had no irrigation engineers; so they had to divert the loan to something else.

Therefore, as we support this loan, I implore colleagues that we take the absorption of this loan as very important because it is also probable that there might be the counterpart funding on the part of Government. The counterpart fund in all loans  - the Minister of Finance is here - we have never seen Government providing its part or it is what comes with a lot of delay, it causes penalties and if you look at the penalties Government has gone through in terms of delayed payments, all those came as a result of the delay of Government counterpart funding. May I know from the chairperson, do we have the guarantee that the Government of Uganda, in as far as the counterpart funding, that these funds will be provided?If you look at 2012/2013, we lost over Shs 164 billion - (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mbale is a business hub of that part of the world and my people together with the food basket of this country of Budadiri valley supply food to Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Koboko and all parts of Karamoja and the people have been suffering in delivering food.

I travelled on that road from Muyembe to Nakapiripirit and you could see portholes which could swallow three coffins. If you did not have a four wheel drive, you could have never made it to Nakapiripirit.

Mr Speaker, I want to you and this august House, it is not easy to borrow money and when you just hear of this loan of $ 110 million, we are paying back $ 163 million in 19 years. That adds to about $ 2.7 million per year as interest.

Now, the chairperson talks of interest but we know that the Islamic Bank does not charge any interest. I wanted you to clarify to the House what this six per cent is on point no.7 of your report where you say “interest rate: six months $ LIBOR plus 155 bps.” Unfortunately, the guests who were here who come from the Arab world have gone away but they must have got a shock because the Arabs do not charge interest rates; is this the service charge?

Secondly, I have seen the road, which was constructed from Muyembe to Kapchorwa, which was supposed to go Bukwo and you see the vehicles carrying the lime stones taking them to Tororo. The Kapchorwa Road is already gone. 

Heavy vehicles are going to carry lime from Karamoja to Tororo. I keep wondering how long this road is going to last? I have heard you talk of the weighbridges on this road but these weighbridges are not used. I see heavy vehicles  - if you travel on the Kapchorwa-Muyembe-Tororo Road, you see these vehicles loaded and there are over sixty tonnes.We are borrowing money at a high cost and we are paying back $2.7 million per year for this loan with $ 53 million interest for 19 years. It is a very high cost of this road but what do we get in the end? We get a shoddy deal; poor work done. Can’t this country for once, see that we are borrowing at a very high interest rate get something good? Can’t the Ministry of Works and UNRA supervise and stop “feasting” on these roads by getting “kitu kidogo.” This is very unfair and I urge Parliament that before we pass all these loans, we are mortgaging our country. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members coming from the region, let the rest of the country speak on this matter to support you, please.

4.40
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, we thank you very much and we thank the Government of Uganda for considering the people of Karamoja for this regional interconnectivity, which will ease communication. 

We also thank the committee for the work done but we are hopeful that as some of our colleagues are saying, some of these loans come in when the designs are not in place. I would appeal to the committee that next time you are looking at these loans, take time and see if the designs are in place. 

Another issue you should look at is, have they effectively compensated or acquired land where the road is passing? There is a tendency of having the road handed over to the contractors and you find that the other designs are being done and that one will delay the work of the contractor and bring a lot of valuation. Instead of $110 million, you will need up to almost double. This was experienced on the Kabale-Kisoro Road where it was supposed to be about $100 million but we ended up paying more than $150 million because the contractor could not access the site.

The other issue is that as much we look at the internal rate of return for roads and economic rate of return, it is high time that Government of Uganda also looked at the impact that the roads are going to cause because there are also negative impacts. This Parliament should desist from approving such construction projects where environmental mitigation is not being looked at. Yes, you can find the roads there but the rate of erosion, degradation and silting in the valleys is high. 

We should encourage greening all the road reserves, because when they are tampered with, the maintenance of the road become a problem. In all the projects, Government should consider tree planting on all these road reserves for us to fight the degradation of our environment. This will also help us to address issues of climate change because we are going to be affected. We shall not have economic benefits when we don’t address issues of climate change.

The other issue is that Government should also go beyond looking at the roads, because it is complicated for Members of Parliament travelling, for example, 1,000 Kilometres to Karamoja. If Members of Parliament and ministers are paid very well, why should a minister or the Speaker of Parliament go to Karamoja by road? Can’t we have regional airports as part of our effort to encourage internal flights? I do not –(Member timed out.)


4.44
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this loan request. Anybody who has been to the Karamoja sub region has every reason to support this loan request.

We have a number of game reserves and national parks in this sub region. We feel like we are opening up this region to tourism opportunities and so the time is right for us to pass this loan request and have this road in place.

My district happens to do a lot of business with Karamoja. The maize that is grown in Busoga and mainly the one in Iganga is consumed by the people of Moroto, Kotido, Abim and Nakapiripirit, among others; but the cost of transportation has been very high.  We have also been losing trucks along this road. That is why I am saying the time is ripe for us to increase on the profits from this sub region. This is a grey opportunity for us to support. 

On the contingency fees,  the committee is spot on that we need to scale it down. As members have observed, a contingency is something unforeseen and I wonder how you can plan for 16 per cent as contingency. What are we not able to budget and plan for, when we are negotiating these loans? 

For the other loans that we have already approved, there is need of some declaration by Government that since the prices of oil, lubricants and fuel have been reduced for some time, the money saved can be utilised in constructing other facilities. 

I now need to talk about the workmanship. Last weekend, Mr Speaker, you were in Kabale. I wonder what type of bridges we are constructing in this part of the country. The road from Kabale to Ntungamo is slightly bigger but when you get to a bridge, it is so narrow that even two cars cannot pass. I wonder what type of workmanship is being exhibited. Can we make standard roads for this country instead of creating black spots for our people especially those of us without advance clearance police cars? We need to have the safety of our lives in mind when constructing these roads because - (Member timed out.)

4.47
THE STATE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA (Office of the Prime Minister) (Mrs Barbara Oundo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I also want to thank the honourable colleagues that have made their contributions, specifically in support of this loan. 

I should also use this opportunity to thank the honourable members that supported and passed the loan that is now seeing the implementation of the upgrading of the Nakapiripirit-Moroto Road from gravel to tarmac. I thank you very much. In fact, if you travelled to Karamoja now, you would think it is just an artistic impression and it may be hard for you to believe but the road is so good; we appreciate the efforts of the Members of Parliament.

However, I would also like to appreciate the challenges we still have because the biggest road network in the region is still bad; we must agree that as Government that we really have to start somewhere. We started with Nakapiripirit-Moroto Road and we are now talking about the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. But I want to say that the other road networks will also be taken into consideration because as the chairperson was reading the report, she wanted to actually hear commitment from Government in regard to those other roads. She specifically talked about the Nakapiripirit-Amudat Road.

Therefore, I would like to assure the committee chairperson and the whole House that Government is very much committed to seeing the road network in the region improved and that the Nakapiripirit–Amudat Road will not be an exception. 

I would also like to thank the honourable members for having agreed that Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road project is a viable project. Looking at Karamoja as a region, most people usually talk in the perspective of delivering food there. But this trend has changed; as we have seen not all foodstuff is delivered to Karamoja. We need to have particular interest in areas like Namalu in Nakapiripirit, which have now become the biggest rice growers. In fact, if the other people in the areas of Kibimba are not very careful, the areas of Namalu might out-compete them in rice growing. 

While they are growing rice, the neighbours in Kween and Bulambuli grow maize and I am sure that with this good road network, people who come to buy maize from the neighbouring districts will also find it easy to proceed to Karamoja and also access the rice being grown there.

This will go a long way in boosting commercial agriculture in this area and also expedite development in areas such as tourism, as has been alluded to by hon. Milton Muwuma. This will also go a long way in changing the face of Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, I also want to use this opportunity to thank the Ministry of Works and Transport. Like I said, we have a challenge with the roads but this ministry, irrespective of the challenges we have in Karamoja like natural disasters, has ensured steadfastness in ensuring the road network in Karamoja is kept motorable. We would like to request the ministry not to relent on this. As we ask for more roads to be tarmacked, let them always be handy in helping us whenever we have disasters especially during the rainy season.

Finally, I am very sure that everyone is privy to the information that Karamoja has had a problem when it comes to human resources. The Ministry of Public Service attracts, hires and posts different staff to Karamoja but retention has always been a problem because as this human resource tries to access the region, some of it gets stuck on the way and/or find it difficult accessing the region; some of them even give up on working in that region. 

But with the good road network, we shall have human resource attracted and retained in the region which will give the service delivery in Karamoja a good pace onto which to move. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity. I also thank the Members who have supported the loan request. Next time we shall come back with more requests or approvals for using our own money, Government money.  I want to congratulate the Members who come from Mayuge, Namayingo and Busia districts which are using government money to upgrade that road from gravel to tarmac. I hope that next time we bring a request to tarmac the Nakapiripirit-Amudat Road we shall be talking about using Government of Uganda funds. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

4.55
MRS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I would like to stand to support the loan request. 

I spent eight years of my life working in Karamoja and I can testify that it was always hell to move there. Sometimes during the rainy season, we would take three nights on a road just around the bush as we kept on moving. It was a big challenge. 

This is going to be historical because in Karamoja there was only a small patch of tarmac within the town, not even the whole town, on the main road. It was a small broken road. This will be historical and I know we shall celebrate with our uncles when this road comes to be.

Mr Speaker, people say that there are trucks carrying stones. I wish that with the coming of the road, we ensure that we have big factories in Karamoja. It will be easier to have these mined and processed in Karamoja than carrying them from Karamoja to Tororo. This road should bring employment opportunities to the people of Karamoja. They should benefit from the minerals that God has put in their sub region. Therefore, it is my prayer that as the road comes, the factories are thought about, and I am happy that there is an inter-ministerial proposal for this project.

I also want to say that when the roads are made, let them be wide enough for the pedestrians, for the people with disability who usually move on tricycles. An honourable member talked about the Kabale Road, I was in Kabale but you find people struggling to move. Now imagine if somebody is moving with a wheelchair, what would happen on the road. The roads should be made wide enough.

Also, the contractors working on these roads sometimes do not put signs to show that they are still working on the road. Sometimes you move on a road and you just find works going on and you need to find a way to slow down and braking suddenly spoils some of our cars. So, there is need for the roads to be wide and for some signs to be put on the road as construction goes on.

The other issue is about the local people who work on these roads. I think their rights are abused. I used to see young people along the Mbale-Soroti Road using hand hoes to dig the road. The contractors would not give them machines, which would make work easier. That is abuse of our people’s rights, and they are even paid very little money. There is need for the rights of these people to be considered as these roads come on board.
 
I would like to congratulate the people of Bulambuli, Kween and Namalu for this road. This will be historical; we shall be able to go to Kidepo National Park and see the animals. Maybe we shall extend it from Kotido to Kaabong after that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.55
Ms DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report presented on the loan request concerning the construction of the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road in Karamoja.

It is true, and my brothers and sisters have alluded to this, that Karamoja is endowed with so many minerals but people have not benefited much from these because of lack of good means of transport especially tarmac roads. So, it is my pleasure to push on so that we pass this loan request for the development of the people of Karamoja.

Secondly, I would also like to ask the Ministry of Works and Transport to always acquire land before the project is given to the contractors. This has always been a problem. These loans attract interest and if the Government or the ministry do compensate the people on whose land the road will be constructed, it delays implementation. It is very important for us to put that into consideration.

I would also like to ask the people who always do the supervision, the UNRA engineers - Sometimes they do not have time to go and supervise the work. Sometimes these contractors come here and they want to make a difference and when they are not supervised, poor work is done; the work done is not commensurate to the pay they get and after just a few years, the road will need repair and maintenance. This is not good. 

Some of our public servants, who work with them, also take advantage of such situations. So as we approve this loan request, I pray that our public servants who do the supervision do not get corrupted, so that we can benefit from this loan, bearing in mind that we are supposed to pay it back.

Lastly, I want to talk about the design. Recently, on the 27th of last month, His Excellency the President came to my district to launch the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road. We got problems as leaders representing the people from that district because some people along the roadside were compensated based on the original designs, but when the construction started, they changed the design. Now the buildings for those people who were never considered in the earlier design were affected. This now calls for double compensation. Those who were compensated based on the first design are free but when they changed the design, they have to compensate those people whose land was affected - (Member timed out.)

4.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Ogutu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting a good report. We support the motion. We want every part of Uganda to have tarmac roads. 

We should thank the people of Uganda who pay taxes to build these roads. I tend to see some very dangerous thinking here, where thanks are extended to either one person or the party. I want to say that that party has no money and that one person has no money. The money is from the people of Uganda. So we must be very clear about that, colleagues.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of roads and costs, we know that procurement in Uganda is badly abused. There is insider trading and people compete for a price or quote a price which they know is already provided for by Government. So we pay where we should not have been paying. Government must find a method of hiding the figure - the reserve price or the guiding price - for whatever they are doing so that these people do not cheat us. We would like to know, what is the guiding price or the cost that the Government wanted to work with on this road?

When I was on the Committee of National Economy, we realised that the roads at that time cost, on average, US$ 1 million per kilometre of good tarmac. We argued about this and eventually, we changed this. We are told that the price is now between US$ 600,000 and US$ 700,000 or US$ 800,000. We would like to know from Government what the cost of constructing a kilometre of a tarmac road is. 

They should also give us the specifications for each road. I would imagine the road from Mukono to Kayunga is short; the cost may not be the same as the one we are talking about now. However, the Government should help the committee and Parliament so that we know that when we are constructing this kind of road, this size of a road, which will last this number of years, it can cost us this much. 

This is important because we keep on getting different costs and sometimes there are big differences. I will give the example of the Vurra-Koboko Road, which is Shs 1 billion cheaper than the one of Nakapiripirit and yet I do not think the terrain is very different. Nakapiripirit is not very mountainous; we all know that. So, what is the difference? Why is this road very expensive? 

Sometimes projects are delayed because Government does not have the counter-funding. In this report, Madam Chairperson, you have pointed out that they have only provided for half a billion shillings, but the counter-funding needed is Shs 13 billion. It is possible that they have provided for the current financial year, but I hope we shall ensure that as we approve this, the Shs 13 billion needed for counterpart funding is provided for in the next financial year.

We would like also to know the lifespan of these roads. The Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road is indeed a highly economic road. One time I met about 50 trucks on that road carrying marble from Karamoja to Tororo to make cement. So, Karamoja cement is made in Tororo although it is packaged as Tororo cement. Therefore, with that number of trucks, that road must be made really strong. However, we need that assurance in the specifications, showing that the road will last for maybe 15 years or more; it must be strong. 

Also, as has been raised by hon. Helen Asamo, the width should be considered. The trucks, which move along that road, are big and if you are driving a small car, you are an endangered species. That must be considered. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to give notice to the Government Chief Whip that we are not going to pass any loan requests or Bills in this House without quorum. Even today we are not going to pass this loan request unless the Government Chief Whip goes out to bring in Members for the House to realise quorum. Thank you very much.

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank honourable members for the overwhelming support in regard to this loan request. 

I have personal experience with this road. I traversed it for about three years, from Muyembe to Kotido. This road has been in such a sorry state. For Government to have considered it and you honourable Members of Parliament to have supported its upgrade to tarmac is a big achievement for the people of Karamoja.

Having said that, Mr Speaker, a few issues were raised. On the issue of compensation, as provided in the project paper, Government will cater for compensation through UNRA budgets every year throughout the lifespan of the project. A total of US$ 5 million has been particularly allocated for land acquisition. For those areas where there will be interference with people’s buildings and land, they will get compensated through that way. Government has committed itself to doing this.

Honourable members, it is true the cost of this road is a bit high. However, the cost of roads or any other project depends on the specifications, the scope of work, the design and the terrain. For this road, I know there are a number of bridges and it is actually, mostly a low-lying area, which floods when it rains. As we speak, two bridges are already down. As of now, you cannot pass through one of the bridges. You have to pass through Soroti in order to access Moroto and come back to Nakapiripirit. 

The costs are determined by the Ministry of Works and Transport. They do a feasibility study and they assess how all these factors come in. Through the established rates of the study, they then come out with a rate for each project. It cannot, therefore, be uniform. If you look at the costs here, it includes secondary roads, which will cost about US$ 10 million. This also adds to the costs. So, they will link up with nearby areas around this road.

The Islamic Development Bank is a bank like any other bank. It is not a charity institution that will give you money free of interest. Therefore, while they may be lenient, they are also trading just like the World Bank and the other banks where we borrow from. Of course, we have different kinds of loans. We have concessional loans for which we have a quota. If that quota is exhausted and we need money to cover our projects, we have no option but to go out for non-concessional loans or a mixture of both – concessional and non-concessional.

Honourable members have expressed concerns about contingency. It is true that contingency should cover unforeseen events and factors. During the feasibility study, the consultants will usually determine the level of contingency. For some loans, the contingency has gone as far as 30 per cent, 25 or even 28 per cent. This is put aside to cater for those factors. 

Honourable members, contingency is applied only where the money budgeted for has not covered the project cost. Where the money is not spent or if it is not accessed, it is reflected as a saving and it is added to other projects or - If we do not provide enough contingency, in some instances the project will stop. It is not healthy for us to invest so much money and yet we have not put a fall-back position in case the money is not enough. Therefore, we budget for sufficient contingency to cover the project to its completion. If it is not completed –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to thank the minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, you are aware that there are always books at the end of the financial year – revenues minus expenditure. I would like the minister to give us one specific example where we budgeted for a contingency and we got a saving indicated as revenue or income, which accrued as a result of savings. 

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I may not be able to point at a particular project. However, honourable members will see in most of the instances - Even when we go for supplementary expenditure, you ask us where we have got the money from. Once the balance on any project is not utilised, it is taken to the Consolidated Fund and if it has not been budgeted for, it is reflected as a saving.

Honourable members, we talked about debt sustainability. It is true our debt exposure is getting high every day. However, I can tell you that the support instrument that we have from the IMF indicates that we will be able to service our debt over the next 20 years. It is not true that we are mortgaging this country. Our debt sustainability ratio is still within manageable levels. The revenue projection, among other things, and our export performance are positive. Our GDP and domestic revenue collection are also still okay. Therefore, we think that in order for us to spur development and social services to the people of Uganda, - we do not have this money in our budget - all we can do is to borrow and then we pay later on. 

On counterpart financing, Mr Speaker, I have already said that most of the projects have a counter funding element in them. If we do not have this, most of the projects stall. That is why in this loan, we have provided for counter funding for land acquisition and other issues so that the project does not stall. Every year of the project period, up to five years, Government will provide this counter funding.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee and honourable members for overwhelmingly supporting this project. I do pray that this loan request passes so that the people of Karamoja can be interlinked to the international community and the rest of the people of Uganda in terms of development. I so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the debate on the motion whose question I put to you. I now put the question for approval of this motion. Can I now put the question? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see we are about to take a decision on behalf of Ugandans. I agree that we need loans not only for Karamoja but also for every part of Uganda. However, at this point, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay if we ascertained quorum? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, ascertain quorum. Honourable members, the House is not fully constituted to take a decision on this matter. I order the Sergeant-at-Arms to ring the bell for five minutes. House suspended for five minutes.

(The House was suspended at 5.17 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 5.26 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were not able to take a decision because we did not have the required number of Members. The bell has been rung for five minutes and we have resumed. I would like to know the status. After this exercise, we will be doing a roll call to know the Members who are present in the Chamber. If you are already here, you will be lucky. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the last count before the honourable member for Lyantonde entered, was 127. (Applause) That means we are now 128. 

Honourable members, we also have a Bill that has been stayed because of this kind of situation. The work, which has been entrusted in our hands, is not able to progress because when duty calls, there is nobody to answer. That has stagnated our work and we need to do something drastic about this so that we can deliver on the balance of what we need to do for the people of this country. 

That means the honourable member for Mukono Municipality should have some order in the House. Honourable members, we had exhaustively discussed the –(Interjections)- Honourable member, please have some order in the House. Honourable member, it is because when the Speaker is speaking, you are also speaking and that is why you caught the attention and the ear of the Speaker.

Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 110 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road Project. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, call the Bill.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 9

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

Schedule No. 3

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much for the work. I would like to propose, on behalf of the committee, that we introduce a new clause 17 as a miscellaneous amendment to the principal Act. We are proposing to amend sections 1, 28, 29, 30 and 33. The reason is that the amendments that we have made in the Bill have consequential effects on these provisions of the principal Act. 

We would like to amend paragraph (b) of section 1 of the parent Act by inserting the phrase “while moving about” between the words “person” and “sells” on line 2. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment is contained in the report of the committee but it was not separated properly. Now it has been properly brought out and it is clear. I put the question on that amendment to the principal Act in section 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, in part 2, we would like to amend section 28 of the principal Act by substituting  the phrase “one thousand shillings” appearing on line four with the phrase “fifty currency points”. The justification is that we want to enhance the penalty for contravening the provisions of this Act.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I raised a concern the other week when we were debating the motion on this Bill. I said that the reason for us to regulate is not to curtail business in this country. We have different people who are doing business at different levels -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you suggesting something else?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that we leave it at 10 currency points and not put it at 50 currency points because it is very prohibitive; otherwise, most businesses will close and we shall not have the revenue that we expect.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we have consulted with the ministry and we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You concede to 10.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we must make a distinction because there is a better way to do this. I will give any example. A trading licence for a small shop might be Shs 50,000 and here we are saying that once one contravenes the law and does not pay for the trading licence, he or she must pay Shs 200,000. This does not help. 

The best way to handle this is that if you do not do what is right and pay what was due, the highest penalty can be to double the initial cost. This would mean that if I am supposed to pay Shs 50,000 and I have not paid it, I should pay Shs 100,000. If I am supposed to pay Shs 600,000 and I do not pay it, I should pay Shs 1,200,000. The rationale is that you must pay according to the proportion of what should have been due. 

When you say 10 currency points especially for these hawkers who are supposed pay Shs 5000 and now you tell them to pay Shs 400,000 as a fine, you are actually sending them out of business. Therefore, the best way to do this is that if you contravene the Act, you pay double the amount you were supposed to have paid.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, for the benefit of the Members, clause 28 is about offences where penalties have not been provided for. For other offenses, the penalties are provided for. Regarding this Shs 10,000 we are talking about and as hon. Nzoghu has said, we are looking at small businesses, which cannot afford to pay higher fines because we are not here to kill businesses. 

I therefore request that hon. Nandala-Mafabi accepts the proposal by hon. Nzoghu. We have consulted with the ministry and agreed that we move it to Shs 10,000 so that we keep these businesses running instead of killing them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: With that clarification, is it okay, Members?  
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you are saying that this will not affect others who will commit the other crimes, I concede but if it does, then no.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is the position. What is the amendment now? Can you state it properly?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, regarding the amendment to section 28, we are substituting the phrase “Shs 1000” appearing in line four with the phrase, “Shs 10,000”. Hon. Nzoghu proposed Shs 10,000. (Interjections) Mr Chairman, let me explain. We are moving from Shs 1000 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are helping you, Mr Chairman. The currency point is just a measure so if it is Shs 10,000, you can say half a currency point. This is to justify that when the currency point changes, you go up with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Half a currency point would take care of the- It is not safe to put the amount. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, the way section 28 is drafted presupposes that it is a general penalty. Regarding the line we are talking about and how it is amended, it states, “…specifically provided, to a fine not exceeding one thousand shillings”. What hon. Nzoghu has said is, “not exceeding Shs 10,000” and this is specific and accurate. When you say, half a currency point, this is not what is drafted in the law. They are amending and instead of Shs 1000 they are putting Shs 10,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza, this particular law that we are dealing with was passed in 1969 when there were no currency points. They only knew figures. We are doing this many years after and we have since revised the issue of how you put figures on fines and things like that. Please, do not take us back to the 1960s.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, with the guidance of the House, I concede to half a currency point. I propose that the new section is amended as follows: Substitute the phrase “Shs 1000” appearing on line four with the phase “half a currency point”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it include “not exceeding”?

MR SSIMBWA: Yes, “…not exceeding half of a currency point”. Mr Chairman, I beg to propose and move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment. It is 0.5 currency points or half a currency point. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend section 29 of the principal Act by inserting, at the beginning of paragraph (b), the phrase “in consultation with the affected local government or city authority”. The justification is that we require the minister to consult with the affected local governments or city authorities before classifying trading businesses. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to amend section 30(2) of the principal Act by substituting the phrase “two grades” appearing at the end of the subsection with the phrase, “four grades”. The justification is that in the earlier amendments we have made to subsection (5), we have provided for four grades instead of the two, which were appearing in the original Bill. Therefore, we would like to change the reading of this clause by inserting “four grades”. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, in subsection (5) of the same section, we would like to amend (a) by inserting after sub paragraph 2, a new sub paragraph 3 to provide as follows: “The Executive Director be credited to the revenue of the appropriate Authority.” 

Mr Chairman, the justification is that we would like to cater for licensing fees collected in Kampala Capital City Authority and any other city authority that may be established in Uganda. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why don’t we make it general? Supposing tomorrow the name of the Executive Director changes? I would like to propose that we say, “the accounting officer of a city authority or a local authority”. That would be better.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, what we are providing for in this amendment is only for Kampala Capital City Authority. In the principal Act, the accounting officers for the other local governments were catered for. Maybe what we can do, and I also want to propose as hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing, is that we make this -

Mr Chairman, we have already passed subsequent clauses where we have talked about the Executive Director for the Kampala Capital City Authority. I seek guidance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the moment we say “accounting officer”, it covers this and there is no need to amend the law. This is because the person responsible for revenue collection is the accounting officer. It does not matter the name you call him as long as he or she has the name “accounting officer”, he or she will be the one responsible. I think there is no need for amendment on that.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we have consulted and conceded.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What will it say now?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the new sub paragraph 3 will provide as follows: “The accounting officer be credited to the revenue of the appropriate city authority.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the one of the local government already there?

MR SSIMBWA: The local government is already there; we are only adding the accounting officer for Kampala Capital City Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you are saying city authority.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, let me re-read the proposal: “The accounting officer be credited to the revenue of the appropriate city authority.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is better. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to amend section 33 of the principal Act by substituting for the phrase “sell any article or substance for the sale”, appearing on line two, the phrase “carry out any trade the carrying on”. Mr Chairman, the justification is that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was the amendment?

MR SSISMBWA: The amendment is to section 33 of the principal Act by substituting for the phrase, “sell any article or substance for the sale” appearing in line two, the phrase “carry out any trade the carrying on”. This is meant to cater for the trading in goods as well as in services.

Mr Chairman, when you look at the Bill, it now includes trading in services, which does not come out in that section. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. If you are saying, “carrying on any trade of goods or services”, are you telling us that you are legalising illegal trade like smuggling and others?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the Trade (Licensing) Act provides for legal trade. It does not provide for trade in illegalities. This section appears in the principal Act and it reads as follows, for the benefit of the members: “Nothing in this Act shall be construed so as to entitle the holder of any licence granted under this Act to sell any article or substance for the sale of which a separate licence is required by any written law…”

Therefore, the sale of articles or substances does not provide for the sale or trading in services. That is why we are substituting just a portion of the principal Act to provide for trading in services. We are not making a law that empowers people to trade in illegalities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the Member for Budadiri West was just posing a representative question because he knows where he comes from and -(Laughter) Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the last amendment I would like to make is to amend the long title of the principal Act -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have to call it. You do not call it from there. 
Honourable members, I now put the question that the Schedule, as amended, stands as the Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to amend the long title by inserting the phrase, “to grant or renew a trading licence” between the words “refusal” and “to” on line six. Our justification is: for clarity of the long title. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a proposal to enlarge the long title to the Bill to capture that particular aspect, which is not in the current Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the title says, “The Trading (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012”. What we are trying to address is licensing for trading, whether in services or anything else. I do not see any reason to amend the heading, unless there is real justification that the current title is confusing. If it is not confusing, as we know it is not, I do not think there is need to amend it. Maybe the chairperson should tell us why he wants to make the long title when we understand the short one?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairperson, is there any value added?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, for the benefit of the House, when you look at line 6, we are proposing to insert the phrase “to grant or renew a trading licence” between the words “refusal” and “to”. When you read what appears here, it says, “…to provide the procedure of renewal and appeal against refusal.”

We are saying it is the renewal and refusal to grant or renew a trading licence. Mr Chairman, that is why we would like to make it clear by adding that phrase.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in every law we make, we make provision for appeals in case somebody is not given what he wants. Definitely, even this law will cater for renewal or appeals. Therefore, since it is a normal law, you do not have to make it as one of the headings because it is already covered as one of the sections inside. If you want to bring that in, then you should also state that this is a trading licence with schedules. However, in the current state, the title is enough.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we have consulted with the ministry and we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the title to the Bill remains the title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.03
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that Motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.04
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and passed clauses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and the schedules connected thereon with the various amendments as proposed and there was nothing stood over. That is the report I give; it was very clearly done. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.05
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikona): With that noise and appreciation, I move that the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012 be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDENT) BILL, 2012

6.06
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. He should advise Members where to go after this. (Laughter) Honourable members, thank you very much. I think it is important that we should carry the spirit forward. It is important that we do this properly. Everything we do should be done properly and that is why we have insisted that it should be done properly and it has been done properly. What it has proved is that it can be done and must be done. There is a statement from the minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED ILLEGAL DEMOLITION 
OF A GOVERNMENT OWNED COMMERCIAL BUILDING ON 
PLOT 60-62 ALLIDINA ROAD, JINJA MUNICIPALITY EAST

6.08
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the last time when the minister read a statement here, a number of issues were raised about that report and you directed that the minister comes back and gives a more substantive report arising from that demolition of a commercial building on Aldina Street. 

When we went back, my senior colleague, Gen. Nyakairima, decided to constitute a special high level committee comprising of various security men and women, including intelligence, to thoroughly investigate this matter. Therefore, I request that we be given time of about two weeks so that we can come with a comprehensive report about the demolition of that commercial building. 

As a ministry, we are very interested in getting the right information and details about that issue; we would like to get to the bottom of it so that in case there are any improprieties, we can firmly deal with what transpired during that time. I beg the indulgence of the House to give us two weeks so that we can come with a more detailed and thorough report. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember this matter was raised by the Member for Jinja Municipality East. What this House needs is proper information. The minister came here with a statement and the Members who knew the facts were not satisfied with what the minister said. We tasked the minister to go and come back to the House after looking at the issue properly.

The minister has come back and said that they have not been able to gather all the proper information that this House needs. He is asking for two weeks to come back to the House and do just that so that the House is comprehensively briefed and if there are questions, we can raise those questions then.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, the Rt Hon. Gen Moses Ali has always said on the Floor of Parliament that Government will always be ready. Government must take care of the properties of Ugandans. Government is simply a custodian of property –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue is that the minister has asked for two weeks; is it too long? Do not go into all those speeches again, please.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I wish to propose that two weeks is too long. What we can do is to give him at least one week. Otherwise, the issue will be overtaken by events; that is the fear that I have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you do this in one week? 

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I have requested for two weeks and I even consulted with hon. Paul Mwiru who raised the matter and I think we have concurred on this. I request that the House agrees to this proposal of two weeks. I thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. When the minister appeared before Parliament, an extra step was taken, in that the IGP moved to the site and condoned it off. I would have no problem with granting the two weeks because it is intended to solve the situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
