

Wednesday, 1 March 2017

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just want to urge all of us to work expeditiously because we only have today for sitting. Tomorrow, as I indicated, we have to pay tribute to Mr Maumbe Mukhwana. So, let us do the week’s work this afternoon. Thank you.  

2.46
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bakonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In 2013, the national household survey, conducted by Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), revealed that 27 per cent of the Ugandan population still depends on unsafe water and such population relies on water from streams and ponds while others draw water from the lakes. 

Unfortunately, the media which is superintended by Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) has been running adverts with women and men using the magic detergent powder washing dirty clothes in streams. I know that many people in Uganda believe that whatever they see on national television is acceptable by Government and any other people in authority. I am wondering, therefore, whether the ministers of health, trade and ICT have any explanation as to why such an advert continues running while it has a negative message to the citizens of this country. 

I also would like to know why Government would not bring the advertising company to book because I know that UCC had set standards to be followed. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I know the minister of ICT is not here – honourable minister, are you aware of that advert where people are washing in the stream and it is being aired regularly on television?

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I request that you give me time to check, then I will report back. 

THE SPEAKER: It is related to magic soap powder. Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have members of the board of trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and the executive members of the former park yard market led by hon. Charles Ssego. They have come to observe the proceedings but more particularly they are interested in hearing what the minister for Kampala will say about the issues that have been in the public domain. 

2.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The country needs to know what is happening at Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) because we are getting information that UBC is being sold. It is the only national television that Uganda has; we are told it is being sold to a Chinese company. This is very serious if it is true. 

So, we want the Government to come out clear so that the country gets to understand whether they are going to sell everything that belongs to Ugandans. I thought we were at a level where we wanted to get some things back. Last time this House proposed the same for Umeme. 

Finally, is the issue of the industrial park at Namanve. We know that park is under Uganda Investment Authority, but between November last year and January this year, we have seen private individuals advertising in the newspapers, the selling of plots in Namanve Industrial Park. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us what is going on. Have the individuals reached the level of selling land at the industrial park in Namanve? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of UBC, we have this information for the House. UBC is not on sale and the Government is not, in any way, having any plans to sell UBC. Instead, beginning with next financial year, as you saw in the budget framework paper, we are investing Shs 20 billion to revamp and equip UBC so that it can serve the people of Uganda. So those allegations are certainly false and should not be listened to. 

On the second issue of Namanve Industrial Park, Madam Speaker, I will crosscheck and then come back to the House at the next sitting. 

THE SPEAKER: There was something from hon. Ogwal. 

2.51
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sure the honourable members know that it is not easy to be a commissioner. (Laughter) 

I stand to bring matters of national importance to this House. I know some time ago, this House was burdened by an order, which disturbed all of us; a subject of great importance to this nation, but the court had issued an order barring Parliament or any other person from discussing the matter. 

Madam Speaker, when the Ninth Parliament passed a supplementary budget of Shs 78 billion part of that money was going for the compensation of cattle lost in the Lango sub region. The concern of Parliament was that there were general complaints - although money was being dispersed, we were not sure that the genuine claimants were the ones being paid. 

Therefore, when the supplementary budget was passed, the Speaker of Parliament then ruled that the matter be followed up with an investigation to establish whether it were the right claimants being paid. The same seems to be happening in Gulu and other places where people are being compensated for lost animals. 

Madam Speaker, what surprises us is that the lawyers who got the writ of mandamus – I am not a lawyer, but I struggled to explain this matter to the Ninth Parliament, which was well understood, despite the fact that I am not a lawyer. But we had assumed that for one to secure the writ of mandamus means that there has been undue delay in paying for debts to the rightful claimant. Before such money can be paid, there must be evidence that there has been an attempt to get the recovery and it was not done.

Madam Speaker, the concern of this Parliament was that the Ministry of Justice ought to have captured all the debts, which were supposed to be paid to those who lost or brought their cases against Government and were due to be paid. They had to have their figures captured and included in the budget. This would help Government to provide for such money in the budget. 

Furthermore, even if it were more than what that particular financial year could absorb, at least this Parliament would be conscious of the fact that it had a large amount to be carried forward to the next financial year.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the presence of the injunction against discussion and debates through the media or in any discussion forum - if anybody is found discussing about compensation of animals through Bashasha and Company or any other agency, they would be considered to have breached the writ of mandamus. 

Now, on the 7th February when the President visited Lango to open the regional office, he expressed concerns about the manner in which the compensation for animals was being handled. He further said that he was suspicious of fraud. And the journalist who reported exactly what the President said was arrested on the basis of having reported what the President said.

Madam Speaker, while we sit here representing our people, there are so many other stupid things happening outside which affects our people. Therefore, my fear is that what has happened to this journalist who has suffered unfair arrest for reporting exactly what the President said could be happening in other areas as well.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister in charge of this matter to explain to us how this matter will be handled. That is important because whether we like it or not, the issue of compensation of animals will continue to be brought to the attention of the members of this Parliament and will continue to be a subject of discussion in the budget and various committees that deal with compensation.

Therefore, I would like us to be guided on how we can conduct the affairs of the state without mentioning matters of grave concern of this nature. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Parliament and expect that the Government will respond accordingly so that we can protect our members wherever they are. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give us the name of the journalist and the media house he works for so that when we ask the minister to explain, he is aware of what we are talking about.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the newspaper which reported the matter about cattle compensation is the New Vision of 7th February 2017 and the journalist is called Hamson Apunyu. He is the New Vision correspondent based in Lira. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not received any information from the Attorney-General, but last week, I saw the Constitutional Court had nullified those types of things; but I do not know how they are being implemented. However, let us ask the Minister of Justice to give us an update on the impact of contempt on the work of everybody.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON PARK YARD MARKET

2.53
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first congratulate you upon a successful exercise that was conducted yesterday under your leadership. I would like my congratulations to be registered. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, pursuant to Rule 44, of our Rules of Procedure, I stand to provide a statement to Parliament on the relocation of venders from the Park Yard Market. 

I beg to inform this House on the events that have taken place at the Park Yard Market in the past few days. I am sure that you are all naturally anxious about how they might affect the current peace prevailing in Kampala Capital City Authority.

The purpose of this statement is to update this House and have it on board in regard to the genesis of the Park Yard Market, the struggle to have it relocated to another place in order to give way for developing the premises into a parking space for Nakivubo Stadium, and why we had to make the decision that we made.

All the documents, Madam Speaker, that I will mention in this statement will be laid on the Table for all Members to review at the end of this statement.

The background to Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium

The stadium was created by an Act of Parliament in 1953. It is managed by a board of trustees, appointed by the Minister of Education and Sports which is the line ministry. The ministry has a lot more information and I hope that the minister will have time to read this statement.

Madam Speaker, Nakivubo Park Yard Market is located on Plot 26, Nakivubo place, which belongs to Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. 

The plot was designated as a car park for Nakivubo Stadium and not a market. Park Yard Market was started in the late 1980s by people with disability, supported by local leaders when the then Kampala Capital City embarked on a massive exercise to evict vendors from the street. Since the premises were unoccupied, it was convenient to relocate them there temporarily. 

Efforts by Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium, the owners of Plot 26 Nakivubo Place, to remove the vendors and repossess their premises, date as far back as 1997, but they have usually been resisted by political forces and interests.

In 1999, Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium instituted a court case against Kampala Capital City, which had advertised for tender application to manage the market. In the suit, as far back as 1999, Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium prayed for the eviction of the vendors so that they could repossess the premises. 

In January 2000, in a letter to Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, the then Town Clerk of KCC, conceded that KCC had no jurisdiction over Park Yard Market and requested for two years’ notice, at the end of which, vendors would be removed and the Park Yard Market converted to its original purpose of serving as parking space for the stadium.

In 2012, Ms Phoebe Kamya, who was the Director of Revenue Collection, wrote a letter to Hajati Kabanda, who was the Chairperson of the Management Committee of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium, informing her that Park Yard Market was an illegal market over which KCCA had no responsibility and advising them to manage their property as they deemed appropriate.

In 2013, Nakivubo Stadium was closed by Uganda Revenue Authority over accumulated debts. In April 2014, Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium demolished the perimeter wall of the stadium and dislocated vendors of Park Yard Market on grounds that the stadium needed to repossess the premises for their own development programmes. 

In April 2014, Mr Mohammed Musisi, who was the Chairman of Park Yard Market vendors, wrote to the Executive Director, KCCA asking her to prevail over the demolition in order to save business for 4,000 vendors, who had been displaced. 

The Executive Director, Ms Jennifer Musisi, responded in a letter that they should go to Usafi Market, where spaces were available at very convenient terms of Shs 6,500 per stall per month. 

In February 2015, His Excellency the President of Uganda wrote to the Minister of Education and Sports then, hon. Maj. Jessica Alupo, directing that she discusses a proposal by Mr Hamis Kiggundu to develop the premises occupied by Park Yard Market into a modern parking area for the stadium. The President recommended that any discussion should be of a PPP-agreement nature, where Government retains ultimate ownership of the facility. 

In May 2016, Mr Fred Katerega, Acting Chairman of Management Committee of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium, wrote to KCCA asking them to enforce the removal of the illegal Park Yard Market. 

Again in May 2016, Ms Harriet Mudondo, Director of Gender, Community Services and Production KCCA, in response to Mr Katerega’s letter wrote to Mr Ssebaduka, the Chairman of Park Yard Market, inviting him and about 30 vendors, to brief them about the proposed eviction plan for vendors that operated at Park Yard Market. The vendors were to be relocated to Usafi Market, “which is a gazetted place for a market.”

Generally, Madam Speaker, there is hundreds of backward and forward correspondences in the file I found in the Ministry of KCCA, between Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Trustees, vendors of Park Yard Market and different Government officials. All the letters are about the eviction of Park Yard Market vendors. 

Fast forward to 2016 when the minister of state and I were appointed as Ministers of KCCA. It started on 10 November 2016, when I received yet another letter from Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium decrying non-action on numerous petitions to various Government officials, seeking support to repossess their premises by evicting park yard market vendors.  

They specifically referred to the Cabinet decision of 19 October 2016 to evict vendors from Kampala Capital City operating on streets, road reserves, unlicensed open spaces, road carriage ways, sidewalks and all illegal locations. Basing on that Cabinet decision, I had to issue the necessary directive for the vendors to vacate those premises.
In their letter referred to above, Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium questioned the selective administration of my directive and demanded that the same directive be applied to the vendors operating at the Park Yard Market, who were illegally operating in their premises. 

On 23 January 2017, the Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium copied me a letter they had written to the Director of Physical Planning of KCCA, still asking that Park Yard Market be made available to them for their own development plans. 

In February 2017, they wrote me another letter pleading that their issue be put to rest. So desperate were they that they offered a relocation plan that would cost them about Shs 120,000,000, which would pay for 5,000 stalls in a KCCA market for six months. 

Madam Speaker, this is a 20-year old story of owners of premises trying to repossess their premises for the development of the sports facility. For 20 years, they have been haggling but with no decision being taken. 

Surely, if a Government can haggle with illegal vendors for 20 years to develop one and a half acres of land, what else would they do? 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority decided to take a step for the development of this land and bring the matter to rest. 

Plans to relocate vendors

We first worked out a plan to relocate vendors. On 8 February 2017, I first wrote to the Executive Director of KCCA, asking for a brief on the status of Park Yard Market. 

She responded in a long brief the summary of which was thus: “Park Yard Market does not meet the basic planning requirements for establishing a market…” She recommended that, Park Yard Market be relocated to another feasible place in the neighbourhood such as Usafi Market and other proposed markets.

On 14 February 2017, the Chairman and General Secretary of Park Yard Market wrote asking me to clarify the status of Park Yard Market. 

I responded on 20 February 2017, clarifying that Park Yard Market was an illegal market that did not meet the basic planning requirements and as recommended by KCCA, directed that they relocate to Usafi market and other markets within a period of 30 days.

My letter was copied to the Prime Minister, PPS to H.E the President, Ministers of Education and Sports, Security, Information, ICT and Communication, Presidency. All the people that needed to be informed of this decision received a copy of my letter.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this chronology is to show that our decision to evict vendors was informed by this protracted struggle, by Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium to repossess their property for development that had lasted 20 years.

After this communication, I sent a final brief – these are the consultations - to His Excellency, the President. I also held a meeting and briefed the heads of all security institutions - the IGP, ISO, ESO, CMI, SFC, UPDF, UPS, the acting RCC, among others. This is because the issue could turn out a security matter. 

We all met the representatives of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and the developer, Mr Hamis Kiggundu, and together we met about 40 representatives of the vendors of Park Yard Market. We agreed with them that they should relocate within 30 days. The Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and Mr Kiggundu requested that we leave them to negotiate with the vendors, which we did. 

So, why was the eviction carried out on Sunday night and not wait for the 30 days? This is what everybody is asking. 

Madam Speaker, I received communication in the morning that the vendors had peacefully agreed to relocate from Park Yard Market to Usafi, and that the developer had accepted to facilitate the process, which had actually been agreed on even before I gave my order to vacate.

When I asked why they did not wait for 30 days as had been agreed, I learnt and I later confirmed that there had been effort by some smart people to secure a court order stopping the eviction. I confirmed that the court order would be ready on Monday morning. They, therefore, needed to pre-empt the effect by occupying the premises before the court order was issued, which I thought was smart.

In the communication from the vendors, I was informed that the developer in his discussion with the vendors, had confirmed with an agreement signed the relocation plan we had all agreed on. 

The developer offered 1,000 stalls in his own Ham Shopping Mall, promised to pay for 700 stalls in Usafi market and whoever would take immediate advantage of this offer would have the stall for free for the next six months.

This looked like a very good deal to the vendors who would move in a month’s time anyway, without the benefit of the six months rent-free advantage. After signing the agreement, which is among the documents that I will lay on the Table, that evening, the leaders started calling their colleagues to come and vacate the market.

This is the situation today. Currently, I have a document dated 1 March 2017, which updates the information that I had given by end of yesterday. This document is signed by the Executive Director of KCCA, J. Musisi Ssemakula (Dr) and says thus:

“A total of 500 work spaces have been reserved in Usafi market and allocation of the same commenced yesterday, 28 February 2017. In Wandegeya, a total of 50 work spaces have been reserved and in Ham Shopping Mall, 2,100 vendors have so far been accommodated. This brings to date a total of 2,650 vendors that have been relocated to Usafi, Ham Shopping Mall and Wandegeya market.”

Madam Speaker, the chairman of the Park Yard Market, Mr Kasim Ssebadduka, who is in the gallery now, spent the whole of Monday and Tuesday this week, helping his members to relocate, assuring them that the six months-free rent offer was not a hoax and was guiding them to whom they should report to in Usafi market and other alternatives. He is also telling them where they can find him in case of difficulty on a loud speaker located at the Park Yard Market. He is doing all this on a loud speaker so that any vendor that needs support knows where they can go. 

Madam Speaker, is there a problem now? All is calm at Park Yard Market and the new location, except for the media that need news and politicians – am sure who need some political capital. There is no serious security or economic threat arising out of the relocation of vendors formerly at the Park Yard Market. There are however, a few skirmishes, mainly arising out of incitement and the usual few people who will always resist development and change in all societies and in all countries from time immemorial.

If you can remember, Madam Speaker, Katikkiro Nsibirwa was assassinated by people who resisted the construction of Makerere University. Ugandans resisted electricity and had to be whipped in order to allow electricity poles to pass through their gardens. They even resisted the growing of coffee and had to be caned, hence the name “Kiboko coffee” because Ugandans resisted the growing of coffee. They had to be caned. 
Former President J. F. Kennedy –

THE SPEAKER: We need order, Members.  

MS KAMYA: Former President J.F. Kennedy was assassinated by people who resisted abolition of racial segregation; and Galilee Galileo was executed for insisting that the world was round when the Catholic Church said it was flat. 

History –

THE SPEAKER: Order members, allow the minister to make her statement.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, history is littered by people who will always resist change but progress and development must continue. 

Madam Speaker, was this a successful mission? I am proud that we have successfully brought to the end a 20-year old dispute and relocated over 5,000 in a few days without a gunshot, with no tear gas and without any serious injury. (Applause) I call this a resounding success. I am very glad that Park Yard Market –(Interjections)– that I saw in the middle of the capital city, has finally been brought down and that Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium can now be developed into an ultra-modern facility, which Ugandans need and deserve.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I undertake that while I am still a minister with my colleague and still in charge of KCCA, we shall take keen interest in the quality of the development we anticipate.

I also call upon our colleagues in the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that Ugandans have the quality of development they deserve. 
The Minister of State and I –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I have the right document or not. Is it in order for the Minister to leave out very important things on page 8 and jump to page 9? At page 8 on successful mission, if I have the correct statement, it reads, “ I am proud that we have successfully brought to the end a 20-year old dispute and relocated over 5,000 people in a few days without a gunshot, tear gas, serious injury or mayhem. It is a resounding success for which Parliament ought to give me a handshake.” 

This is the document I have. I do not know why this part has been left out. Is the minister in order to avoid words in her statement? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I believe the minister was still explaining her statement. Did you omit the “golden handshake?” You talk about the handshake.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I am talking about the one of Parliament; the choice of Parliament to reward. I do not know whether Parliament rewards. May I continue, Madam Speaker?

Madam Speaker, we are convinced that it is possible to have the Kampala we want in a short time but only if we take out politics and concentrate on work, development and service delivery. With everybody’s collective support, Kampala can shine in a few years.

My I conclude by begging colleagues in this House to rise above partisan politics and support the development of this sports facility, which is 20 years overdue. 
Madam Speaker, I beg to submit as I lay this document at the Table. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think that the House and the country have benefited from the sequence and the chronology. A lot of this information has been in the public domain but sporadic. At least you have put it in sequence and I think we have a better picture. Thank you.

Let me hear from the minister in charge of the stadium before we come to hon. Latif Ssebagala. Keep it very brief.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me start by congratulating the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority for a wonderful job done.  

As a Minister in charge of Nakivubo and sports at large, we would have developed that place yesterday. But because of park yard vendors and other problems we could not proceed. Anyway, it is good she has cleared that. And as she rightly quoted since 1999, several letters of communication have been going to KCCA telling them to remove those people and relocate them so that Nakivubo can proceed.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to bring this bit of history for the Members not to get the perception as it was on the television as if these people had been ambushed to leave the place.

In 2009, Cabinet passed a paper authorising the Minister of Education and Sports - (Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister to read a statement without giving us copies yet we are stakeholders in this matter? For example, as a Shadow Minister of Sports, I need such information for my own analysis and follow up. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister is talking from his notes. Do you have a document? The Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, we have copies of your statement but not for the Minister of State for Sports.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I am just supporting the statement by the Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are just speaking from your notes? 

MR BAKABULINDI: I am speaking as a stakeholder who supports the action that was taken. I think there is no obligation for me to give him a copy. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, in 2009, Cabinet passed a paper for Nakivubo to be modernised. Some of you who have been here for some time will recall that part of Nakivubo park yard has suffered three fire outbursts. When we talk about Nakivubo, park yard is part of it. This is what some people have not understood. 

Secondly, when we started the process of modernising Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium, of course it was a long process because it involved soliciting for the potential developers and developing the plans - one of the hindrances that we got was that of the people who were operating at Park Yard Market. As you have heard the name, it is not called park market.

We requested KCCA, by telling them that we had our land title and this was not their property and asked them to relocate vendors from whom they had been collecting revenue. We wrote to KCCA not just one or two letters. 

When Park Yard Market was burnt, the perimeter wall of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium was greatly affected to the extent that even FIFA, by regulation could not accept international games, hosted there. As sports lovers, the first priority was to look for somebody who could put up a perimeter wall.

Madam Speaker, the story of Park Yard Market is very interesting. Immediately, after this market was gutted by fire, several people visited the place including H.E, the President. You are aware that he even donated some money to those vendors as a way of sympathizing with them.

There was a group in the Park Yard Market that developed a plan of the market immediately. Some of them came to my office saying that they wanted to be given that place and they construct a market. I told them that was practically impossible because of two conditions, one, park yard belonged to Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and two, that park yard was not a gazetted market.

I thought they had understood as they went back. However, another group came later saying that since they had secured a developer for the perimeter wall, was it possible for them to also be stakeholders?

I told them that was a different entity and so there was no way they could be partners to it. They knew very well that any time developers started, they would leave the place. Therefore, for those who were thinking that these people were ambushed, I would like to inform them that it is a long history; they knew that they were there temporarily. 

After writing to the city council and it realised that they were on the wrong, they wrote back to Nakivubo and said, “Please, we no longer deal with them” but they remained with the responsibility of removing them.

For about two to three years, the people of park yard wanted to cooperate with Nakivubo; they agreed to be there temporarily while they paid some little dues until they get the developers.

However, again our colleagues, the politicians stopped the dues they were paying and until now, nothing has been coming to Nakivubo Stadium from the park yard. 

I heard some people saying that they have documents - I would like to challenge them to bring up to date documents to show that they were paying their dues to Nakivubo. 

We continued pestering KCCA until sometime back when the board wrote to them saying that they had reached the final stages with the developers and would like their portion; because the plan involves all that land.

That is why I thanked the minister for saying we need development in that area. KCCA came in and at first it looked as if the people were going to negotiate and leave the place amicably.


Madam Speaker, you will be seeing some and I think you saw them on TV - again some of our colleagues went to park yard. And some do not even belong to that constituency but they told them not to leave that place even if it means shading blood. 

Those who thought –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happened to have been part of the group that made an attempt to go and assess the situation at Park Yard Market.

Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR KASIBANTE: The honourable minister is insinuating that politicians went and kind of incited vendors to resist this brutal eviction. 

The goons who attempted to lynch us confessed that they had been deployed by the minister. Is the minister in order to insinuate that politicians went to incite vendors when it is the goons deployed by the minister who were inciting people by trying to lynch politicians who had gone to assess the situation on the ground? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know there are politicians at LC I, LC II and LC III. The minister just mentioned “politicians” he did not say “Members of Parliament”. So he is in order. (Applause)

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. And I think your continuous guidance has made us progress in the debates.


Honourable members, park yard has its leaders who on several occasions wanted to interact with the Nakivubo leadership to see how amicably the situation could be handled. I would not like to repeat what the minister has told you; several meetings took place, leaders were called and they went ahead and were given gestures of stalls as she has righty put it. They were even given money to facilitate them and the process was going on.

However, as my colleague said that he was one of those invisible eyes enforcing - there were also visible forces that could know what you were planning and things went at a good speed.

With that, I would like to once again salute my minister and I can now assure the House that after that, in a few months the entire Nakivubo is going to start its process of development. Thank you. 

3.39
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we need today are facts and honesty from members. The history of park yard has been stated and indeed we all agree that park yard is owned by Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. 

Madam Speaker, that is the first fact, it was a parking yard for those going for sports. As time went on, it developed into a market and that is why we are calling it park yard market.  Whether we deny it or not, this place has been a market for 20 years. 

Thirdly, the issue of illegality; if we are honest - we have all the evidence that shows these people have been paying their dues to the owners of the land. There is empirical evidence that Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium has been collecting dues from the owners, recognising that they are renting from the landlord. These are facts which cannot be disputed.

When we talk about Ugandans who have been working there; the beneficiaries are over 15,000. We all agree that indeed we need development in the city and do not believe that there is any leader here who can say they are not interested in development. 

When we were elected as Kampala leaders in the Tenth Parliament, I was elected to lead the city parliamentary caucus and one of my objectives was to ensure that as Kampala leaders, we should agree on how to carry out development, which includes the poor, the under privileged and the rich.

Madam Speaker, the honourable ministers of Kampala are members of this caucus and we agreed to sit and see how best we can ease the tension and move forward. In the first two months, we were moving well but all the communication she has given was not passed to the caucus to which she is a member - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think the House is required to take note of what happens in the caucuses. No! Hon. Latif, concentrate on the rights of the leaser of that land. That is where the contention is.

Was it a market, did it become a market by their acceptance, were they receiving a premium for the market or just for the land? You leave the caucus issues alone.

MR SSEBAGALLA: Madam Speaker, I was giving you a brief history because they have talked about politicians de-campaigning this and being anti-development. That is why I wanted to bring it out - we have been missing in action as the politicians in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, what we should know right now is that if these people had been operating in park yard illegally and indeed as I have said, the documents are there to show that they have been paying, the minister should have written to them, giving them time to relocate. The minister should have gone ahead to ensure that the timeframe given was sufficient because relocating 15,000 people is not simple. 

Madam Speaker, many people have lost their properties because they were evicted at around midnight. We need to look at the management of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. As Members of Parliament, we should know that it is not just about what is happening now.

Madam Speaker, you constituted a committee to investigate the Park Yard issue and related matters including the takeover of land in schools and other markets. The committee came out with a very clear report. If the Ministry of Education and Sports is sincere, there is a board of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and that board had already put up designs to redevelop that area. They gave four companies authority to redevelop Nakivubo Park Yard. The four companies were given the authority by the board of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium.

As we speak now, the committee which was instituted by Parliament requested that those four companies should be maintained. What we are talking about in the minister’s report is now one company. This means the other three companies are going to court for litigation.

Madam Speaker, my concern is that although the minister is saying people have been relocated, we should remember that Usafi has been there for many years and even if Wandegeya Market was constructed, up to now it is empty. There is no way you can say those people have been relocated to those areas, yet these people cannot sell from there; people cannot go there. The minister is not honest in saying that people are now comfortable and carrying out their businesses.

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, the people we are protecting are not people of Kawempe North or Kampala City. They are people from Kamuli, Iganga, Mayuge, Gulu and everywhere else. They are the ones earning from park yard. If we evict them the way they were evicted at night, I doubt – (Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, the point of order I would like to raise is that we are aware that there are forces of demand and supply. In most cases, people go where the products are. I think it is misleading for the honourable member to say that since the market has been relocated from park yard, the consumers will not go where they have been relocated. People will always go where the products are. My point of order is that the Member’s information is misleading us. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Ninth Parliament, we investigated the grabbing of public land especially in schools around the country and hon. Migadde was the chairperson. Can he give us some light before I move to the other Members? Hon. Latif, conclude your statement.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, when the President visited Kawempe, the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority promised His Excellency the President 80 per cent votes in Kampala. She has started working on it -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our concern as a House was the manner of eviction. Let us hear from hon. Migadde.

3.49
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was the chairperson of that six-member committee and fortunately, only two of my Members made it back to the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, in our investigation, we discovered quite a number of issues. Although the minister only mentioned one stakeholder or company – Ham Enterprises – it was not only Ham Enterprises.
Madam Speaker, like the minister mentioned, after the President directed on the redevelopment of Nakivubo Stadium after a Cabinet decision, on 31 March 2015, the chairperson Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium wrote to the Minister of Education and Sports informing her that the board of trustees of Nakivubo had contracted three other companies. 

One of the companies was Nterenfune Enterprises Ltd which was meant to build a 10,000-seater pavilion. The second one was Future Uganda Ltd which was to construct an ultra-modern sitting/stand at the Villa-Ki-Russia Park. The fourth was Bestin Limited and it was meant to erect two other stands. Why is that one very important?

Madam Speaker, when we visited, we discovered that the company the minister is emphasising – Ham Enterprises – had started construction without an approved building plan. This made it very difficult for KCCA to supervise the work because you cannot supervise minus an approved building plan. To make matters worse, Ham Enterprises Limited had constructed lock-up shops on an annex netball court and the committee considered it that Ham Enterprises was more interested in business than sports.

Madam Speaker, the approved building plan had provided for four gates because this is a stadium and must be accessible –(Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I listened to the statement from the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority about the evacuation of the vendors in the park yard area. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to bring the details of the management of the park yard rather than the topic, which is being discussed now?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what happens when Government keeps quiet about our recommendations. We made recommendations in 2015 and adopted the report. Now issues around that are coming back again. However, our issue had been the manner and brutality of the eviction. For now, leave out the issue of the other companies. We are interested in knowing how Ugandans were handled on this matter. That is our concern. If you want to reopen the report - In 2015, we debated this report because there was no treasury memorandum and now the same thing is coming back. Hon. Migadde, concentrate on park yard. Do not go into the other areas because this is our concern.

MR MIGADDE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. What I was worried about is coming back next month complaining about a stadium which has no entries. I, therefore, thought it was very important. I would like to affirm to this House that as a committee, we discovered that it was not only park yard that encroached on Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium land but we found quite many other encroachers and some of them are well established.  

Madam Speaker, even before we raise the procedure, the selective action should also be questioned. The committee even agreed with the minister and recommended that all encroachers on Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium land, be evicted. We never approved the manner in which they should be evicted but we requested to set up a committee. We also recommended putting a moratorium on disposal of other lands belonging to the stadium.

Madam Speaker, what I am worried about as a Member of Parliament is something that happened before on this land. We saw Basajjabalaba and it is still fresh in our minds; he claimed for compensation. I am worried about these other three companies which were dually awarded contracts by the same board and the letters are there for evidence.  I am worried about them going to courts and yet it is still the taxpayers and Government to incur the cost and this same Parliament will pass a supplementary maybe to compensate them. That is why I am worried.

Madam Speaker, there is also another implication, which is litigation. It would be okay if it was Government repossessing this land because it is easy for Government to pay the cost for litigation. Now, why should Government pay the cost of litigation when this whole land is going to an individual company –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are going to do something different today. I am going to demand from the Prime Minister, a treasury memorandum on that report. You are late by  two years yet you are supposed to present in six months and now we are having residual problems because Government  - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are demanding for the treasury memorandum on that report on Government land and we want it in one month’s time .

3.58
MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Several issues surround this matter, but as you have guided, I am going to be cocooning on the manner in which this eviction was done.

The minister has already mentioned that the eviction was done in anticipation of a court order and on that only. From that, you can understand what actually took place.  However, before I get to that, the habit of fearing court orders and hiding from court cannot be supported here. We can challenge court orders but we cannot hide from them; that an investor was even spying on courts. For example, even on a Sunday, he was anticipating a court order coming in on Monday. This investor convened a meeting of the leadership of the vendors on Sunday night and the eviction which was actually brutal began at midnight.

Madam Speaker, these were leaders of vendors convening at night with this big investor. Madam Speaker, you guided very well. We may not go into the details of what took place. I would even make a case that the leadership was actually bribed by the investor. I know I have to prove – 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have evidence – please bring it?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, as you so guide, at some stage, I will bring the evidence – the meeting was at night, it was Shs 50 million for each of them.  We have evidence and we shall bring it – (Interjection)

Madam Speaker, this is the case I would like to make right now. This means that the leaders could not even get time to consult their constituents - at night and then immediately after the meeting, evictions begin. So, where was the involvement of the ordinary vendor in this Sunday night meeting, which actually led the eventual eviction where the vendors lost their merchandise? 

The minister is saying that the leaders of these vendors are making calls to the people begging them to come for their merchandise. Why is this so? Someone is accusing us that this is not Rubaga North Constituency but these are Ugandans. We cannot wait for Ugandans to suffer from Kasubi before a Member of Parliament for Rubaga North can get involved.

Madam Speaker, a case was made here that the market was illegal. In fact someone is even saying that it was not the market but the yard. I would like to lay on the Table the evidence – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  In half a minute, conclude please.

MR KASIBANTE: The letter I have is written by the Executive Director of KCCA, Mrs Ssemakula Musisi, to Kampala United Park Yard Vendors Association. The reference is - request of tax holiday to park yard market vendors. She is acknowledging this is a market.

Madam Speaker, KCCA has been getting revenue from these markets   for a very long period of time. I also have evidence that Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the vendors and the MoU is still running. 

However, before I lay this on the Table, this letter was written by the former Acting Town Clerk of KCCA, guiding on how revenue should be collected and deposited. If I can be allowed to read verbatim - It is enough testimony that KCCA acknowledges that this is a market and that it has been collecting revenues from the someplace.

Madam Speaker, by this letter, KCCA was directing that 30 per cent of the revenue collection be paid to Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and 70 per cent goes to KCCA Central Division. This is evidence that KCCA is well informed that this is a market place.

Madam Speaker, the minister is now saying – (Interjections) - I would like to be very brief because I am going to lay on the Table this evidence - that she had to rush this eviction. The minister has failed to table evidence of her correspondences between herself and the Executive Director. Just last Monday, as area MPs, we sat as ex-officio of the authority in a special meeting. The Executive Director was requested to tell the council whether she has ever responded to the request of the minister for a report regarding the illegality of this market. She said she was still preparing one.

Now, the letter was written on 20th February requesting the Executive Director for a report about the legal status of this market. Before a report was given to the minister, eviction took place because she wanted to hide from court. We can only challenge court orders, but we cannot hide away from them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a very huge problem. The working relationship between the minister and the leadership of Kampala must be investigated seriously. Parliament made a special law which guides the management of Kampala whereby ministers are part and parcel of the management of Kampala. They must consult the authority and look into the authority’s decisions before they make their decisions. Here comes a minister who makes an order without knowing what discussions were made in the meeting of the authority that manages Kampala and its properties. 

Two days since the minister made such a directive, the authority sat. Knowing such a problem could crop up, they decided they maintain the status quo as they look around the various markets to get appropriate stalls for the people. After the minister made the directive that the people should vacate in 30 minutes, the management of Kampala sat in a special meeting again to see what to do. What can we do as the planners and leaders of Kampala?

Before sitting on Sunday night, the minister made up a plan as she has said in her statement to evacuate the vendors. Now, what is the motive? Even before the minister makes such decisions, she must first consult the Cabinet. She is not managing Kampala alone. There are certain organs which must first be consulted including the Ministry of Trade and Industry. That is why I am asking Parliament to investigate the actions of the minister and see if there is any other motive other than the issue of development, which she has stated.

Another issue is, Madam Speaker, before the Minister for Sports leaves -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was supposed to flag off a team. I asked the minister to do it on my behalf and that was before this matter came up.

MR SSEWANYANA: The minister has just said that as sportsmen, we would be very happy to reclaim our land for future development of the stadium. There was a scenario when even football was evacuated from Nakivubo Stadium at no notice; that was yesterday. Police FC and Onduparaka were preparing for a game, and then an investor brought in machines –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I have stood to speak about the rights of the user. I know we need development in this country. Every developed country has good cities, but I question the way the users were handled without good information to protect their goods. I felt like crying when I saw women crying about the loans they are going to pay. Why don’t we have development together with our people as stakeholders? Why did the minister behave like this?

I discovered that many times we make mistakes. The minister, who is still the President of the Federal Alliance, one time, when we were looking for votes for President Museveni, used the same method she is using to make sure people go. I remember well because she said this in Busia when she was there for campaigns. She said when she comes in power, she would use force. I witnessed force during this eviction, and this mistake is attributed to us, the ruling party. We source people from other political parties with unknown backgrounds. They come to our party and begin implementing their programmes. Whoever has been appointed a minister from the Opposition has crude methods of working. (Laughter)

Mr Prime Minister, we have enough cadres who can be ministers instead of getting people from the Opposition to come and spoil the name of the President.

Madam Speaker, almost 80 per cent of the speakers from the Opposition were abusing NRM; this is bad. I stood to say that this Parliament must know that the Opposition, as soon as you call them to eat with us, they will destroy us. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order please! There is a member on the floor.

4.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At times, we bring out some of these statements in good faith. We do not wish the Government to imagine that we have neglected them. 

Madam Speaker, on page 3, the minister said in 2013, Nakivubo Stadium was closed by Uganda Revenue Authority over accumulated debts. I wonder whether she wanted to say park yard or Nakivubo because we are addressing park yard. Park yard is not related to Nakivubo’s accumulated debts much as it is owned by Nakivubo.

Secondly, if you continue to page 5, the minister says that she wrote a letter and gave 30 days for the people to leave the park yard. Eventually, she gets communication from the meeting that there is an injunction about to be presented. I wonder whether she heard the information by a written document that included the agreement the leaders with the members of the park yard had reached since her correspondences were written like she said. However, the response and information she got was a rumour. She was told a rumour of what was about to happen and that the people were ready to leave before 30 days.

Madam Speaker, there is a tendency where the leaders that run some of these markets are easily bought off. After buying them off, they disguise as if they are fighting for the rights of market vendors yet they have got their handshake. Now, here we are, a chairman is moving day and night, immediately after closing off the market to look for areas which he was not searching before closure of the market.

Madam Speaker, everybody has seen how these poor men and women of park yard have suffered. It is today that I have discovered those who have been burning the park yard. You realise that much as this has been on-going, at the end of the day, we are not going to watch this place benefit from by Nakivubo Market. However, there must be some people somewhere using this to imagine they are fighting for sports as the minister said. That they are helping this and the other yet they are just few individuals that the minister and a given team are fighting for at the expense of the poor men and women of this country.

We must be considerate; we are all Ugandans and we need each other. Let us look at this instead of fighting for one person; fight for the many that suffer elsewhere. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.16
MR IBRAHIM KASOZI (FDC, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I proceed, I request to read verbatim the letter which was written by His Excellency the President on 28 April 2010. I would like to read a paragraph where he said: “The continued sale of the property to individuals is dangerous socially and politically because a lot of people stand to be deprived of their livelihood.”

THE SPEAKER: Who wrote that letter?

MR KASOZI: It was written by the President. I beg to lay it before the House. Madam Speaker, this letter was written by His Excellency the President addressed to hon. Adolf Mwesige the Minister of Local Government by then. I beg to lay the letter.

I would also like to quote the letter which was written by the then Minister of Local Government Adolf Mwesige addressed to all district chairpersons, all mayors and all chairpersons of the town council. In paragraph (e), he stated that all programmes requiring demolition, reconstruction, closing or moving of markets must first be submitted to the Minister of Local Government and the respective local government councils for scrutiny and approval before the programme can proceed.

In paragraph (f), it is stated, “The sitting and registered tenants for all stalls  (Midalas) those in open spaces, in the market shall all form one umbrella market association. The democratically instituted and registered market vendors association shall be given the first priority to develop and manage the market”.

Madam Speaker, the minister in his letter written to the management of Park Yard Market, stated the reason as to why those people were supposed to vacate: she said that it is because the market is illegal. I beg to lay on the Table, this letter of award which was given to the then company to run. It was dated 20 July 2000. It was addressed to Equator Touring Services Uganda Ltd; award of tender to manage Nakivubo Park Yard.

This means that it is the Kampala City Council Authority who - 

THE SPEAKER: Who wrote it?

MR KASOZI: Written by the then Secretary for Kampala District Tender Board; he was awarding the tender to Equator Touring Services Limited to manage that market. This means that that market was not there illegally. 

Madam Speaker, this Government was founded on the strong foundation of those Wananchi down there. The time is now. All of us have in one way or the other ever been tenants. However, even then when you are aware that this house is not yours the landlord cannot just wake up in the morning and throw your property out. There are laws to follow. My fellow comrades, those are your brothers and sisters.

I recall my mum the minister - I call her mum because we were once in the same political party. These are the things she used to condemn over the radio one by one – (Laughter). Today she is doing the same things. The country is not going to be owned only by those who have money; we should also consider those people who were the foundation of this Government.

4.21
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. With the high insight of the guidance you gave the hon. Migadde, who was my chairperson on the sectoral committee, I will be very careful because I know quite a lot on this subject matter. However, let me limit myself to the boundaries of the eviction.

First of all, I would like to advise the honourable minister for Kampala that this very report she has given Parliament is an indictment of her own conduct, knowledge of the workings of Government that on her revolution, she could abandon poor Ugandans and leave them at the mercy of brutal capitalists. That a minister with a duty to protect, even when you had a legal duty to relocate; Government should not work like private individuals.

Madam Speaker, the minister will have to explain to this country whether she is aware that part of her duty in Kampala is to ensure that wherever there are disadvantaged people, she has a role to move them to a place she considers lawful for them to echo out a living. She is informing the country of how she abdicated her duty and left it to whom it may concern. I take exception to the conduct of my very good friend the honourable minister for Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that the works around the stadium are tainted with impropriety procedurally and legally. I would like to interest the Committee for Education in the conduct of the State Minister for Sports in matters regarding Nakivubo Stadium. 

The President, in his capacity, wrote advising the minister on how to do business on this stadium and this land. His letter did not in any way impeach the provisions of the 1953 Act quoted by the minister – he did not purport in any way to impeach the provisions of this Act. Instead, he asked the minister to work within the boundaries of this law. That is why I am inviting the committee to interest itself in the personal interests of the minister in matters relating to Nakivubo Memorial Stadium – not the Minister of Kampala but the Minister of State for Sports.

To the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, in future, as a political leader in Kampala, it is not proper for you to accuse colleagues in Kampala of inciting people. In none of these meetings that you quoted did you invite them for a conversation over these matters. There was no way they could sit back and wait for your hands-off-hats-off approach. By leaving these vendors at the mercy of the capitalists, you used a hands-off-hats-off approach.
You are a mother and these are your people; yes, they could have issues with the way they are occupying this place, but you are privy to the provisions of the Land Act. You are aware of how to handle bonafide occupants. They may not be occupants by title but they had a right under the provisions of the Land Act. 

I also know that the workings of Government are such that sitting tenants are given special treatment in the way business is handled. Otherwise, this very document indicts the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority and this should give her an opportunity to consider how she can work with the politicians in Kampala. The politicians in Kampala are indispensable in matters of Kampala. 

You could be having disagreements but you are not disagreeable to the fact that Kampala should be developed. If you are not disagreeable, then you can have a consultative conversation on how to work with the people. Some of our people are vulnerable and need protection by their leaders – (Member timed out.)

4.26
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to page 6 of the report especially that sentence which begins: “When I asked why they did not wait for the 30 days as had been agreed during the security meeting, they told me they had learnt of the Lord Mayor’s plan to secure a court order stopping the eviction and that Ham’s intelligence told him that the court order would be ready on Monday morning”. 

Madam Speaker, even Rule 71 of our Rules of Procedure guards against anticipation. The honourable minister who has read this report is aware that you cannot kill a person because you fear that he may kill you. We are human and we watched that incident. We feel that the people who did it misrepresented the Government. For how long should we continue doing this?

Recently, the Attorney-General presented a paper to stop the Parliament from doing its work. The same things are being done to the vendors. I am a Member of Parliament on the NRM side but these are our people; the people suffering are for the NRM and other parties but more importantly, they are Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, it is high time the Government looked at the plight of the people of Uganda and considered the rationale of these people. Why did you take that high-handedness to evict these Ugandans? How can we punish the wrong doers – the wrong doers in this case are the people who gave 30 days and in the process turned around to evict the poor men and women of Uganda. 

The chairperson of the committee has already given us some highlights. I propose that this be investigated to conclusion – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the investigation, I would like to propose that we get the Government Treasury Memorandum to know what they are doing and not doing. We cannot add another investigation because they have not answered on the other one. I have given them one month to report. 

4.30
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kiyoga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take cognisance of the long period that Government had taken to evict vendors from Park Yard Market, and I would like to commend Government. I think Government was aware that the services of the over 4,000 people in Park Yard Market also impacts directly and indirectly to millions of people. 

Madam Speaker, if you are to conduct an eviction - Government took long because they knew they needed to have a human face to conduct this eviction. However, also there were probably no options for these people in park yard. I have learnt that options were given with Ham Shopping Mall giving them about 1,000 stalls - USAFI Market having about 700 and 200 million for relocation. We can conclude that eviction had become a foregone conclusion. 

This eviction should have been done in a better way. Let me hasten to draw your attention to page 7, particularly the first paragraph. The first sentence talks of Ham’s intelligence. The action of eviction was actually guided by Ham’s intelligence – (Laughter) – who is Ham? We have a Government minister and we have a Government intelligence system. Here is a situation where an honourable minister is relying on the intelligence information given by an individual and that is the information guiding the actions of a whole Government minister. 

Madam Speaker, reliance on this kind of individual information gives a vote of no confidence in our institutions of Government like the intelligence systems of Government. 

I find it very belittling that – (Interjections) – even if we had got this kind of information, we needed to check the information. I once was a student of participatory appraisal; when using this methodology in collecting information, there is what we call triangulation, which is – (Member timed out.) 

4.34
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Division): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The saga surrounding the Park Yard Market did not begin today and as you are aware, we have been discussing various matters of market vendors and hawkers not only in this Parliament but also outside.

However, as we discuss relocation, the question should be: who has the authority to licence a market? The answer is clear; it is the Kampala Capital City Authority. Who has the authority to gazette and de-gazette a market? Still, it is Kampala Capital City Authority. 

Secondly, on whose land was the market operating and does that owner still want the market to be on his land? Thirdly, in which manner have the people that have been operating in this area moved? We are on the third question and this started way back. Half of this park yard was already built by Ham. We presented the issue to this House that the procedure was not followed and it was overtaken by events.
 
However, there is a fully constituted council. In the midst is a school - Nakivubo Settlement - that has around 30 children surrounded by markets in the place of clash and clang. If we had discussed together with this community, we would have got diverse means to relocate these people in a place where they would own a title because these are poor people.

A similar situation happened in Owino market where we said that the developers should be the tenants so that they own something within the city. In Kisekka Market, the developers are the owners. The issue at hand is that there is lack of truth; the population affected are not 50,000 people and this is a lie. Fifty thousand people is when Namboole Stadium is full to capacity when there is a football match. However, even if there were 2,000 people, these people are breadwinners for another 1,000 people through their families. What should we do now?

The question that the Speaker raised before was for Kampala Capital City Authority to inform the House about the number of stalls available in the markets and we have never received any answer to that effect. Therefore, the eviction was definitely rushed. We should not talk about eviction because we know the landowner is Government and the Government has a right over that land. The licensor is the city council; if the city council withdraws your licence, then you cannot operate. However, what we are addressing now is the relocation. Do we have the list of those market vendors and the answer is no. The first question would be to know the number of market vendors and give us a list.  

We do not know the actual number or the list and the stalls. The minister’s statement falls short of showing us that vendor x was relocated to Kisaasi to stall No. 19 or that Vendor y was relocated to Wandegeya to stall No. 640. There was an eviction of that nature in Wandegeya before and if you passed there today, you would be surprised because Wandegeya looks much better. However, the question is whether this was done for the better.

Whereas we all agree that we cannot be impediments to development, we should all work together harmoniously and ensure that the process is inclusive and we would have swift developments that are acceptable to all.

However, for now, we must devise a solution. Can we task the minister to come back with an inventory of all the vendors and where they were relocated to because if we continue lamenting here without giving a solution, we shall be wasting time? Let those who allege that they were not compensated or relocated come up. We should form a joint committee inclusive of the minister, council leaders and vendors and discuss. In addition, we should see how to relocate them. If the vendors are in excess, we then create more space and build temporary stalls. That is a win-win situation for all of us. Thank you very much.

4.40
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a young man, I came from Butambala and lived at Old Kampala Mosque with my sister. I saw the market which was started by the former Minister of Local Government, Mr Bidandi Ssali. It was for the poorest of the poor; it used to be occupied by old women who had witnessed the catastrophe that had befallen this country in the 1980s and I would not like to elaborate on that.

Madam Speaker, certain things are difficult to take and I have listened to the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority carefully. Let us not make situations in this country inevitable, the people will one day rise up. The stakes are higher because they are matters of life and death.

There is a small group which we must clearly look at in Kampala Ham Towers who specialize in acquiring people-centred property. They are so rich and can buy any property on the open market but they cocoon around free properties of the masses, who have struggled to acquire them. For example, Ham Towers was built on the roadside around Makerere and Kampala City Council Authority has been expending that road and thus encroached on Makerere University and protected Ham Towers.

The same Ham Towers built in Nakivubo an illegal structure and got away with it. However, when the minister comes on the Floor of this House and tells us without a structural plan that an individual - Parliament must interest itself in knowing who owns Ham Towers because if we do not, the people will take us on.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about the issue of compensation. When this so-called mismanagement happened in Kampala, Government lost billions of monies over Nakasero Market to Basajjabalaba. We also lost billions of money on Kisekka Market to one Col. Mugyenyi. This small group of Ham, Basajjabalaba, Mugyenyi and the like have become a menace to the poorest of the poor. 

It is high time we mentioned them so that people get to know them. These are young men; we must also interest ourselves in knowing how they have made the money or who owns the money. This country cannot be taken for a ride.

I have also done a lot of politics around Kampala and I know –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR INNOCENT KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the House upon yesterday’s elections; it was wonderful. I further would like to thank God that even during the celebrations, I did not hear of any bad report.    
              
Secondly, as a Ugandan I am concerned about what happened the other day at Park Yard Market. This is a national issue because we all have people working there as vendors. I am a leader in Kyankwanzi but I have my people there. Therefore, such issues should be handled without party connotations or the Government we belong to. 

As a young parent, I am worried; if I died today, God forbid, where would I live my children? Would it be in this environment where no one seems to care about the less privileged? Just think about it. 

Madam Speaker, this is a post-mortem but people have already been pushed away and property has been destroyed. However, we can ensure that we guard against such happenings in the future when we organise this in order for us to put this bad image out of our faces. 

Since the leaders, especially those within Kampala, seem not to have been consulted, I request the minister to always bring them on board. I have heard their views and they are good. For example basing on what hon. Mohammed Nsereko and the rest have said, if they had been brought on board, this thing would not have escalated to this extent because it paints a bad picture of this Government. 

My parents and relatives lost lives and property when this Government was just taking over power during the bush war. I feel very bad when I see a few elements trying to paint a bad picture of this Government so that people can hate it. If anything happens and this Government loses power because of such wrong people, it would hurt me because it reminds me of the people that we lost. 

Honourable members, I request the House to devise means of handling such public issues amicably while we are together. Political issues should not divide us. As national leaders, let us paint a good picture and also help our less privileged people for the development of the whole country. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister will come to you. I think I am inclined to agree with what hon. Mohammed Nsereko has proposed. I think it is an indictment on all of us that the poor have been pushed and we have not found a solution. 

I went to school here in Shimoni but the school is no longer in existence. That school was for the children of the poor and the children of the police, who would walk from Kibuli to Shimoni. I grew up in Naguru but the school is not there. We were displaced and there is nothing going on. There is just a wall. The hawkers were chased; they are in this town but we do not know where they are. We do not know where the other vendors are. 

Honourable members, I think we must rise to the occasion. (Applause) It is only us that can speak for those people. Therefore, I want the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority to come and bring us a list of names of the people who were in the other place and where they have gone. We want a report next week because this is a serious matter. We cannot continue treating people as if they are not Ugandans. We want to know those who have gone to Wandegeya, USAFI, Ham Towers and those who have nowhere to go. That is what you should do because that is our responsibility.

MS BETI KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I will produce the report. 

THE SPEAKER: We want a report next week of all the names of the vendors. We cannot continue treating people as if they are rubbish. Honourable members, debate will continue next week, when the minister brings a list of the allocation. Thank you very much. 

I will now amend the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to make a statement but let us now go to the Prime Minister’s Question Time and then we can come back to the statement.  

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.49
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now two weeks since electricity was disconnected at the only hospital in Bugiri District.
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that a hospital needs power during surgery, for sterilising instruments, carrying out x-rays and so much more. However, due to an accumulated bill, Umeme, a parastatal that distributes power on behalf of Government, went ahead and disconnected power in a Government hospital. 

Right now the people of Bugiri are listening and have been asking questions. I would like you to give them an answer after the overwhelming support they gave to the Government that they love most. They even went to the extent of kicking out the Leader of the Opposition. 

4.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I salute the people of Bugiri for solidly standing by the Movement. 

Secondly, it is true all of us are expected to meet our bills. Unfortunately, the problem of Bugiri reflects what is happening in a number of other districts; Apac is one clear case. The problem is that the money received by the district general hospitals is not yet adequate for clearing the bills. 

To make it worse, in many district hospitals, power is not only connected to the actual hospital building but also to the quarters of the hospital workers. Sometimes management and the use of power are not adequately controlled. 

Therefore, the Minister of Health and I have discussed the matter and we are pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the aim of getting power reconnected as quickly as possible. We are also looking into getting a more permanent solution to these regular disconnections by Umeme, which inconveniences not only patients but also all of us.

4.52
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for a person to get a Uganda Certificate of Education for O’ Level, they must sit for at least eight subjects. 

Recently, we developed a curriculum reducing the number of subjects and most of the subjects, which were scrapped, are arts subjects. Unfortunately, a blind student cannot study biology, chemistry and physics because of their sight.

However, due to the removal of these 10 subjects, which includes political science, office administration, among others, it has reduced their subjects to seven. That means that they will not attain a certificate. What can we do to such students? What can we do to help them get certificates?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if the position as described by our sister Baba Diri is correct, Government has no choice but to review the matter in order to ensure that our country men and women who cannot read or write and those who are blind are able to access education. Her point is therefore going to be taken up by the ministry responsible for education, to ensure that people who are disabled are adequately catered for in our curriculum.

4.55
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions for the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: You have to ask only one question.

MR BAFAKI: Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that last week, I asked how Government is prepared to save people from hunger. I also proposed that the Government should look at waiving taxes of food so that we can have surplus food here for six months. I followed you and requested that you table it in Cabinet. I would like to know if you tabled the proposal and the outcome. When are you bringing it here such that Parliament can discuss it and we have a waiver of taxes for six months, for people to have food here in Uganda? Please let us know.

Secondly, you are aware that the population of cattle in the cattle corridor is becoming extinct. I have asked for a solution of the counterfeit acaricides on the market and there is no solution that has been given. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you give a decisive answer so that on Friday I can go and tell my farmers in Kazo? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised key issues on the question of the cattle corridor and the challenges being faced by livestock owners. The minister responsible for livestock will come to this House and make a specific statement on the matter by next week. It is an urgent matter. 

Secondly, on the question of taxation for food and other related issues involving money, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to come to the House and give an elaborate explanation on the position by Government over the issues of money and taxation of food.

4.57
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the position of the Executive arm of Government on the rampant sale of Government land or public land by the Uganda Land Commission, despite its constitutional mandate to hold and manage any land in Uganda that is vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question was not very straight but the point is that the Uganda Land Commission is a custodian on behalf of the people of Uganda, for what belongs to Uganda and Ugandans in terms of land. Sometimes there has been some issuance of land by the Uganda Land Commission, which has generated, I must say, substantial amount of controversy and Government is already taking measures to streamline it, to ensure that any irregularities of that nature do not recur.

4.59
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about this issue, which we need a solution for. While driving home from 8.00 p.m. onwards, I find so many children in primary school uniform, going back to their homes. 

I have a few in my home and I was informed that they are requested to stay at school up to 8.00 p.m. yet they are day scholars. Madam Speaker, this endangers these small children and many times, we have heard of rape cases of children and even other older people.

What plans do you have to notify these schools not to make children stay in school up to late in the night? It is absurd because they again have to report at 6.00 a.m., when it is till dark. We need our children to study but we also need them to be safe. Many of them walk to school, those that cannot afford other means of transport. We would like to know what plans you have for that. 

I am uncomfortable, as an educationist, seeing very little children walking - even when it is raining in the night. I am also concerned as a parent. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question of young children going to class up to 8.00 p.m. is obviously not acceptable and it requires the Ministry of Education and Sports to enforce regulations, to ensure that children have enough time to study but also enough time to rest and the young children need a lot of time for rest.

Studying at night, to the best of my knowledge, is not part of the practices that are authorised by the Ministry of Education and Sports. This is therefore an important matter; I will take it up with Ministry of Education and Sports to take the necessary measures to protect our children.

5.01
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is common knowledge in Uganda that land grabbing is rampant and most of the Government land out there does not have land titles yet the land grabbers are very rich and can easily bribe anybody to do anything. We are worried for our land at the district, sub county and even parish levels. 

Which plan does Government have to make sure that Government land in the whole country is secure from land grabbers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question of land grabbing is as common issue and again, we have discussed it in this august House. It is true that Government land is an easy target, as thus, Government has already taken a decision to survey its land and title it as a measure to protect it. However, let me also alert you that a lot of land is in the hands of the district land boards that have the responsibility over land in their respective districts. 

It is therefore important for us as political leaders to sensitise the population to know that public land belongs to them and that they should not allow anybody to mess with it because that person will be grabbing what belongs to the people of Uganda. Nevertheless, the vigilance I have talked about and surveying the land is going to take place to secure Government land.

5.05
MS VERONICA NAMAGANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for three consecutive years, Government has been including the Villa Maria-Sembabule Road in the budget. However, up to now, there is no work done on that road. My people would like to know when work is going to start. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: There are very many important roads – (Laughter) - I see hon. Chris Baryomunsi smiling. I know it is one of the priority roads; to be specific, the Minister responsible for works will give the timing as to when work will commence to you.

5.06
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know very well that the country has been hit by drought for a long time. After the drought, we have had rains, which have been very bad. We have had a number of homesteads and food crops destroyed not only in Bukomansimbi but also Kamuli where the Speaker comes from. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have consistently written to your Office for relief items to assist our people but up to now, there is no positive response from you. May I know what time it takes for somebody to be assisted when the house has been de-roofed?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true we have received reports of how rain has come with vengeance after hiding from us for a long time. It is true a number of areas have been affected in the country. However, Madam Speaker, yesterday, we launched the National Food Security Assessment Report, which gave a global view in terms of Uganda on the food situation. 

It is well known, at least from this report that the most affected areas of the country are Teso, Karamoja, Bukedea, the cattle corridor, parts of Busoga, Lango, Acholi, West Nile and some areas of Central Uganda.

We have also received a substantial amount of food, if I may quote; Government has so far committed Shs 25 billion for relief and procurement is taking place because we are procuring 60,000 bags of 100 kg of maize flour. We are also getting 15,000 bags of 100 kg each of beans. This is going to improve our capacity to reach areas that we have not been able to reach in terms of distribution of food to most vulnerable groups.

Therefore, in summary, the areas where there has been destruction, Government will endeavour to support the communities that are affected with relief and help them to recover from the damages that have been caused by rain.

5.09
MR WAKAYIMA MUSOKE (DP, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is on the contract that was given to SPENCON, a company that was liquidated but was later sub-contracted by Wu Yi Co. Ltd to rehabilitate Busunju-Namungoona Road.

However, SPENCON failed to meet its obligation making Wu Yi leave the contract. Why would you continue giving tenders to companies that are in receivership and when is construction resuming on that road?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker if a company meets essential requirements to successfully compete, it does the work. In the course of doing the work, it may get problems of financial or other related issues. If it collapses, Government still has an obligation to ensure that the work that was supposed to be done is completed. Therefore, it is a question of now contractual obligations and management of the contract and sub contract and this is a matter that is important. It is going to be followed up by the Ministry of Works and Transport.

5.11
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to finally tell Ugandans the Government position on the elections of LC I and LC II. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday you conducted a very successful election here and we voted by secret ballot but when I went back to Mukono, my people said that we are very selfish because we hold all elections that nationally concern us. “You have held Presidential, Parliamentary, and now elections for EALA. Even bye-elections for positions that have become vacant in Parliament are being organised.” They said. 

What is the final position of Government on the issue of LC I and LC II?  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, isn’t it time for you to consider bringing an amendment here for us to abolish these councils if at all we cannot afford to accord our people to elect their leaders? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The question of disempowering the people of Uganda to elect their leaders will not be countenanced. Therefore, the question of bringing an amendment along those lines is out of question.

Secondly, the position is, as we have stated before, that LC elections are going to be held. At the same time, the body that has got statutory authority to announce the election date is the Electoral Commission and it is not my intention to usurp their mandate.

5.14
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2006 this Government donated land to an investor, which land belonged to Shimoni Demonstration School, to construct a five-star hotel for CHOGM. As you drive along this road, you will see very insignificant development on that land. 

Again in 2010, the Nakawa-Ntinda Estate land was given to another investor to develop village satellite estates. Similarly, to date, there is no significant development there.

Are these investors unserious? Haven’t they defrauded the Government and the people of Uganda? What is your say about this? Is there a policy to change the status quo or otherwise? The people of Uganda are concerned. 

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Gutomoi is raising a serious point. It is true that we have had contractors that have not performed as expected and consequently, a number of projects have not taken off or have barely taken off.

It is true that in the case of Nakawa, Government, after waiting for Opec Prime Properties to take off and failing, decided to give part of the land to the Aga Khan Foundation to put up an ultra-modern hospital, which they are indeed intending to do. We are convinced that they are going to develop that area fairly soon.

Government, meanwhile, continues to make contact with the Opec Prime Properties and the lawyers to see how to quickly resolve the issue of developing the other part of Nakawa.

Government will not take seriously people who accept contracts and fail to perform. Government will deal with them firmly because they are wasting our time and money and are hindering the development of our country. 

THE SPEAKER: I am looking for those who did not contribute in the other debate so that we are all on the Hansard. 

5.17
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is almost related to those projects that have been promised and nothing happens. 

Recently, I was in my constituency and we have got a few more sub-counties allocated and I would like to thank the Ministry of Local Government for that.

However, the challenge we have is that for every sub-county granted to the people, there is a policy that they should have a seed secondary school and a health centre III. The constituency created should also have a vocational skills training centre.

Unfortunately, this does not seem to be happening. I understand that where we do not have a lot of cloth, we may have make a short-sleeved coat. However, it seems that we keep making promises and allocating new administrative structures without enough budget to support them. It makes my life, as a leader of this constituency, very difficult. 

One team came to me and asked me to build them a health centre and a school. Only last week, I was in Kabweri and the problem we have as young leaders is that we think we can do what the Government is supposed to do.

I am proud of people who can give ambulances to their villages but this is not sustainable. What is the role of the Government in making sure that our people have the secondary schools, which are by policy established, the health centres and vocational skills training centres? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Prime Minister answers, honourable members, I direct the Clerk to arrange for screening of the question time in the House of Commons because we are taking so much time debating, asking questions and answering ourselves. Members should watch the screening so that we can move faster. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true we have tended to create more administrative units than the capacity to easily service them. Nevertheless, it remains a clear policy of Government, over time, to build a health centre III and a secondary school for every sub-county. 

5.19
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the current and last financial year, the Uganda Police Force, with funding support from the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), supervised under your office, earmarked construction of police stations for the new districts under PRDP region.

Secondly, they also earmarked to procure double-cabin pickups to be given to districts that did not receive them in the first phase. A case in point is Lango sub-region. Out of eight districts, only six received the PRDP cars that were given to CID department. To be specific, it is Alebtong and Otuke that did not receive. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these are two financial years and you are the direct supervisor of PRDP. When are you availing funds to Uganda Police Force for the districts that were promised and the CID cars to be procured and handed over? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is the intention of Government to fulfil her plans with regard to PRDP. With regard to the vehicles, since six districts out of eight have already received vehicles, it is clear that Government has done well in implementing that programme and the remaining will be done.

5.22
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 18 November 2015, we had a meeting in Lira concerning traders who were rioting. We had a meeting with foreign and local traders and the Minister of Trade, hon. Amelia Kyambadde. She came up with very good resolutions, one of which was having a list of foreign traders and what they do by mid-December last year. She went ahead and stated that the documents of non-Ugandan traders would be validated latest by 30 December 2016.

However, I would like to inform you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the traders are now selling popcorn, running butchers in Lira, selling slippers and other ordinary items. What are the plans of Government to make sure that the promises that the minister gave the traders of Lango, on behalf of Government, are fulfilled, now that the date has elapsed? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that the minister responsible for trade is carrying out this exercise so as to ensure that people who come as investors do not end up becoming permanent sellers of popcorns and other related items. Give the minister some more time to complete her work. 

5.24
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is the second time I am making you aware of this matter concerning people drowning in Lake Bunyonyi. Every day, at least five lives perish in this lake. As I speak, people are holding vigils at the lakeside, looking for the bodies of those who drowned in the lake. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know whether the Government can provide life jackets for these people so that they can be seen under the deep lake. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I share the concerns of my sister. It is true that there is a shortage of resources at the moment. However, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning), Ndugu Bahati, who is also the Member of Parliament for Lake Bunyonyi, is working hard to ensure that some money for the ferry can be found. I am sure he will give us a good report soon on how he is going to solve that matter.

5.25
MS CHRISTINE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister arises from a concern in this country where we have people claiming to be doctors and they go on radio claiming to treat everything. Some of them are herbalists while others engage in selling food supplements. 

However, we know in this country that trained doctors are not even supposed to advertise themselves. These people have even started doing outreaches in the communities. You hear them on radio telling people that they are coming and that they can treat everything. What is Government doing to protect our people so that they are not exploited? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, our sister from Mbarara has raised an important point. It is true that by profession and ethics of the medical profession, doctors are not supposed to advertise themselves. One elimination point, therefore, is that if you hear somebody advertising themselves as doctors, almost certainly, know that, that person is not a doctor.

Secondly, the Ministry of Health, through its various bodies, is intensifying its inspections of various premises to ensure that quack doctors are not in operation.

Thirdly, there is the question of traditional healers. Traditional medicine is a well-known practice, not only in this country but also globally. However, it is also heavily infiltrated by people who have no idea about medicine. Some are good but there are also many who join the field saying they are traditional healers when in fact they are not. 

Accordingly, the Government, through the Ministry of Health, is collaborating with genuine traditional healers, through their association, to see how they can be organised so that the fleecing and hoodwinking of the population can be curtailed.

5.29
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During this year’s Budget Speech, Government envisaged that the economy would grow at a modest rate of five per cent. Of recent, the media has been awash with speculation that the economy of Uganda has collapsed and a number of enterprises and companies are closing shop. Unfortunately, Government has not come out to deny or confirm that our economy is in shambles.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the economy of Uganda in shambles? If so, what stimulus measures has Government undertaken to revamp the economy?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the economy of Uganda is not in shambles. The economy of Uganda is actually strong. It is so strong that it has been able to be resilient in spite of the numerous challenges that the country has been facing. 

However, this matter is very crucial for honourable colleagues and the country to be kept posted. Next Tuesday, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come here and make a statement to apprise honourable members and the country on the state of the Ugandan economy.

5.30
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the previous presidential campaigns, H.E. the President, who is the head of state and fountain of honour, as provided by the Constitution, promised Ugandans that the Government would provide Shs 2 million to every registered group in every village. This was actually reiterated recently when he was in Masindi. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is the Government rolling out this initiative?

DR RUGUNDA: The Government will roll out this initiative as soon as the resources are mobilised. (Laughter)

5.32
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform you that today I am in the shoes of the Leader of the Opposition. Therefore, I will raise more than one question.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why does the Ministry of Internal Affairs prefer to recruit fresh graduates from universities yet there are many officers in lower ranks who have upgraded, acquired degrees and have not been considered for promotions to the rank of cadet officers?

Secondly, I agree with hon. Nambooze that the Electoral Commission is on record that they are ready but it is the Government, which has failed to release the money. What is the status? Tell the country because the people who want to contest are already campaigning and you know what it means. This is a rainy season and these people need to know their fate and start planting. Otherwise, they are still in campaigns.

Another question is that hon. Beti Kamya, the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, belongs to the Uganda Federal Alliance. The honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Betty Amongi, belongs to the Uganda Peoples’ Congress party. I would like to know whether the NRM has a formal agreement with Uganda Federal Alliance and UPC party because you have witnessed what happened here. Even now Members of NRM are asking, how? They are there contributing but they do not know. Tell your caucus members whether you have agreement with these parties.

Lastly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what policies has the Government put in place to ensure that children from the poorest families get equal opportunity to access good schools and regulate fees payable by parents? Today, in Uganda, the proprietors of schools charge different fees without Government control. The tuition charged includes, among others, application fees, admission fees, commitment fees and development fees. 

Actually, for this particular term, some parents have paid up to the tune of UShs 3 million for a senior one student. What is Government going to do to harmonise the situation on the ground? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my brother has raised a number of issues. His point about Police recruiting fresh graduates when in fact those who have upgraded while within the Police have not been considered is not quite accurate. It is true that Police recruits fresh graduates but it is also true that those who have graduated within the Police are gradually being promoted, taking into account the fact that they have acquired higher qualifications in education. The speed may not be as fast as we want but I know that Police is working on that.

Regarding the issue of elections, I had made reference to it. There may be some little adjustments required and discussions between the Electoral Commission and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Those are being resolved. Therefore, I expect that the Electoral Commission will, using its statutory mandate, come up and inform the country as to when elections are going to take place. 

Regarding the issue of our sisters, hon. Beti Kamya and hon. Betty Amongi, you could even have added our sister, hon. Nakiwala. All I can say is that these sisters have made enormous contribution to the working of Government and in a way, they have given the country a stronger, better and a more united Government and a better united Uganda. I hope that the example will be emulated by many who are still wondering. These ladies have taken a correct step; please emulate their great example – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We are talking about issues, which are constitutional in nature. Ugandans gave themselves a Constitution, which provides that if a person crosses from one side to another, especially where such a person is a Member of Parliament, that person will also vacate the seat to offer the people of that constituency an opportunity to elect a person, well knowing which side of the House that person belongs to. 

Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to continue talking very causally about issues that are well spelt out in our Constitution? 

Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s question was, under what legal framework are UPC members serving in the NRM Government and sitting on the right side of the Speaker in this House? The DP person, hon. Nakiwala, is not a Member of Parliament here and so, the law does not apply to her. However, in case where a person was elected on a UPC ticket as an opposition member, how does she sit on the right side and under what legal framework? 

Therefore, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to address us very casually about such an important matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of crossing, the Member crossing is required to notify the Speaker that he/she has crossed. I have not received a letter from hon. Amongi and hon. Kamya. As far as I am concerned, nobody has crossed. Therefore, he is in order.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Finally, on the issue of poor children accessing education, through promotion of Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE), these children are going to access high quality education.

THE SPEAKER: Item five. We have gone beyond the 45 minutes. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY, 8 MARCH 2017

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, I am pleased to have this opportunity to brief this Parliament on the occasion of the commemoration of the International Women’s Day on 8 March 2017.

The annual commemoration of the International Women’s Day in Uganda is a national event. In this regard, my ministry coordinates the activities to mark the day in collaboration with stakeholders in Government, civil society and development partners. 

The International Women’s Day is marked under the selected theme, which for this year is, “Women’s Empowerment in the Changing World of Work”. The theme is adopted from the international theme of 2017 which is, “Women’s Economic Empowerment in the Changing World of Work: Planet 50-50 by 2030”. 

This theme recognises that the world of work is changing. This offers both opportunities and challenges for women; be they young, old and women with disabilities. The theme calls for support to equal participation of men and women in the changing world of work to accelerate the achievements of gender equality and women’s empowerment as part of the 2030 Global Agenda for Sustainable Development.

In Uganda, the NRM Government has made significant gains to ensure a conducive legal and policy framework that supports both women and men in the work environment. The Constitution provides for equality and protection of rights of all to employment, the right to safety, health and freedom from discrimination. 

Laws in place include the Employment Act, 2006; the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006; the Labour Union Act, 2006; the Workers Compensation Act Cap 225 and the Sexual Harassment Regulation of 2012. 

The Uganda National Employment Policy, 2011 recognises that empowerment of vulnerable groups, including women, is important for wealth creation. The Uganda Gender Policy, 2007 prescribes interventions to improve the earning potential of women, taking into consideration their livelihood needs. Several other policies on trade and cooperatives, agriculture, education and private sector development provide for women’s increased participation and inclusion.

Madam Speaker, despite the supportive legal and policy environment, there are challenges that need to be addressed and these include women’s limited access and ownership to productive assets including land and credit, the gender pay gap, income inequality and sexual harassment at workplaces. In the private sector, women receive an average lower pay than men with a male-female wage gap that stands at about 39 per cent.

Women are the main caregivers in our households, providing for childcare, care for the sick, for older persons as well as family members with disabilities. Their contribution is not monetarily quantified. This calls for measures to support workers with parental care responsibility to access affordable childcare services, to benefit from parental leave and other policy measures that enable working to balance with their care    responsibilities.

Women comprise 53 per cent of the Uganda’s labour force and constitute 86.2 per cent of the actors in the formal sector. Thirteen per cent of working women are in formal employment, compared to 27.9 per cent of the working men. The informal sector contributes about 55 per cent of GDP yet it is characterised by low wages, limited job security, long working hours and lack of regulations and social protection.

The quality and benefits for women working in the informal sector need to be enhanced. There is also need to enhance the opportunities for women to benefit from the economy through affirmative action measures such as public procurement of goods and services from women-owned businesses.

Global innovations in ICT and digital technologies, as well as mobility of labour are bringing high rapid changes in the world of work. These offer opportunities for women, especially the young ones. However, women and girls must be well equipped with requisite education, vocational and entrepreneurial skills to take advantage of the emerging opportunities.

Madam Speaker, as highlighted above, it is important that we work towards ensuring decent work and that the labour market offers equal opportunities for women and men. There is also need to ensure that the world of work is better for the women in Uganda. This will, ultimately, yield positive results for Uganda’s economy, social transformation and attain a middle-income status by 2020. It is against this background that the theme for this year’s International Women’s Day was chosen.

Honourable members of Parliament are informed that the venue for the national celebrations is selected on rotational basis among the regions of the country. This year, Dokolo District requested and was granted the opportunity to host the event. The venue for the national celebrations will be taken to Dokolo Technical School in Dokolo Town Council. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has been invited as the chief guest. All local governments and KCCA have been informed and are requested to observe the day, in accordance with the guidelines for the commemoration of the national day.

I, therefore, wish to request all honourable members to mobilise the communities in your districts and constituencies to commemorate the day. I also request you to endeavour to join my ministry, the women of Uganda and Dokolo District Local Government to celebrate the International Women’s Day on 8 March. I thank you, for God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you have been informed that hon. Cecilia Ogwal will host you in Dokolo for the International Women’s Day. Are there any comments?

5.49
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and congratulate all the women for this day.

Madam Speaker, the minister is asking us to organise this day in our constituencies but I wanted to comment that this policy is dwindling. A national day should be organised in such a way that those who cannot manage to go to the main venue are well organised in their localities. In Dokolo, it is those who have the means who will attend; the leaders and yet we are supposed to mobilise all the women at the grassroots. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon the ministry to change the format in which we celebrate this day so that if 8 March is Women’s Day, we have functions across the country at the same time officiated by ministers as guests of honours. When it is done now, again in October they will be calling for Women’s Day in some other districts. This does not come out to educate us very well and it does not come out with the pomp it deserves. It gets isolated and does not achieve a lot of sensitisation. 

I have seen this before. We used to have colourful Independence Day commemorations at the same time in all the districts. If we cannot do that, let us organise activities that run throughout a week like we did for the Parliamentary Week, which was very successful. 

As we talk, you cannot hear anybody talking about Women’s Day. Most of us are hearing it today. Therefore, I request that for purposes of educating our women and promoting this day, let us change the format of celebration and organisation. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe the minister will answer you but you are asking the minister to deploy officials throughout the country to officiate the functions if we are to do it on the same date? However, note that we are the same people who are required to sit in Dokolo. 

5.51
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement that came out a bit earlier so that we have time to digest it before the International Women’s Day.

Madam Speaker, I am worried about the theme of this day, which is, “Empowerment of women in the changing world of work”. Certainly, this is a noble theme and the minister’s statement touches on issues of rights of women and other issues that we should be working on. 

However, it seems to me to be an elitist theme and yet we are going to celebrate it upcountry in the villages. How do you mobilise the local woman and teach her about the changing world of work? What work are we talking about? 

It is not until paragraph 7 that the minister addresses herself to the concerns of the local woman who we represent here. I know we represent all the women of Uganda and their concerns are real; things like equal work and pay, putting conducive facilities in place so that women can play their role in the homes as wives and mothers. However, we have not addressed the concerns of the local woman who is still suffering.

The minister talks of accessing land for credit facilities for example. We are not talking of the local woman being able to access land so that she can carry out production on that piece of land, have equal rights with her husband or be able to produce on this piece of land and be able to sell the produce and get benefits from it.

Therefore, my worry is that it is an elitist theme, which we could have celebrated in Kololo. These are important matters, which we must address ourselves to but carrying them to Dokolo - I am wondering about the relevance. I thank you.

5.54
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the statement. First of all, as women, we are the majority in terms of population but I am more concerned about the facilitation of Women’s Day celebrations.

Yearly, I celebrate mine in Adjumani District on the same date but with a lot of challenges whereby the district fails to adequately facilitate this day. Therefore, can we know from your ministry how you plan for the districts to celebrate this day without funding? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister raised the challenges faced by women. I would like to narrow it down on the rural woman. It is true that the policies are available but you will find that the burden being carried by a rural woman is increasing on a daily basis. Therefore, I pray that the ministry intervenes so that there is adequate sensitisation. It is about change in the mind-set.

There are a lot of issues on domestic violence. If you look at the current law where people are simply arrested, that is not a primary strategy to me. We need to educate our populace because, at times, this is done by their husbands. Therefore, I pray that community services are highly supported so that the mind-set change is worked on.

Lastly, you talked about having fair opportunities for girls and women through skilling. I agree with you. However, honourable minister, there is a high level of school dropouts, especially affecting the girl-child. In turn, the women get affected because it is from childhood that a girl enjoys the opportunity and eventually becomes a woman. What specific strategies does the ministry have to ensure that girl-child dropout rates are reduced? Thank you.

5.57
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I will dwell on the achievements that she has spelt out. She has told us that this day is for us, women and other Ugandans, to commemorate the achievement of the empowerment of women.

This means that we have to bring on board all vulnerable people to benefit from this day. This brings me back to what the previous speaker has said that if this is the case, may we know from you, honourable minister, how much money you have allocated to the districts in celebration of this day?

Secondly, the women Members of Parliament are the stakeholders in the celebration of this day. I would like to inform you, honourable minister, that there is a lot of politics in our districts and some of the chief administrative officers and chairpersons use this day to de-campaign us, women Members of Parliament. May I know from you how you are going to help us, the women Members of Parliament, to make this day memorable as we address the vulnerable people? 

If I am to hold this celebration at the district headquarters, how do I let the other women in other sub-counties, that are far away from the venue, benefit from this day?

5.59
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for her statement. I remember a few years back that we used to have so many activities running before 8th March. One would have the feeling of the women from all over the country.

I remember we used to participate in women shows such as drama; women would go for legal aid and cancer screening in different places. When we go to one centre, everybody is interested and when the President leaves, that is the end of the function. As such, the women do not feel it.

I am also wondering about the theme. How do we monitor it? Last year, we had a theme and it would be good to give Parliament a report on what change has come in the women after that theme. This is so that we keep tracking whether we are moving in the right direction. It should not be simple statements and when it comes to the actualisation of the statement, we do not see the change in the women.

I appreciate that we are talking about women with disability here. However, how much is done for these women with disability? I think there is something that we need to do beyond statements and come here with real concepts that can help us. 

In addition, I do not know how much the ministry is in touch with the different districts. Members have already said this in terms of emphasising the issue of Women’s Day.

I remember when I was growing up in Soroti, we used to be taken for acting and we never knew about a national venue. We used to play at the local level and some of us even got potential at that level as people used to encourage us saying, “You will become a leader, today you acted well.” 

Therefore, I think the ministry has to begin engaging the districts instead of looking at only the national venue. It is cheaper to bring women at the local level than bring them to the national venue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I would like to thank the minister for the statement. This is a very important day for the women and I am surprised that as we present this statement, very few women are in the House.

Secondly, somebody called me today from my district and said, “We have only Shs 1.5 million and they have decided to decentralise this and give every sub-county Shs 100,000.” When you look at the population of women in a sub-country, given Shs 100,000, it does not give us meaning to celebrate in every sub-county.

If I am the woman who is supposed to celebrate this day with my fellow women, how am I going to divide myself? I remember in the Eighth Parliament that we had these issues and the programme would be sent to the districts early enough. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development would send the programme early enough to all the administrators at the district and they would be informed of the activities that should be included in the programme.

Honourable minister, has this statement been sent to the districts so that they are aware that on the Women’s Day, these are the activities that must be included and maybe have you even given them financial support? 

Otherwise, honourable minister, this is a very important day and we need to respect it and include as many activities as possible. I thank you.

6.03
MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have a simple question about how the Government determines some districts to host national functions. I have checked in the records and found that if God created Kyegegwa District - they have never hosted any national function whereas other districts have hosted two or three times. 

Madam Speaker, I wanted to know how the Government determines the choice of the district to host functions. Thank you. 

6.04
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been requested by the Leader of the Opposition to stand in for the shadow minister for this docket. We are grateful that this year, the Women’s Day is going to be celebrated in Dokolo, the home of Mama Cecilia Ogwal. 
	
I want to request my honourable sister to appreciate that when we take these functions to the rural area, we give the rural women the opportunity to be part of these functions. If we consistently hold these functions in Kololo, we make it very difficult for people to travel say from Karamoja, Kabale and Dokolo to come to Kololo. I am informed that the function will be in Dokolo District – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for my sister to intentionally mislead the House that I said that this function should not be held upcountry in Dokolo? I said that this theme, being an elitist theme could easily be dealt with in Kololo because it is meant for the working class. I could even add that it can easily be handled in a boardroom. When you take a function to the rural people, say to Mitooma, it should be relevant to the majority of the people of Mitooma. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to mislead the House that I meant that functions should be held in Kampala rather than upcountry?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think the issue was misunderstood. But what I understand from hon. Kamateeka, if you look at Dokolo, how many workers are there, how many factories are there for them to understand equal pay for equal work? I think that is what the Member was saying – how will the ordinary woman find that relevant to them? I think she is right. In fact, I wanted to ask the minister how we can localise the theme a bit so that it is relevant to the people. This one is okay for bankers, doctors, lawyers, nurses and teachers but they are quite few compared to the majority of the population. You could add something to localise the theme. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been guided and I do not want to pursue that line further. We as the Opposition are worried and concerned about the trend national functions are taking these days. They are organised in such a manner that they are so partisan that women from the Opposition find it very difficult to attend. 

One time, FDC women went for a function during the Women’s Day and they were harassed and some were arrested. We pray that this year, room will be created that every woman who travels to Dokolo, including Betty Nambooze, will find people ready to welcome them and the message coming out will be for all women irrespective of their political affiliation. 

We are also praying as the Opposition that in future we hold evaluation of where we have come from as women and where we want to go. The report should be presented to Parliament so that we are able to assess and audit. What did we achieve last year? What have we achieved this year? And what do we want to achieve next year?

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, we are going into this celebration when the girl-child was told a lie in the President’s manifesto that we shall be able to provide sanitary pads. If you want great women, you must focus on the girl-child today. It is very unfortunate that we as a country, have not realised that.  

It is still our prayer that Government finds money to facilitate the girl-child – (Interruption) 
	
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rarely rise on points of order but I heard my sister hon. Nambooze saying the country was told a lie, captured in the manifesto. As far as I recall, that manifesto is 2016-2021. 

Is it in order for hon. Nambooze to say that a lie was told when actually the manifesto is a five year manifesto and we have just started that period?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, in addition to that, I believe the minister for higher education successfully budgeted for that money here in this House; it is on-going, it is in the budget. It is not a lie; so you are out of order. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I am comforted to learn that this was not a lie. It is still a promise that waits to be fulfilled and it is our prayer that the country finds money to do it for our children. 

It is also sad that we are celebrating the Women’s Day when the figures are still the same; 16 women dying in labour every day or maternal related causes. How we wish that this number would go down – that all stakeholders would put in what they have so that the mothers of this world do not die in labour. 

Finally, the Domestic Relations Bill that has always been coming to this Parliament and then being shelved to wait for another year. Even this year, women are going to celebrate when there is no clear information about the final decision this country is taking about the Domestic Relations Bill. 

We are very grateful that His Excellency the President has accepted to preside over this function. He has become a permanent guest of honour on Women’s Day. We would like to see a day when, Madam Speaker, you preside over because you are our pride as a woman. Maybe, we can invite some women from international organisations. But it is His Excellency, day in day out, year in year out. This Women’s Day is becoming a men’s day; no wonder the Minister for Gender is a woman in a suit. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, let us not just talk about women issues; let us give it to them. When it comes to the issue of women councils - the youth were facilitated to elect their councils in a secret ballot. The people with disabilities were facilitated to elect their councils in a secret ballot. The elderly were also facilitated to elect their councils by secret ballot but for years, the women have not had their elections. 

We would like to request Government that as we go to celebrate the Women’s Day in Dokolo, we want Government to give women some of these answers. Thank you very much.  (Ms Syda Bbumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: She is no longer holding the Floor, hon. Syda.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like her to know that the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development is a woman and she is not in a suit.

6.14
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Minister of Labour, Gender and Social Development. I have every reason to wonder why that ministry still continues to have such a long name after very many years of struggle, fighting and talking to have a specific ministry for women affairs. That is why we talk in French, English and Swahili about the same thing. We have said that there are very many aspects which need to be analysed and dealt with but we can only do that if we have a specific ministry of women affairs. 

Madam Speaker, I will be very grateful if somebody could whisper in the ears of the President that, let Dokolo have a declaration that will lift women and create history because Uganda has produced a unique woman called Mrs Ogwal. (Laughter)  People are proud about that; if the world and Africa are proud about it, why not Dokolo District? 

Secondly, the ministry needs to be serious. Much as we are trying to lobby for them to have better budgets, better organised and more specialised to focus on women issues, every year, we must come up with an audit. The best audit I have ever had of how far we have moved in the last couple of years, Madam Speaker, has been from your office. It is where you analysed where we have come from, when the affirmative action was declared before and after and how far we have moved in terms of how women have spread out in leadership positions; how we have dealt with rural women affairs - I have only been able to find this in your office.

You recall that I had to do some special work and the only place where I could find that information was in the Office of the Speaker of Parliament, not even in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. When I was serious about research work, I physically went to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but I did not find any specialised information that would address the issues I was talking about.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that every year, when they come up with a topic for women to celebrate, we want to celebrate but not to quarrel over the issue of women affairs. Some of you are too young to understand how we fought in the Constituency Assembly to arrive at a consensus. Now that you found already cooked food, prepare it properly and include it in the microwave –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I would like to remind you that despite our request to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, they have failed to produce a country report. They go to the United Nations with civil society to report and we do not know what they report about. Parliament does not know what you report to the United Nations about us.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is what I am talking about. They must come up with an audit report to show how far we have moved and the progress we have made in various aspects. We have asked you to come up with a maternal health audit report but we have not seen it yet you have specialised and skilled employees that are paid taxpayers’ money. What would you like Parliament to do for you? We fund the budget and are still pleading for you to get a better budget position but you cannot give us what we want. That is my concern. Tell us how far you have gone.

However, I have listened to the minister and read the document and I have the ability to understand. (Interjections) Allow me to first complete my statement; I am not in a good mood –(Laughter). Madam Speaker, it is good that we have made some gains. However, how are you telling us that we have made some gains? What are we celebrating? The theme is “Empowerment in the Changing World of Work.” I am not complaining about the theme because we the people of Dokolo want to be challenged. The best training that we have had for women in business among other things has been done in Dokolo by Enterprise Uganda.

We had the Equity Investment Market recently, training the people of Dokolo. It is successful. Therefore, I am not scared about you imagining that we cannot grow because we would like to be challenged. We have women who are educated and have got jobs. Therefore, if you can tell them about what they should do and empower them, I will be proud that women will engage themselves and get involved in self-employment and be able to look after themselves.

When you come to Dokolo, please, tell us how far we have moved as far as employment of women is concerned, using the women empowerment entrepreneurship. There have been many funds coming up in different names. The first lot, what did you do with it? How much have you achieved? How much have you given to the people of Dokolo. How many people have benefited from this project? Some of this money is supposed to go for women and bureaucrats. They tell us that we do not know how to fill the form and when you ask them for help, they also take 10 per cent.

When you go to another person to seek for help - when you are supposed to get Shs23 million, you end up getting Shs 15 million and that is a fact. You must tell us how a rural woman can benefit from this money directly, without having to go through some agencies who take a portion of her money.

It is also important as women, to address the issue of chain-link mechanism. We the leaders who have arrived at the national leadership platform, how much are we doing to pull the rural women? Some of us who are in NGOs, how have we helped the rural women? What are we the educated women doing to help these women? This is also another thing that we must come out with as a national strategy, not just Dokolo. When you visit us, we shall tell you how we have done it in our rudimental way.

Madam Speaker, this is how we can address the issue concerning gender in a broader perspective. 

Otherwise, I am very grateful to the ministry and Government that the venue this time will be in Dokolo District. Many of you who do not know Dokolo, this is one of the new rural districts but it is the fastest growing district in the country. That is why it has been rated - it is not my words but the words of those who do statistics. We have been told from the health perspective that Dokolo is far ahead in terms of fighting Hepatitis B prevalence. So, it is not a joke but a serious district and we are working very hard. Hon. Baryomunsi knows that we are on top of many things. 

When it comes to leadership, we are very serious. We are the ones who have adopted the Government of national unity. We do not only have Movement in the executive position but we also have the opposition. We have been able to show that regardless of political parties, we can deliver quality leadership. Therefore, when you come to Dokolo, do not only focus on the Women’s Day celebration. Focus on our management, how we collaborate with each other and how people from diverse political views can work together. Thereafter, you will learn it and see it in practise in Dokolo. Please, do not forget to eat our food. I will make sure that we prepare.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, we have a lot of work. Hon. Twinamasiko, you have two minutes. 

6.28
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement and I thank the Government of Uganda for working hard towards emancipating our women in this country. 

This national Women’s Day celebration in our country needs some deepening, widening and strengthening, if possible, because it is not being felt nationally. 

I was working with Uganda Broadcasting Cooperation (UBC), the national broadcaster and we had always covered this day live on TV and radio. The celebrations usually begin with some assignments, a few speeches, the guest of honour’s speech and the day ends. There is really nothing much that can help our rural women to transform. I was, therefore, imploring the minister that they should try to revise how we celebrate this day to benefit our rural women. 

These days, some women in our country are becoming violent. So, if there is a way of reaching out to them and really sensitise them -

THE SPEAKER: Does that require Women’s Day? Have you finished? Let us get information from Kazo County. 

MR BAFAKI: Madam Speaker, there is a serious situation. When you move country wide, there are few people producing food, and yet we have very many consumers. The women are the only ones producing food. 

I would wish for the ministry to look at the theme in terms of the food insecurity crisis that we are facing now because some political pronouncements have compelled men go to trading centres and every man that gets Shs 10,000 starts up a shop. Women are left to look after cows, children, dig, put food at the table and they cannot produce enough food for the family to eat and probably, have some to conserve for even more two months. 

This is a very serious situation. So, the ministry must address this. Otherwise, our women are going to turn into donkeys. They have to look after goats, fetch water and firewood as well as cook food. It is terrible and alarming. 
 
THE SPEAKER: You have really smuggled your point. Let us hear from the General. Hon. Twinamasiko, your two minutes are over because you gave part of your time to the honourable member.

6.28
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I just came up to make a comment on one statement and also seeking clarification from the statement made by my sister across, hon. Nambooze. She said that women are fed up of the guest of honour, in the person of the President. (Interjections) You did. 

Is that a representative view of women in Opposition or all women? That is something I want to understand because I need to know how to report this type of statement? I am here and it is being talked about. So, I must comment on it. 

Therefore, before we adjourn, I want her to clarify it to me because I was thinking that this is representative of a feeling of women in the Opposition, which is okay because they are entitled to get fed up with anybody.

However, if it is necessary, then you can say that this time you do not want the President to come to Dokolo and then, ask him to send somebody of your choice. You can also ask the ministry to send somebody of your choice because you are fed up with the President. 

Madam Speaker, I need some clarification from her so that I can report properly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The General is required to report to the Cabinet, so can you give him clarification on who is tired and who is not? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the Hansard can bail me out on this. I started by saying that we are very grateful that H.E the President has accepted to officiate at this function. However, as a way of advice, I said that in future, we should consider inviting other people, even international figures, so that we can benefit from their presence.

We always have our President every other day on various functions. So, I do not think it would be bad, for example, one day, if we would consider sending Gen. Ali as our guest of honour or Mama Janet.

Madam Speaker, I did say that even you; there are very many girls down there in the villages, who would like to see the first woman Speaker of this country. The President can even choose to say, “Nambooze go and preside over that function on my behalf.” I would be very grateful and I would take it on with a lot of vigour. (Laughter)

We are not fed up. We love our President but when it comes to functions, various people can be resourceful in various ways. We have heard from the President a number of times and it would be nice to hear from other people. This year, he can even choose to send Dr Col Kiiza Besigye so that women can also benefit from hearing from the Leader of the Opposition.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Amoru. He will speak for two minutes. Minister, do you have anything to say?

6.32
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to start by thanking the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in general and Government for picking on Dokolo to host this year’s International Women’s Day celebrations.

This day is not meant to be celebrated with particular exclusion of men. I think for it to have full meaning, our men should very much associate with this day and with the women. That would make the day enjoyable and warmer for everybody.

Madam Speaker, the challenge that I had wanted to raise is that I think the idea behind taking celebrations to different districts is to try to focus and tailor the event to reflect the realities, the struggle, the achievements of women in that particular district, and probably that is shared at the national and international level.

This will definitely not be achieved if we only have the climax of that one day. That is why a build-up of activities that would attract experts on women empowerment, that would have training and would be field-visits to identify and probably even have women that will showcase what they are doing, that would make them productive and would bring them into the money economy. That is what we would be celebrating that day; seeing how they must be empowered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you use two minutes to respond? You could also send us written answers about the issues we have raised.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, the same was adopted from the international theme. We will definitely localise it to suit the occasion but also the population – and that is one of the ways through which we will be able to sensitise the public about the changing world of work.

We know for sure that we have 78 per cent of the total population under the age of 35 years and, therefore, many are placed in the rural areas. How will they know until we go there? Being in Dokolo was the most prime area. However, also regionalising – I think it was the principle that we take these national celebrations in different regions for purposes of the countryside getting the feel of the reason we celebrate such national occasions.

In Nakasongola, we had the Women’s Day celebrations in 2012, in Nebbi 2013, Kumi in 2014, Kabale in 2015, Kololo in 2016 and this is because it is a neutral area. At that time, we had elections and now we are going to celebrate in Dokolo. The Members of Parliament should also be aware that we do write to the ministry when we are ready to host. If it falls in your region, then it would be good to go and celebrate there. Dokolo expressed preparedness and got the opportunity. 

The President is the fountain of honour and we know his contribution towards women emancipation and, therefore, inviting him was not a mistake. 

On auditing, I made a brief statement here on the Floor of Parliament that on the Woman’s Day celebrations, we shall give a detailed report on how far we have gone in emancipation and of course, I know the contribution of women in monetary quantification and those that have challenges, we need to raise them up. People should get to know that these contributions are known.

Women are becoming violent - I really do not know that. We need to establish the figures, if you have them, kindly let us know but we need to know that all people are capable of becoming violent if they are offended. We do not have figures that qualify women to be more violent than men. 

On funding, I am sure that honourable members are aware that the national celebrations will be facilitated with the national budget, provided for by the ministry. However, the districts also receive their funding and they should appropriate budget for such functions, Women’s Day celebrations inclusive.

I think many of the concerns shall be shared there when you join us because they constitute the detailed report of what we have. However, everybody is invited and at least we have confirmation from the Chairperson of the Uganda People’s Congress party, hon. Akena. We have also invited all the other Opposition parties and the NRM, of course.

We are also aware that hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s political affiliation is clearly known to us. So, the hosting of the occasion is not selected on partisan agenda. 

I think these were some of the few issues I can share with you now but we have a one-week activism event, which has started today. You must have seen, for those who are on Whatsapp, that forces were taking the lead in marching and sensitising the public on how they are going to address gender-based violence. This has been one of the bottlenecks on women’s emancipation. 
I thank you for the contributions and I have taken note of some of the issues that were raised, that would not have ready answers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much minister and honourable members. I had wanted us to go on with the work but I have remembered that our colleague’s husband is to be buried tomorrow and there are Members who would like to leave this evening. However, I would like to just let you know what I am planning for tomorrow.

We are going to have two sets of activities: From 10.00a.m. to 12.00 p.m., we shall have the body for the late Maumbe Mukhwana here. We shall sit at 12.00p.m. and finish at 1.45p.m. so that they can leave and we continue with our work. I was worried about tomorrow but if we can do both – we deal with him in the morning and then, from 2.30p.m., we have our normal sitting so that we do the work which is on the Order Paper. Is that okay?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: The other thing honourable members, there is a World Wildlife Day on Friday; there are going to be activities at the Uganda Museum. You are invited by the ministry and Ms Tourism Uganda. If you have time, go and support the World Wildlife Day.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Members who have the intention to go for burial tomorrow that one bus has already left this afternoon. The next one is leaving at 4.30a.m. for those of you who still want to go. We will go with you at 4.30. Members, you need to keep time because Lamwo is very far.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we scheduled some business for the morning. Is it advisable, therefore, to call off those meetings or we can proceed? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you can continue with your work. We can have a few Members in the tribute. We cannot all be in here; we need to do some work for the country as well. Do your work; it is all for the country.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 12.00 p.m. for the tribute and then, we shall have the other ordinary sitting at 2.30p.m. Thank you very much. Please, be around at 10.30a.m. to receive the body.

(House rose at 6.42p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 March 2017 at 12.00 p.m.) 



