
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Wednesday, 27 March 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Reverends and their wives from Rutooma Archdeaconry in Kashari County South, Mbarara District. They are represented by hon. Nathan Twesigye Itungo and hon. Rosette Christine Kajungu Mutambi. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

Honourable members, I received a letter from the honourable member for Bulamogi County in relation to item 18, on the Order Paper. You remember, there was committee that was set up to go to Japan and Dubai on vehicle pre-export inspection. Our rules require that a delegation of this Parliament that goes out must file a report to be brought to the attention of Parliament. However, that delegation has not yet filed the report and yet, we have a report from the committee under item 18. Therefore, I am going to stay this matter and ask them to reconcile their positions before they come to the House. Item 18 is hereby stayed until there is harmonisation of this situation to avoid having reports being presented by people who did not go there.

Honourable members, that is my advice on how we shall proceed with this matter. Thank you. There were some Members with issues to raise and I will start with the Member for Bulamogi County.

2.07
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to beg your indulgence, considering that the matter I am going to raise will need the Executive’s urgent attention. We seemingly do not have a well constituted Executive. Nevertheless, if you so decide, Mr Speaker, I will proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The discretion is entirely on you not me. If you think you can raise it now, I have already given you the opportunity but if you want to defer it, it is up to you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I may not have another opportunity and so, I would like to request that once the Prime Minister is in the House, he should be briefed about this matter such that we can have action taken.

The issue I would like to raise pertains to a situation that happened in Bulamogi a few days back, when we had a very serious storm caused by heavy rains. The storm was so heavy that it swept across villages in the sub counties of Gadumire and Kisinda, ravaging a number of households.

About 51 households were put down and these people have no shelter. These families have children and other members of the family. I believe it would be important for the Government to support these families especially, in terms of the reconstruction of shelter.

Mr Speaker, I pray that Government takes action in order to save these people who have no shelter yet, we are already in a rain season.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the assessment been submitted to the agencies responsible? If they have been submitted, then –

2.10
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, the procedure is that whenever there is a natural calamity like heavy rains, the onus is on the district to immediately investigate, quantify the quantum of the damages that has been done and send it immediately to the Office of the Prime Minister for assistance. I will check with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to see if that information has already reached there so that action can be taken. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.12
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU KAMUGISHA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Kagamba Secondary School in Kajara County, Ntungamo District, whose roof was taken away by a storm on Monday. Three classrooms do not have a roof.

While the rainy season has started in western Uganda, the students in that school, the administrators and the parents are finding it difficult – the school serves Kagarama Town Council and Ihunga Sub County for both O and A level.

My prayer is that the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Ministry of Education and Sports should avail us with a solution in the shortest time possible. Otherwise, as we have heard, whenever requests go to the Prime Minister’s Office, they delay a lot. Thank you, Mr   Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the first call is to have this report from the respective District Disaster Management Committees because it is the strength upon which we can move other agencies to take action. Nevertheless, there is the Ministry of Education and Sports here and someone can speak for the Office of the Prime Minister. 

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of the matter and we are going to investigate and something will be done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The investigation is already done because you have the information. Member for Gomba East is not here. Can we have Member for Kasilo?

2.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope hon. Bahati is ready with the response on the matter we raised yesterday about his commitment to the mobile money issues.

The matter I am rising concerns our colleague – we have not heard any statement yet this is something that affects all of us. We need a statement about what happened to hon. Nantaba. 

We have heard contradictions in the news about hon. Nantaba. Can the Ministry of Internal Affairs tell us what happened? Otherwise, we are all scared because if we are always trailed like that all the time - So, Government needs to inform this Parliament and the country on what is happening and whether we are safe or not. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the matter of the Nyero Rocks?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second issue is that the people in Ngora District are living in fear. You must have seen and heard on NTV and NBS news that there are some tremors being heard inside that rock. The people are scared; some people are taking off from the neighbourhood. We do not know whether there is going to be a volcanic eruption.

Can the Government explain to the people what is happening? We have a Geological Department in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and at Makerere University, Faculty of Engineering. They should be able to tell us what is happening because we are living in fear and if there is an eruption, many people will be affected; even the people of Serere and Mbale.

Therefore, can the Government come up with a statement or tell the country what is happening? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byabagambi?

2.15
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (MR John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I will pass this information to the Rt Hon Prime Minister for further transfer to the necessary ministers to take action. [MS ANYWAR: “Clarification”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking clarification? I wonder what you seek clarification on when information is going to be sent to the Prime Minister. (Laughter) Do you want to find out which Prime Minister it is?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That issue is not a simple one because, the lives of the people around the rock are at stake. I watched the information being relayed on the television and even saw young children putting their heads on the rock to listen to whether there is some noise under the rock.

I got the appeal from the leaders for immediate intervention and that is what I am trying to relay. They were asking for the intervention of the Police - to come and cordon off the place because it has become a risky tourist destination. So, I would like to find out from Government – other factors remaining constant – whether we have secured the place from becoming a risky tourist destination. 

People were on top of it, including the journalist who was interviewing them. He said it was a golden opportunity for him to also go and see because it will never happen again in his life-time. However, supposing it erupted while people were making fun of it? Have we secured the site?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, every Thursday at nine o’clock, we have a Top Management Meeting, chaired by the Rt Hon Prime Minister and specifically to address such issues. It is my prayer to God that nothing happens before tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. so that we can discuss this matter and the necessary department takes action.

2.18
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning the Student Loan Scheme for university education. My understanding of the scheme is that it was expected to help the needy students to access university education. I understand that it was also supposed to be regionally balanced so that regions that are disadvantaged can also benefit from the scheme.

However, what is happening now, from the information I have, is contrary to what was originally planned. First, the students that are accessing this money actually come from the big schools around Kampala; they go back to their villages and access the funding. At the same time, the upcountry schools cannot produce the same students that will compete with these ones because of the high points needed for the scheme on the science subjects. Most of the upcountry schools do not have enough to cater for the labs and are, therefore, disadvantaged. Even the students that have benefitted cannot pay back and it is a bit tricky because they have no jobs. They get out of university and fail to get jobs and therefore, they cannot pay back. The information we have is that out of over 2000 that have already benefitted from the scheme, only two students are paying. 

Now, it becomes very tricky that some students, instead of paying back, now travel abroad for greener pastures and the scheme is automatically rendered useless. I would like to have the Minister of Education and Sports explain further whether the scheme is achieving its objectives for which it was set up to do or we review and find a lasting solution to the problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION)(Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can stand here and confidently say that the scheme is doing very well. We are achieving the objectives. This scheme is meant to assist our students who are financially handicapped; those who have financial problems and cannot afford to pay for tertiary education to access loans.

I do not know whether these financial difficulties are regionally balanced, as my colleague was saying but what is true and very clear is all Ugandans who have financial difficulties are able to apply and benefit from this scheme. Because the resources we have are not enough to cater for everybody, we started with those who have been admitted for science-related programmes, where we are sure that they can easily get into employment.

I would like to tell you, Mr Speaker, that the first group to benefit from this scheme has come out and we have given them a grace period of one year to organise themselves. Almost 90 per cent of these are in employment and they have notified the Board that they are in employment and ready to pay. There is even one girl who, immediately after graduation, decided to pay back all the money.

Mr Speaker, the only problem we have is that the demand for the loan facilities is extremely high, compared to the amount of money the Board has. Secondly, about the requirements, for you to access the loan, you must have passed. Then, you must have been admitted to a chartered university. I know, of course, passing depends on quite a number of factors, which I will not take you through. However, it is not true that those who have benefitted are from only the big schools.

If you allow me, I will even give you the list of the beneficiaries in future. They are from all over the country.
I beg to submit.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the information the minister is giving is very useful. Can the minister give us a formal statement so that we can follow him and understand what has been done and achieved? That way, the Member who asked the question would benefit a lot from the information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was actually hoping that the minister, after answering this question, would volunteer to say, “I am going to come back and brief Parliament on the issue.” Were you going to do that, honourable minister?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That, actually, was going to be my concluding remark. (Laughter) If Parliament allows, I would like to come back here and give you details of how we are performing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Gomba East County -

2.24
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Some time back, when hon. Simeo Nsubuga raised an issue on land evictions, I pointed out that this issue was very tricky and if not attended to, it would turn into a time bomb. Only yesterday, people evicting kibanja holders were attacked and four of the bouncers, the so-called kanyamas, were killed using machetes.

I am getting more information that the landlord is also trying to mobilise another group to go and attack the kibanja holders. Therefore, if something urgent is not done, I am sure this may turn into a civil war because it is happening everywhere. 

Mr Speaker, I have three prayers to make. The first one is that as a matter of urgency, all land evictions should be halted by this Parliament. Secondly, a special tribunal be set up to examine each and every case of land evictions because what is happening is that most of these cases are coming from forged land titles by people who collude with people from the land office. They come out with titles and go down to the villages and start surveying the land. They then sell it off immediately. That shows that they are not the rightful owners of that land.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal that the Minister of Internal Affairs sets up a special force to go and protect my people. Otherwise, if that is not done, we shall see more deaths in my area. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today, you have come in the mood of creating committees and tribunals only. We have the Bamugemereire Commission, which could be handling it in the interim. Some of those issues should immediately be forwarded to them even if other tribunals are going to be created ahead of time. I am just saying in the meantime, the eviction issues can go to the tribunal because there is a tribunal already existing. 

For the rest of the things, Government – Is there anyone from Government to respond on this issue?

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to immediately attend to this issue and inform the Member –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I am utterly sorry that I have to intervene at this time. The information I would like to give the House is that I have also had similar cases. For instance, church land was acquired in 1956. Somebody got a land title and recently, he wanted to evict the church that had acquired the land in 1956. People rose up with all sorts of weapons and they wanted to kill each other.

When we went to the Bamugemereire Commission, Mr Speaker, we realised they do not have time. I know one of the members of the commission who was a Member of Parliament; he called me aside and said, “Hon. Byarugaba, even if we wanted to intervene, we do not have money enough to sort out most of these problems.” 

So, the information I would like to give the minister is that whereas we are referring most of these cases to the Bamugemereire Land Commission, they are not well facilitated. That is why they are almost doing everything within the Kampala office and rarely going to the field. That is the information, Mr Speaker.  

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, it is true that the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters needs extra resources. Actually, we will be laying, in a few minutes from now, a supplementary budget Schedule No. 2, which is giving them an extra Shs 3 billion so that they can continue doing the good work they are doing. We will wait for the report.

Now, on the issue of other –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. We had a report that we have spent nearly Shs 20 billion on this commission whose tenure has been extended for countless times. An impression has been created that the commission is now a legal outfit that can resolve land-related disputes. So, I seek clarification from, first of all, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us how much money he has given to the commission, which he now says is not enough. How much money does he think is enough? Secondly, I need the minister to clarify whether he thinks this commission must now be a permanent feature of this Government.

You remember the President went with that commission to Lusanja. Instead of going with police, he went with the commission and said, “You resolve this matter”. I need clarification on whether this commission has taken over issues to do with land-related conflict resolution such that Parliament should appropriate more money for it. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the commission of inquiry has been given over Shs 10 billion and we are adding them another Shs 3 billion. According to Justice Bamugemereire’s statement that she made yesterday, so far, they have saved up to Shs 1 trillion out of dubious land cases, which they have stopped. So, I would like to beg that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development comes here and solve issues –(Interruption)

MR SSEMULI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, the Land Act, 1998, provides for the establishment of land tribunals. Land disputes are almost in every district and I am happy that the minister is talking about increasing funding for the commission chaired by Justice Bamugemereire. The clarification I am seeking, therefore, is why the Government cannot operationalise the land tribunals.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we will ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come and answer those two issues; the first one from the Member of Parliament for Gomba County East and the second one from hon. Ssemuli. However, I just would like to say that the commission of inquiry by Justice Bamugemereire is doing a good job and it should be supported to solve these matters.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A very important issue has been raised concerning one of our colleagues, the honourable minister, hon. Nantaba. However, we have not heard any response from the front bench and yet. This is a very important issue, which touches our lives. As a woman, I am scared because such a thing has ever happened in the past. I would like to request that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and explains to us the contradictions we are hearing. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before you even go to the contradictions, once a matter affects a Member of this House and has gone public, that Member owes it to the House to come and explain.

The first call is on the affected person to come and give a personal statement because she is a Member of Parliament; to explain to us what it is then the other things can follow.

2.34
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, the problem also is that you have citizens who are crying and grieving as a result of this incident. Whereas you have guided that the minister may personally come to explain, Government ought to explain to citizens because if you read the stories in the papers, they are very stressful; how families are mourning with no explanation from Government.

Therefore, in addition to the minister explaining herself as a Member of this Parliament, this Government ought to explain to the public because we are concerned with the safety of ourselves and our colleagues but also public safety.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is true.

2.35
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, I will inform the Prime Minister who will in turn inform the Minister of Internal Affairs to come here and explain. Hon. Ssemujju is right. There are some investigations going on by police, which we read about in the newspapers and I think the Government will come and explain to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we now go to the Order Paper?

MR MUYANJA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I was on this Floor in the month of January when I brought a matter concerning two of my villages where all the crops were slashed down. I was promised by the Government Chief Whip, who was here on behalf of the Prime Minister, that they are going to come and take action. 

As I speak, someone claiming to be the landlord of the so-called forest came disguising that he is going to plant trees. When you look at the footage, two more villages of Terere and Butere have had all their plants and gardens cut down.

When we raise matters of national concern and they promise us that they are going to be worked upon, nothing takes place. We are promised on the Floor that action is going to be taken and what was a matter of national concern becomes a routine programme. Therefore, how are we going to be assisted?

Mr Speaker, there is another issue. The Prime Minister stood on the Floor and confirmed that opening of boundaries is going take place. At the moment, people near forests who own land, which is not under National Forest Authority, are being chased away, their houses demolished and they do not have any explanation. 

I beg that you order for matters of national concern to be handled not beyond a week so that our people can know why we stand on the Floor to raise issues of national concern. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Rule 46 is clear. Rule 46 creates an exception to the normal procedure of Parliament where everything must be handled with prior notice. Rule 46 creates this situation where the matter is so urgent that no notice can be made so that you come to the Speaker and say, “this matter is urgent, I cannot wait” and you raise it. That means that the response must also follow suit.

Therefore, there is no point of saying after a week because it is urgent and you cannot give a week. Once urgent matters have been cleared and understood to be urgent, they must be dealt with urgently. (Applause) We cannot give a week; it should be immediate. For example, there may be a disease outbreak. How can you say it should be responded to in one week if there is a disease outbreak? If a bridge has collapsed or people have been displaced for some reason like land or mudslides, how do you wait for a week?

That is why the rules made this exception. Some matters are so urgent that they cannot wait for even a statement for another day because a statement is not what is required; action is what is being called for. 

Therefore, can we respond to these issues please, honourable ministers? When they come up, we should deal with them like that. This one was raised last week and it is still being raised while things are escalating and we are still going business as usual. This should be business unusual so that you deal with matters urgently. Thank you.

MS ATYANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me way. I rise on a matter of procedure. On 20 December 2018, I presented a matter of national importance concerning the land grabbing that occurred in Moroto district where Moroto district local Government forcefully evicted 180 families saying that Government needed land for a cement factory.

These community members were forced to sign agreements they did not understand while using the police. They were intimidated, sprayed tear gas, beaten and arrested. They were forced to take a fee of Shs 1 million as compensation.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the land price in Moroto District, it is an average of Shs 10.5 million. When you give these people Shs 1 million, they will not be able to get that amount of land. Although the intention of the land -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Raise the procedural matter.

MS ATYANG: Mr Speaker, from the time I raised this matter, the Speaker followed it up and wrote a letter to the Prime Minister who also forwarded it to the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs. However, three months down the road, I have not got any response and yet, these people have lost their farming land, which is the source of their livelihood.

They are now left desperate without land. Apparently, it is now time for cultivation but they have no land to cultivate. Therefore, are we proceeding well if the ministers are not able to respond to such urgent issues? Thank you.

2.40
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, it is true that this matter was raised here and it is true that the Prime Minister forwarded this matter to me. It is true that the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, together with some officials from the Office of the Prime Minister visited Karamoja to find out the truth. I am going to say the truth, nothing but the truth.

During Idi Amin’s time, the Government then wanted to try cotton in Karamoja and they acquired land near Moroto town, which is a municipality now. Of course, cotton could not grow in Karamoja but they tried to grow cotton.

Unfortunately, that land remained vacant and by 1995, when the new Constitution was made, this land fell under the District Land Board, as public land. 

Recently, the district council applied for this land. The land was allocated to them and the council acquired the land title. A copy of that title is contained in this authority document, which I will lay on the Table. I meant to say that the copy of the land is among the Moroto District Local Government authority documents for the Cement and Marble factory, 2019.

In their wisdom, the district, together with Uganda Development Corporation and a company called Savannah Mining Ltd. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the request from the Speaker then was that you make a formal response to this issue. The Member is entitled to a written copy that they can read and understand. Is it possible to bring it tomorrow?

MR BYABAGAMBI: I will bring it tomorrow with a formal statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do, so that the Member can ask questions about it. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO INTRODUCE TO PARLIAMENT A LAW REGULATING MOBILE MONEY TRANSACTIONS

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is a short statement. I was to crosscheck when we are bringing the law to the House. Cabinet has passed the principles of the National Payment Bill. The Bill is being drafted by the First Parliamentary Counsel. We hope that by the end of April, we should bring this Bill to the House. I would like to apologise that we did not keep the commitment of one month. It was because of these legal issues and processes.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. On 03 October 2018, when you were in the Chair, this matter was raised. The minister had promised to bring a report on the 5th but he did not.

On 23 October 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, wrote to the Speaker and this letter was copied to you. I am rising on a point of order because it is a contradiction from what the minister is saying here. 

Allow me to read only three paragraphs from the letter. It is addressed to the Mr Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda and titled, “Absence of Legal and Regulatory Framework for Mobile Money.” It reads thus: “I refer to 04 October 2018, a letter from the Clerk to Parliament, also copied to you, on the above issue that was raised by hon. Elijah Okupa, the MP for Kasilo County, during the Parliamentary sitting of 03 October 2018. This ministry has finalised consultations on the National Payment System Bill, which aims at addressing the gaps with respect to the legal basis for regulating payment systems including mobile money and the issuance of electronic money. 

Following the consultative workshop held on 01 October 2018, this ministry addressed all issues raised on the Bill by First Parliamentary Council. To that end, the 1st Parliamentary Council has indicated that the Bill will be ready for consideration by the end of October 2018.

The purpose of this letter is to update you as above and also reiterate my undertaking to submit the National Payment Systems Bill to Parliament as soon as possible, most likely by the second week of November 2018. Signed by the Matia Kasaija, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.” It is copied to the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all ministers of state, the Solicitor General, the Permanent Secretary, the Clerk to Parliament and I.

Mr Speaker, the minister is telling us that the Bill is with the First Parliamentary Counsel. Is the minister in order not to tell us the truth? Is he in order? The first thing I expected from the minister was to apologise to this House and to you, the Speaker, whom he gave the guarantee that the Bill would be ready on the 6th.  This is March, the First Parliamentary Counsel told us October and now, he is telling us April. We are in the Budget process. Is the minister in order not to tell us the truth about where the Bill is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure whether I can deal with the truth or lack of it on this matter but I think the minister was aware that there was a problem and that is why he apologised for the delay.

Honourable members, drafting legislation, especially in a new area, which has not been regulated before, can be challenging. I would not judge too harshly if it has stayed longer than expected with the First Parliamentary Counsel because it is a new area that requires new thinking. The framework for regulation has to be properly understood and then brought.

That is, however, not to say that the delay should take this long. Anyhow, the undertaking is that the principles have been passed by Cabinet and the drafting is ongoing. Their undertaking now is that by the end of April, this Bill will be here. Let us live with that until the end of April, then we can show up and see if this time, the minister will justifiably be called other names. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling on that subject matter. I had indicated before that I was to move the same Bill with your guidance. However, when I talked to the minister – we have a draft Bill. I seek your indulgence in the matter that if by that time the Government has not introduced that Bill, then I would put Parliament on notice that I would introduce the Bill that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If 2nd May 2019 happens to be on a Parliamentary day, please, prepare that motion. Be on standby so that if the minister does not show up with the Bill, you can make your motion for moving a Private Member’s Bill. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SECURITY THREATS AND INTIMIDATION OF TENANTS OF QUALICEL AND NABUKEERA ARCADES BY UNKNOWN ARMED PERSONS

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, the issues surrounding Qualicel and Nabukeera arcades are very unfortunate and regrettable because they are jeopardising business in the city. However, what I know is that Uganda Police Force has deployed there full time. Unfortunately, the ministers of Internal Affairs - both the senior minister and the minister of state - are unable to be in the House today. The minister of state is out of the country and the senior minister is indisposed. I undertake to inform them as soon as one is back in the country and the other is able to work such that they come to this House and give a detailed statement. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the one on the arcades; does it have to wait for a statement? Have you instructed the necessary departments to deal with these issues while we wait to be briefed as Parliament? Are the people safe now?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I mentioned there is deployment by the Uganda Police Force, which is full time, to ensure the security of the people and their property and to avoid clashes.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I appreciate the laboured response by the Minister of State for Kampala Capital City, the issue before us was a matter of security. I know she was trying to talk about the police that patrol the city full time. However, the direct deployment of the Uganda Police Force, if it is on instruction, would involve the withdrawal of the private security on either side which are conflicting. 

In fact, based on facts, it is not true that the police are deployed on the premises. They have deployed along the roads as their usual patrols are conducted. Therefore, I would implore the minister that if they want to take it up as a matter and resolve it in conjunction with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we have no objection. 

What we want is full deployment of the police on these three buildings to stop the machete-wielding gangs that are there. Others have knives and others have been threatening people; the traders were here. We are not talking about these usual patrols that move on the streets every now and then. Those patrols are for the good of everyone but we are talking about the premises that are occupied by more than 1,000 traders. 

If you take it as a matter of security – you are the one who authorises people to conduct business in the city, so we cannot object if you do it hand-in-hand with the Minister of Internal Affairs. That notwithstanding, we still demand that the Minister of Internal Affairs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, summarise and let us deal with it. When you take it very far, we lose it. The issue is that there should be specific deployments on these premises where the traders have complained that they are being harassed by people who are carrying weapons.

MR NSEREKO: Private security should also be withdrawn because both sides are deploying private security, which is creating disorder. There are two groups issuing demands –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already stated that, honourable.

MR NSEREKO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to repeat that the police have deployed but I will contact my colleague from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we improve on that deployment because our interest is in the security of the people and their property. I would also like to thank the honourable colleague for the additional information he has given us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will need confirmation tomorrow that this has been done so that we are okay. We do not want citizens to feel uncomfortable in their own territory.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS UNDER RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

(I) MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development -

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. First of all, the Government side is supposed to be led by the Leader of Government Business in this House or his deputy. However, it appears that today, each minister can volunteer in that position. We started with the minister in charge of Karamoja volunteering to be a courier – that for all the matters being raised here, he would be the one to take them to the Prime Minister. The minister in charge of Kampala –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Ssemujju is my friend and I did not want to interrupt him but I was forced when he insinuated that I volunteered to take the messages to the Prime Minister. In reality, I did not volunteer. I am under the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). When the Prime Minister is not here, there is a Minister for General Duties. When the Minister for General Duties is not there, I am next in seniority. (Laughter)

Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that I cannot fit in the shoes of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister as somebody who falls under the OPM and take the message to the Top Management Meeting, where I sit and it is deliberated on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What the honourable member was saying was that if you were truly fitting in the shoes of the Prime Minster, you would have just answered the question directly. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling. I did not dispute that the honourable is responsible for carrying the message. The procedural point I am raising is that another matter for Government to answer is on the Order Paper. They did not even have the courtesy to inform the Office of the Speaker that “the following ministers are not available”. Now, he is not the one carrying the message to the Prime Minister but another, who is a minister of state in another ministry. 

There are several issues that this Parliament will be dealing with today. It appears the Government side is not being led. We do not know who, for example, is now the Acting Leader of Government Business or the deputy – the one who would be able to answer and not just act as an office messenger – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have the Order Paper and we have very important issues to debate. I know that hon. Ssemujju is using it as a tactic to derail the House by raising the obvious issues. Government is in this House. I am here as acting Government Chief Whip –(Applause)- and I am responding to issues decisively. Is he in order to create an impression that Government is not in the House and we are just gambling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the acting Government Chief Whip lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Energy and Mineral development? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is coming before we finish the sitting. The same applies to the Ministry of Works and Transport and the rest of the issues on the Order Paper are on course and will be handled appropriately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is what hon. Ssemujju was talking about. Have you finished?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, that is the point I wanted to raise. If you look at the budget of this House, on a daily basis, taxpayers pay more than Shs 1 billion for Parliament to transact business. We cannot continue in this casual manner – that you volunteer and then cause some laughter and then you sit down. People are spending money to keep this Parliament here to do business on their behalf. Therefore, if Government is unwilling, they should request the Office of the Speaker to adjourn Parliament and maybe send it on recess. 

The ministers are not here to respond to matters that are being raised. The ministers who are volunteering are just acting as office messengers. That is the procedural issue I wanted to raise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we dealt with it along the way. 

(II) MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR VOTE 122 – KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority for Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee to handle. Petroleum Fund – Semi Annual Report on inflows, outflows and assets of the Fund for the Period ended 31st December 2019

I think the minister can consequentially lay on the Table all those documents since they are all his documents.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the Petroleum Fund – Semi-annual report on inflows, outflows and assets of the Fund for the period ended 31st December 2018

I also beg to lay at the Table an addendum to Supplementary Schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2018/2019 and Addendum No. 2 to Supplementary Schedule 2, for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture those three documents. The first will be referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the next two are referred to the Committee on Budget to handle expeditiously. 

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was moved yesterday; the committee reported and a minority report was also presented. There will be general debate on this matter before we go to Committee Stage based on the motion and the report. 

The motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. If there are no debates, I will put the question.

3.07
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the onset, I must state that I support the position of the minority report and I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that in passing a supplementary budget, there are tests that must be passed. 

The first test is that it must be unforeseeable; that it was not in the knowledge of the Government or the entity that such expenditure would occur. The second test is that it is unavoidable. In the circumstances, it is clear that Government was aware that these expenditures would come at some point because they signed the agreement, made the orders, which have been pointed out but were made in bad faith.

Although it appears that the request passes the test for the unavoidability because it is urgent, I think the House needs to take serious note that there seems to be a conspiracy all through in this process of reviving the Uganda National Airlines.

Thirdly, I have calculated and out of the 2,000,000 shares that were floated, Government has, through two individuals, acquired only 0.001 per cent. Meaning that 99.999 per cent is owned by someone or the scheme is that someone is supposed to own it.

Mr Speaker, remember that the share capital is only Shs 200,000,000. Anyone can come up one day and pay the remaining shares and take possession of the Uganda National Airlines. One wonders why Government is willing to inject Shs 29.9 billion, which they are calling financing in terms of capitalisation. Why? (Member timed out.)

3.10
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): (Expunged as per the Speaker’s order of 29th March, 2019.)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I mentioned earlier, you can see – for lack of better words – either fraud or conspiracy to commit fraud in this process by the information that the Minister of Works and Transport has provided. I will leave it up to the chairperson of the committee and members to decide. However, I would like to highlight a number of other issues.

Mr Speaker, there is an amount of $29.9 million that is being sought as a refund. In the report, it is stated that this was money provided for financing to capitalise the airline. In capitalisation, there are only two things: either you record it as an expense, meaning that you record the value of $29.9 million as expenditure or you record it as an asset, which is spread over the entire life of the asset you have acquired.

I am now wondering if Government is serious and owns the Uganda National Airlines. Why don’t we convert the $29.9 million as an expense so that we do away with the process of capitalisation? I think this House owes this country a duty to stop people who are scheming, people who are fraudulent in their intentions and want to feast on the taxpayers’ money. We do not have money to finance six aircrafts and just hand them over to somebody to do their business. I beg to submit. (Applause)

3.15
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to begin by appreciating the committee and state clearly that as a Ugandan, I was very proud of the fact that we are coming up with our own airline. The excitement does not only end with me but with many Ugandans.

However, the majority and minority reports reported the same matter and the query was about ownership. Despite the fact that we desire to have our own airline so much, it is incumbent upon this House to ensure that this airline is handled in the right way and organised in such a way as to benefit Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, Air Tanzania was recently revived since 2011. They have a share capital of about Shs 21 billion but this company is wholly owned by the Government of Tanzania. 99 per cent of the shares in Rwand Air, our neighbours, are owned by the Government of Rwanda. 100 per cent of Ethiopian Airlines is owned by the Government of Ethiopia. Therefore, it would be my desire to hear that 99 per cent or 100 per cent of the shares are owned by the Government of Uganda. (Applause)

This is a new arrangement where agencies of Government are owned by ministries; that one ministry owns 50 per cent and another one owns 50 per cent when we have a fully-fledged development company, which caters for such matters. Uganda Development Corporation would be in a better position to handle and manage this airline. We need explanations as to why we prefer the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be the shareholders in this company.

Above all, the directors are individual members like Mr Muhakanizi and another individual. We do not want to sit here and sound as if we are not for Uganda Airlines. We are for the airlines but we want it to be done in the proper way for the benefit of Ugandans. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Somebody could help us with this. Who signs for Government shareholding? Can somebody help? Usually, when Government has holdings in companies, which is the agency that takes charge of that shareholding? Can I hear from hon. Robinah Rwakoojo, MP, Gomba County West?

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, it is not uncommon for Government to have shares in a company. I think I remember seeing it with Kinyara Sugar Works. It is the relevant ministry that is most related. For example, if it was a water project, it would be the Ministry of Water and Environment and maybe, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

They would have 51 per cent and 49 per cent shareholding and it is the relevant minister to sign. It is not wrong for Government to hold; I have seen it before in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not wrong for Government to hold but who signs for Government? That is the point here.

MS RWAKOOJO: I would think it is the minister. A good lawyer knows where to find the law – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I would think that it is the relevant minister but in his or her absence, it is may be the Permanent Secretary (PS). Normally, the PS is the one who signs everything on behalf of the ministry and we write to PS’s when we are writing to ministries. I can find that out. Thank you. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, as they form a company and the shares are under ministries, they choose a representative who signs on behalf of that ministry. That is why you are seeing Mr Keith Muhakanizi and the other gentleman. They sign on behalf of the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The simple thing is, you need a natural person to sign. That is the legal issue here. That is why I would like the people who have practised it to be the ones to advise us so that we do not go into something that may not be that relevant in the debate.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, the country is waiting to see the airline, which is one of the key points in the NRM Manifesto. However, the minister said that they corrected a mistake. May I know from the minister who made the earlier mistake that they have now corrected?  

We may be here when the people of Butaleja, Omoro and others will be paying for individuals. May I know from the minister who made the earlier mistake and what administrative sanctions the minister has undertaken to that person who made a very bad administrative error? Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I must thank the committee for that correction that the minister says they have just rectified. If this national airline was to go to other countries, we would be signing bilateral agreements. In all these African countries and other places, they want to know who is in charge of this airline.

Arguments have been either by shares or by regulations but the practical thing is – because I was in this – people ask, who has the most shares. This has now been rectified and I thank my colleague, the Minister of Works and Transport, for doing this.

The other thing I want to say on this loan is time. The Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should sign the Cape Town Convention. If a country is a signatory to that convention, they do not have to pay in cash. The member States become guarantors and they give you planes. You will pay as you operate. Otherwise, paying cash is straining our country too much.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Works and Transport and knowing that in Africa, there is only one airline that makes profits, that is the Ethiopian Airline, the ministry should ensure that we are in charge of the Soroti Flying School; its good Cabinet took a decision on this already. We should also be in charge of ground cargo handling at the airport and planes repair. Short of those, these planes that the national airline is bringing will just drain this country.

In Ethiopia, the airline was given money once and they were given responsibilities of generating funds to facilitate other organisations, which they have been doing.
 
We need to be very serious with this airline so that it does not only drain money from the treasury. We also need good management, not like the old Uganda Airline where, Mr Speaker, if I can remember, a plane had taken off from Entebbe International Airport but a certain minister called it back. Such management will not make this airline work well. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The demand for this country to reactivate the national carrier was made four years ago. I am very happy that an attempt has been made to revive it albeit a lot of confusion. A while ago, the minister was on this Floor trying to tell us about the number of shares that the Government has in this project. 

In my hand, here is the document, which is duly signed by a one Bishereko Kyomuhendo, from the Registrar of Companies. In this document, the shareholding capacity of Uganda, as a country, is only two shares. I challenge the minister to lay on the Table the document she is making reference to so that we can be able to scrutinise it and know whether it is authentic. 

Secondly, the minister should not have just taken us by surprise. This is an investment, which needs a thorough scrutiny. At the end of the day, I look at it as a situation where the taxpayers of this country are being used to procure these planes over which we have no ownership. 

It is not only that, even when you go to look at the business projection of this investment, it is such that from 2019, the year when we acquire these planes to 2022, we will be registering losses yet in transport business, when you have just bought a vehicle, the chances of this vehicle breaking down are minimal. Actually, you make more money in the early lifespan of this equipment than when it is old.

Therefore, the depreciation rate in the three years given to these planes is so alarming. Are we really doing the right thing for this country? 

Thirdly, we used to be proud of Uganda Airline; an airline which was incorporated by the late Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada. One would have expected that the time when we demanded for the revitalisation of this company and service as a national flag carrier, we wanted Uganda Airlines. 

However, we are also reliably informed that Uganda Airline has been patented in the names of individuals in this country. You are further telling us that when we buy these planes under Uganda National Airline, they will be trading under Uganda Airlines, which is privately owned. Is this country going to be used this way to acquire such large investment in the names of individuals at the end of it all?

Let us be sincere to ourselves as a country and not allow ourselves to be stampeded over such a short time; by 2019, this large amount of money should have been forked to procure these planes. I think we owe this country a duty. Uganda is not going to come to an end tomorrow because we have not taken a decision on this matter. Let us give further scrutiny to this whole process of procurement. Otherwise, as of now, my brothers and sisters, we are paying money for an investment that Uganda does not own. The country has only two shares in it. I, therefore, challenge the minister to lay at the Table that document so that we can give it scrutiny. I beg to submit.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): (Expunged as per the Speaker’s order of 29th March, 2019.)

I beg to lay at the Table the Certificate of Incorporation of Uganda Airlines and also a letter from the registrar giving the status of Uganda Airline. The letter clearly includes the certificate showing that the Government incorporated the Uganda National Airline Company. The company has never been owned by any individual other than the Government of Uganda. I beg to lay.

(Expunged as per the Speaker’s order of 29th March, 2019.)

I further lay at the Table, the particulars of the directors and the Certificate of Incorporation of the Uganda National Airline Company. I beg to lay. (Interjections) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members Honourable members, the only way we can interrogate documents is when we have them formally before us. So, it would be very irregular to refuse receive documents that people are relying on and we do not have it on our record.

Therefore, the document that has been laid and captured by the records, I am asking the Clerk to upload them so that Members have access to them.

Honourable members, at this point, I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee to say something about these documents on behalf of the committee. (Members rose) No, they could not have been discussed because they were only done today. Let the chairperson first look at the document then you can go and upload it. Do you have copies for the chairperson?

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker –(Member rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, the chairperson is on the Floor.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, as we presented in the report, we indicated that Uganda National Airlines Company Limited was owned as we stated then by the Minister of Works and Transport who then owned one share and the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development who also owned one share out of the 2 million shares.

That was the status then as I reported yesterday. Today, there is a special resolution pertaining to the fact that the shares have been allotted as follows: That the Minister of Works and Transport now owns one million ordinary shares and that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development owns one million ordinary shares.

The resolution has been registered with the Registrar of Companies signed by Gad K. Gasatura chairperson, dated 26 March 2019 and Bishereko Kyomuhendo, dated 26 March 2019. That is the updated information that we have just received, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is how we are going to proceed with this. Please, hand them over to the Clerk. We would like to upload them. Honourable members, order. The crux of the debate on these requests, which are in the supplementary schedule no.2, hinges on this issue of shareholding, to know whether the people are being taken for a big ride.

Yesterday, the committee reported that out of the two million shares, only two shares were owned by the Government. That was the situation. Now, we are being told something different. 

I would like to handle it this way; we give the committee time to look at this -(Applause)- and assess how it impacts on the earlier report and whether they now have to advise plenary one way or the other, on how we proceed with this matter. 

The chairperson cannot act individually now to say we agree with it or not. It would be proper that we give you - Mr Chairperson, how much time do you need to go back and look at these before you come back to Parliament?

What we want to achieve is harmony. This is something we all support but we want harmony.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, yesterday, I laid at the Table the agreements pertaining to the procurement of these aircrafts and we seem to be having a terrible deadline, which has been extended to 31 March 2019. There are heavy penalties associated with these payments in case we do not pay.

Therefore, in view of that, we shall report tomorrow on this matter. The committee will sit in the morning and report in the afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, this is one aspect of the report; the issue of shareholding. The chairperson has said they will sit in the morning and will be able to come back in the afternoon to advise us. We will still debate it and take a decision whichever way we want.

Therefore, let us permit the request he has made. My directive is that they go back as a committee, look at this issue again and then come back tomorrow at 2 o’clock and we resume to see if we are able to proceed with this matter or not. It is so ordered and closed - you will raise the procedural matter later. Can we deal with this tomorrow? Chairperson, if you want to take leave of the House and start your meeting now, I will not object.  - However, if you want to be part of this House, it is still okay but we need to come back with a clear guide to the House on what we do with what we have in terms of information so far.

Order, honourable member. Committee members, it is important that you do this for us; if you want to go for a meeting, that is fine. Can we deal with the ministerial statement from the Minister of Works and Transport if it is ready?

3.40
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, vote 113 - UNRA, vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund and vote 500 - Local Government. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle and report. Do we have the one for energy now? Okay. 

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS UNDER RULE 46 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE: THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO A MATTER OF INTIMIDATION, TORTURE, DEATH THREATS AND ARREST OF WORKERS OF MEDIA HOUSES AND SUSPENSION OF SOME RADIO PROGRAMMES IN LIRA ARISING FROM THE DEATH OF MR DICKENS OKELLO, RAISED BY HON. JUDITH ALYEK, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, KOLE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a misunderstanding here because the Minister of Information, Communication and Technology came to my office and said that this statement should have been made by the Ministries of Internal Affairs and Security. However, it turned out that this aspect - the security and internal affairs aspect of the matter had already been handled by the responsible ministers.

Therefore, it was the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) aspect that was remaining. I suggest a communication be sent to the Minister of Information, Communication and Technology to come back and deal with this particular aspect of closure by the UCC of this radio station.

Therefore, we will give the minister more time to come back to this. Clerk, please, extract the minutes and advise the minister accordingly.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS UNDER RULE 46 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE: THE POLICY INTERVENTIONS BY GOVERNMENT TO ASSIST DISTRICTS THAT POST POOR RESULTS IN PRIMARY LEAVING EXAMINATIONS, RAISED BY HON. ALEX BURUNDO MUSINGO, MP BULAMBULI COUNTY

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement on interventions by Government to assist districts that post poor results in Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE).

The Ministry of Education and Sports shares the concern raised by Hon. Alex Burundo about the poor performance in PLE in some districts around the country. The ministry is working closely with its partners to implement the following policy interventions to improve on the performance in examinations and the quality of education in general.

The OPM together with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Local Government identified these poor performing districts, held meetings with stakeholders to identify the possible causes and devised ways and means of addressing these problems. 

These meetings focused on sensitising these leaders and other key stakeholders about their central role in the delivery of quality education services to their communities. Their participation in education delivery including monitoring was emphasised. 

Consequently, the situation in these areas has seen a drastic improvement and we are now working to translate this into better results in the coming exams.

We have introduced Early Grade Reading to improve on the literacy levels in lower primary. With support from different partners, the ministry is promoting the use of local languages as a medium of instruction in schools across the country with English being taught as a subject from Primary One to Primary Three. With the introduction of this intervention, literacy levels have progressively increased to over 70 per cent among learners.

It has been proven that this policy shift will help children to grasp concepts faster and create a strong foundation for lifelong learning where children are instructed in English.

The ministry has also strengthened the inspection function by ensuring that inspectors visit all schools at least once a term. Inspection is a core intervention for improving quality in education as it enables us to assess teachers and make recommendations to improve their performance. With one cycle of inspection every term, the teachers are engaged and the local governments can help to address the highlighted challenges.

In order to further strengthen inspections, the ministry has also introduced an electronic-inspection system to ensure timely responses to issues affecting the quality of education at school level. Under this intervention, our inspectors use digitalised instruments - that is, tablets - to carry out inspection and this helps to give timely feedback to issues that are highlighted from the field.

The ministry is also enhancing the tracking of teacher presence and time on task. This is a new innovation under the ministry where teachers are followed up to class level to ensure that they are present and teaching as guided by the time table. This intervention helps to cover the curriculum within the prescribed time and leads to better results because children will cover the entire curriculum as prescribed by the ministry.

With regard to instructional materials, the ministry procured materials at an average pupil-book ratio of 5:1; specifically 3:1 for English and 4:1 for Mathematics. With more support from Global Partnership for Education (GPE), the ratios for English and Mathematics will improve to 1:1 for English and 2:1 for Mathematics, respectively. We expect numeracy and literacy levels at primary level to have a tremendous improvement.

With support from GPE, UNICEF and other civil society organisations, the ministry is training school managers on their roles and responsibilities. The ministry noted that performance is dependent on the school managers’ understanding and practising their roles and responsibilities. 

Under GPE, managers in poorly performing 31 districts have been trained by Uganda Management Institute in leadership and management. This is among other interventions in these poor performing districts.

The ministry conducts quarterly monitoring and support supervision to UPE schools. On a quarterly basis, the ministry monitors selected schools and gives them support to improve on the identified weak areas. 

With support from UNICEF, the ministry has also introduced the Quality Enhancement Initiative (QEI) in the 34 worst performing districts as per the National Districts League Table. 

Furthermore, with regard to the learning environment, a total of 145 primary schools, with support from GPE, are being constructed in selected districts. Of these, 116 have been commissioned. 

Under School Facility Grant Funds, all local governments receive money to improve their school infrastructure and some selected schools benefit from emergency construction funds to rehabilitate and expand on their infrastructure. 

The ministry has also developed school feeding guidelines to support stakeholders in mobilisation of parents to provide mid-day meals to their children. We have found that children who have access to mid-day meals concentrate more in class and therefore, perform better.

With support from UNICEF, the ministry is implementing the school Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) programme. Under this scheme, we have developed guidelines like the three-star approach which supports learners and teachers to improve on school WASH. 

We are conducting school micro-planning for all the districts to ensure that we capture school WASH data, which will be used to come up with plans and strategies for improvement at the different levels.

We shall continue engaging all our stakeholders to find new ways of enhancing the performance in our schools throughout the country to ensure that the positive developments made over the years are not lost. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a supplementary question from Bulambuli? (Interjections) This is not a ministerial statement. This is a response to a question and the rules on how we handle them are clear.

The matter of the Karamoja affairs was deferred to tomorrow. Please, come back with that statement tomorrow.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, I rise to present a ministerial response on questions raised by hon. Oliver Katwesigye, the Woman Member of Parliament for Buhweju District. The question raised was regarding:

    1. Upgrading of the health centre IV to a district hospital;
    2. Why more health centre IIIs have not been constructed in the sub-counties;
    3. Why the existing health centres are poorly equipped; and
    4. Why the district does not receive the health benefits that accrue by virtue of being a hard-to-reach area.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has compiled a list of all the presidential pledges, which includes the upgrading of Nsiika Health Centre IV to a district hospital. The Ministry of Health requires resource allocation to fulfil these pledges. However, in respect of the construction of health centre IIIs in sub-counties, the Ministry of Health, as of now, is undertaking this in a phased manner, starting with the upgrading of health centre IIs to health centre IIIs in sub-counties that do not have health centre IIIs.

To this effect, in the Financial Year 2018/2019, Mushasha Health Centre II in Buhanga sub county and Engaju Health Centre II in Engaju sub county will be upgraded to the health centre III status under the Intra-Governmental Fiscal Transfers Project. This year, health centre IIs will be upgraded under the recently approved project loan under Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Project. All these are in Buhweju District.

In the coming financial year, the Ministry of Health plans to upgrade Rwanyamabare Health Centre II in Nyakishana sub county in Buhweju District to a health centre III. The remaining health centre IIs will be upgraded in a phased manner.

The Ministry of Health has compiled the list of all sub counties without a health facility; 132 sub counties in the country including Rubengye sub county, Kajana Town Council and Nyakaziba Town Council in Buhweju District. Cabinet has already directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we are working together to see how a loan can be secured for upgrading some of these facilities.

The construction of these 132 health centre IIIs has been estimated at Shs 145.2 billion while equipment will cost Shs 46.2 billion.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has made efforts to provide basic equipment to health facilities. Currently, we are undertaking a needs assessment of all equipment in our health facilities. This will enable us to determine the gaps and guide the redistribution of equipment that is not being utilised in some of the health facilities.

I would also like to inform the honourable member that procurement of more medical equipment will be based on the needs as per the on-going assessment.

The hard-to-reach districts in this country were determined by the Ministry of Public Service. The primary health care grant resource allocation formula, therefore, takes into consideration the districts determined by the Ministry of Public Service. The same applies to hard-to-reach allowance for health workers. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a supplementary question from the Woman MP for Buhweju? Thank you, honourable minister. There is no supplementary question. Next item.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in view of rule 42(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We raise some of these issues – For example, I raised an issue that has been deferred all the time and yet, it has been appearing on the Order Paper. Rule 42(2) is to the effect that it shall be disorderly for a minister to fail to answer a question without the leave of the Speaker. 

I would like to believe that in respect of the question I raised, the minister does not have the courtesy to seek leave from you not to answer the question. That is why it keeps appearing on the Order Paper –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which question is this?

MR MWIRU: The question is about the chairperson of Jinja Central Division.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What number is it on the Order Paper?

MR MWIRU: It is item 6(b). I do not know whether it is not procedurally right to invoke that rule and declare the minister disorderly since it has been more than once that he has not responded to this question. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot do that in his absence because it would almost be of no effect. The information we got earlier is that the senior minister is not well and the minister of state is out of the country. That is why we have not handled any of the issues that have come from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, the rule is very clear and certainly, we will see how to make these things more effective.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was already presented and debate was supposed to start. I will only restate the question. I propose a question for your debate that the report of the select committee on inquiry into allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning in Uganda be adopted. 

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Each Member will take three minutes.

4.01
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of this select committee and the members for having taken time to visit as many institutions as possible in this country to come up with the report that they submitted to us.

The vice of sexual molestation in our institutions of learning is indeed a thorn in our flesh, right from primary, secondary and university levels. In the past, people used to think it was only men who molested students of the opposite sex but it has been found out that even women do it. In many schools, we have also found women molesting young boys. Therefore, this is a double-edged sword and a vice that we must fight in a united manner. 

With all those revelations, which were made, I think it is not enough for us just to receive this report, debate it and make resolutions. It is important that even in those specific institutions, where such vices have been discovered, criminal investigations should be conducted so that such kinds of wrong persons, both men and women, are brought to book. Otherwise, there is no point for Parliament to make resolutions, which will just be for our shelves and will take long or may never be implemented in any case. 

Mr Speaker, for those vices that have been identified with the specific names – for example, I can say with certainty, the other time, the committee said – and if my memory still serves me well - that there were three teachers from Ediofe Girls Secondary School, which school is within my vicinity. It is a shame not only to those teachers but also to us as a community. 

Therefore, a lesson should be taught to such kind of people so that it acts as a deterrent measure. In any case, such institutions are safe places for our children to go and acquire education. 

Mr Speaker, once a parent hands over their child to an institution for education - you are content that the teachers will play both the responsibility of a parent and a teacher. Now if the teacher turns around - (Member timed out.)

4.04
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a contribution to this debate. I would like to welcome the report of the committee, which is collaborated by what was already available and I thank them very much for the work well-done.

Mr Speaker, there is only one or two points on which I would like to make a correction and where probably the committee was a bit weak and that is on the methodology.

We do not hear much about the voices of the male lecturers in this report yet in most cases of sexual harassment, victims seem to suggest that it is the male lecturers who are harassing the female students in these schools.

Mr Speaker, I have had the opportunity of being a lecture at Uganda Management Institute (UMI) and I witnessed some of these vices. There are many incidences where the male lectures have been provoked, for instance, by female students wearing skimpy outfits during the lectures, which are very suggestive. 

The female students bump the male lectures with messages and phone calls, which are suggestive. There have been incidences when the female students have gathered around the lectures after lectures in - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it already three minutes? It was not. The timing is three minutes. Please, complete your submission.

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, there have been incidences when students have gathered around the lectures especially, in the evening after the evening classes, between 9.00 p.m. and 10.00 p.m., in a manner that is suggestive of –(Interruption.)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my fellow Northcotter for accepting this point of clarification.

You said the provocative attire of the female students is one of the causes. I would like to believe that during the time when you were a lecturer at UMI, no accusation was labeled against you.   Weren’t you also provoked? If yes, how did you control yourself to the extent that you were not negatively reported about? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: For record purposes, no accusations were labeled against me; it is a matter of being professional.

I would like to mention that there have been incidences - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. 

4.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their diligence in this investigation. It has been an eye opener.

Much as we would want those teachers who are found molesting our children in these schools to be prosecuted, to a large extent, the Ministry of Education and Sports should conduct investigations in all the schools and clean the school system of all the teachers that are abusing our children.

Previously, these teachers were even being transferred. When a teacher defiled a child, he would be transferred to another school. This time round, the licenses of those teachers should be canceled. Therefore, I would like to propose that all teachers who are found to be involving themselves in these acts should be dealt with very seriously.

The findings of the committee are not a surprise at all.  The committee found out that we have high levels of school drop outs, especially the girl child. 

Parents send their children to school and they expect them to be protected but instead of the teachers taking care of these children, they defile them. Therefore, for us to reduce the rates of teenage pregnancies and school dropouts, we must seriously deal with such teachers.

As for the provocative attire, the Ministry of Education and Sports should set length of skirts - if we think that dressing is provocative though this should not be an excuse because many girls dress provocatively on the streets but no one grabs them. 

Therefore, in order to protect our children in schools, we should set standards. I was in Bweranyangi Girls SSS and Gayaza High School and I used to dress decently. We should set the limits of these uniforms so that the teachers cannot use them as an excuse.

As for the university students, I think the students also have a responsibility. They went to university because they were qualified to be there. I do not see any reason why they should give in to lecturers in order to get marks when they are capable. If this is found to –(Member timed out.)


4.11
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and her team for the wonderful work they did.

We have heard about sex for marks at the universities in this country and the name of this country is being tarnished because of this. Many parents are losing hope in entrusting their young girls in the hands of these lectures.

I would like to applaud the committee – I know the recommendations should be implemented to restore the hope of our parents and decency at the universities.

We need to set a dress code at the universities. When I was at the Uganda Christian University Mukono, the Vice-Chancellor then used to be very strict. There are some types of clothes that ladies were not supposed to wear but in other universities, students are free to wear what they feel like. They wear miniskirts and some almost walk naked at the university, bragging that they are mature people and at the university, you are free to wear any attire. 

Mr Speaker, as a country, we need to set the standard concerning the dress code in universities. Naturally, people get attracted to each other. Therefore, to avoid that, let the dress code be controlled.

As a lecturer, you must adhere to your professional code of conduct. Teachers are normally very decent people. I am a teacher by profession and the first lesson that is given to a lecturer or teacher is to respect themselves. Therefore, as a teacher, it is embarrassing to hear that a lecturer slept with a pupil or student moreover in the office. 

I am grateful for this very important report and the resolutions should be implemented so that we restore the hope and dignity of the universities in this country. Thank you very much.

4.14
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the minister for the good report. We have a high dropout rate in our primary and secondary schools because of this vice. In most cases, you girls who have been defiled and impregnated are not given chance to go back to class. 

We should make a resolution that if we find out who has impregnated a girl; after delivery, she should be taken back to school. We know that educating the girl child is educating the whole nation yet the dropout rate is so high. These boys and men who impregnate these girls of ours in schools are being given chance to keep their jobs and even stay in classes, if they are fellow students. Therefore, we should make a resolution as Parliament that a girl who gets pregnant at this level is given an opportunity to go back to class and be supported by the person who impregnated her.

Secondly, we need to encourage our girls to speak out because so many vices are being carried out but the girls are afraid to come out to report the teachers who seduce them. Therefore, we should encourage our girls to make sure that they speak out because they are being defiled in teachers’ houses where they are asked by the teachers to take books for marking. Others are being defiled in health centres or sickbays at school. This is very bad for our country and we should join hands and heads to fight the vice. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am now going to choose the next four. I will have hon. Kasibante, hon. Waluswaka, hon Rukungiri and hon. Hellen Asamo in that order for now.

4.16
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a teacher, I wish to, first, castigate teachers who are involved in molesting students. However, I do not want to sound strange. This vice is encouraged by students as well. There are students - both female and male - who molest teachers. I have seen a teacher who was impregnated by a student. (Laughter) 

I am saying this out of experience. We only need to advocate for behavioural change. As policy makers as well as parents, we need to advocate for this. We need to do counselling. These are our children and they must change their morals.

Secondly – and the good thing the Minister of Education and Sports is here – the unplanned calendar in schools takes up most of the time. For the day schools, the calendar runs up to 4 or 5 p.m., and then there are the unplanned evening classes that go without any kind of supervision. There are weekend classes, special coaching, which the students attend over the weekend without wearing uniform –(Interruption)

MR DULU: Thank you very much for giving way. Members, I was a health educator. After interacting with both sexes about the behaviour we are talking about here and teaching them how to wear condoms, they would then ask you when they will learn about the practical. (Laughter) These are things they used to tell me when I was a health educator. This is the information I would like to give you; that both sexes are to blame. Thank you very much.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. As I wind up, Mr Speaker, a school must only open for daily activities under strict supervision. Where there are weekend programmes, who oversees them? The Ministry of Education and Sports only has a calendar between Monday and Friday but then the schools convene on Sunday –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for having been exemplary not only in the report but also in the dress code. Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you. 

Mr Speaker, before we go out to the universities and schools, even in the House here, we have honourable members who do not dress well –(Interjections)– Yes, especially the ladies. I am not saying the ones here but I would like to thank the chairperson.

Secondly, I would like to make a request to this House. For you to be a teacher, you should abide by some principles; you should be a married person. However, you will find somebody that is not married and is given the position of a teacher. For example, in Butaleja, if you are not married, people do not allow you in the school whether you have an appointment letter or not. 

Therefore, we should take this up because we have lecturers who are around 50 years and they are not married. You wonder how that person survives –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to thank my honourable colleague. I felt that I needed to be polite to my younger brother by informing him that in the Catholic Church, we have people who choose to be celibate and they are teachers. Therefore, when you debate on the Floor of the House that you would want every teacher to be married, I want you to be mindful of that. I did not want to call him to order. He is a very good person. Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you for the information. I think there are a few exceptions. In all the faiths I know, it is only in the Catholic Church where priests do not marry. However, for the others, let us have women and men.

Finally, Mr Speaker, for people found guilty, let their certificates be cancelled. Otherwise, the perpetrator would just get transferred to another school. If the certificate is cancelled and he is blacklisted, it would be okay. Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Waluswaka in order to allude that everybody has a chance to get married? I would like him to withdraw his statement because the women will be offended. People get to their employment by virtue of merit and credentials and not because they are married.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think the requirement for recruitment - I do not know whether they have now put it in the employment terms or advert that those who are applying for jobs should be married. I do not think it has reached that far. So, that is a proposal that might be reserved for heaven but for us here, we will still go with what we have. (Laughter)

4.23
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. Whereas the two sexes all have challenges, I do not think the girl-child suffers more than the boy-child. 

Mr Speaker, when a girl-child gets pregnant, she suffers double tragedy. My committee went to the field and we were able to see girls who were pregnant and young mothers who cannot benefit from the Youth Fund because they are not yet 18 years old. They cannot as well benefit from the UWEP Fund because they are not yet women. They are just at that level and nobody thinks about them.

Therefore, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development might have to think of a way of supporting the girls who drop out of schools when they are young and get pregnant. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports - when we interacted with the Education Service Commission - said that their hands were tied. Most of the time, they just transfer this person, hence, transferring the vice. The person will keep impregnating girls. No wonder, we saw what happened at St Lawrence Schools - may the person’s soul rest in peace. You saw the number of people who we thought were children when actually they were wives. That is something which was very unfortunate. 

I think the Ministry of Education and Sports should come with an amendment where these teachers are deregistered and are denied the services of teaching. 

Mr Speaker, we have a vice of the phone. We all were once young girls but the children of today are more exposed than their parents. You sit with children in the house thinking they do not know what is happening but when you engage them, you will be shocked what they will be able to tell you. I remember there was a school where my children said they were asked to go to school with condoms. I asked them what the condoms were for. The school would ask girls to go to school with condoms. I asked the teachers what the condoms were for and they said when there is a prom, anything can happen especially when the girls are with boys.

Therefore, these things are happening in the schools and I think the ministry should save our girls. After the next generation, where are we going to get girls who are humble and are able to do everything? 

The other issue is the role of the senior woman teacher. Mr Speaker, I grew up with the guidance of a senior woman teacher in school, who was very strict and she was able to follow girls from the time a girl gets her menstruation –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the best teacher in the world, I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for their findings and recommendations. As a country, we have the best tool yet it is hidden and we are not using it and yet it is not far. When I stood here and talked about the national values, unless the Ministry of Education and Sports goes into that, we shall keep lamenting and talking about these vices without any amends. 

I would like to request you to go and look for that book, send it to schools and ask the teachers to use it. As a result, we shall have no other disturbances in the country. 

Mr Speaker, the following are the values:

    1. Respect for humanity.
    2. Honesty; uphold and defend the truth at all times.
    3. Justice and fairness in dealing with others.
    4. Hard work for self-reliance.
    5. Integrity, moral uprightness and social sound character.
    6. Creativity and innovation.

If you go by those values, beginning with our families, no child will go wrong and we shall have respectable and responsible children in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, in today’s world, we see very many parents neglecting their children. Many parents do not translate the values that we want the children to grow with. We see parents neglecting the roles they are supposed to play. I was a lecturer previously and when these girls –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

DR MORIKU: When these children come to the university without proper parental guidance and values from their families, they tend to grow out. Is my colleague, therefore, in order to talk about values from the Government perspective, forgetting that the first values come from the parental role? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think the Member said it was exclusively for Government. She is saying that there is a book that can guide schools; that does not mean the parents should do nothing. 

The next lot of speakers includes Brig. Gen. Byekwaso, hon. Abala, hon. Ababiku and hon. Alero. We will start with them and then move to conclude the debate because we also have a Bill to pass.  

4.30
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to thank the chairperson of the committee. 

I have two observations to make. My point of concern that I would like to stress is about bringing in the girl-child. The first time I heard people talking about bringing in the girl-child, I thought it was horrible. However, when you look at it carefully, I think we need to make the girl-child, in some instances, a culprit. We should not treat them as victims all the time. As some Members have rightly said, there are some girls who have caused men to molest or seduce them. As such, after investigations and if found guilty, these girls should be held culpable.

In addition, we usually talk about our girls being victims and facing double problems. I think the ministry needs to have facilities where to keep girls. I heard that in Rwanda, they have made it so stringent for girls that by the time they think of accepting to be molested or to sleep with men, they know what it is going to mean to their lives.

What they have done is to set up facilities, which keep these girls. When she is pregnant, she does not go back home but is set up in a facility that gives her education or other life skills rather than being left to go back to the community or to parents who cannot look after her. That is my point.

The other point is about rehabilitation centres. Instead of invoking licences, which is sometimes so hard because by the time you train a teacher - we have teacher ratio problems. I, therefore, suggest that we should think about having rehabilitation centres. Sometimes these men or women have problems so they need rehabilitation instead of being so strict on them. I beg to submit.

4.33
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for an elaborate report. We have read about this issue in the newspapers and seen it in the media over the years but nothing has come out as clearly as the committee has stated it. That is why I would like to thank the committee for a job well done.

Secondly, I would like to condemn the mentality of sex for marks in universities. Somebody must work and if you have failed, you have failed. That is why I support that those whose names have been mentioned in the report should have the police take over and carry out further investigations. Those people must be brought to book. They should be an example to the rest in this country so that somebody somewhere does not think that they can play around with the lives of Ugandans because of mere marks.

Thirdly, I would like to say –(Interjections)– I know Members are now happy because I have told them so. I am talking about mere marks. Mr Speaker, I am talking about the insensitivity of many Ugandans when it comes to the issue of ethics. You can imagine we have the Minister for Ethics and Integrity here; I asked him how many people are in his ministry and he told me they are 50.

I looked at how many districts we have in Uganda and they are 122. How many people are in this country? They are more than 40 million. That means that if my minister here, who I call Nyegenyege honourable reverend father - In fact, he and I agreed that we can call each other Nyegenyege. Mr Speaker, this is what we agreed between us.

Mr Speaker, we must work hard to protect our girls from this type of –(Member timed out.) 

4.36
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I join the rest in thanking the committee for a good report. Unless we put our heads together to fight this vice, what is happening to these children is going to give a negative impression to our country. Whatever happens to the nationals of a country gives a label to that country.

The impact of this offence is so great and permanent at times. With the high level of infection in this country, especially HIV/AIDS - As a committee, we have learnt that the increase is at 34 per cent, affecting children from the age of 18 to 24 years. You cannot rule out infection with this type of act. Therefore, there is need for us to fight this vice in order to save our children and ourselves.

Mr Speaker, in this report, the committee has attributed the main cause of this vice to poverty and moral decadence. I am questioning the issue of poverty. If we take the poverty levels in this country region per region and we compare the level of this vice, I take Kampala as one of the richest districts in Central Uganda. However, the vice may be higher here compared to what is in Northern Uganda.

Therefore, I would like to narrow this to the issue of moral decadence. As parents and guardians to these children, we must take responsibility. I am a teacher by profession. Before you hand over a child to me, the informal education begins from home. Therefore, as the background is not firm, do not expect much from a teacher.

I, therefore, request that we must get back to the drawing board. In addition, before you blame these children, who buys the privileges that we give them – the phones, computers and television sets that you have in your rooms? Therefore, the exposure of these children that we are –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw to a close; so, I am going to take the Mmeber from Moyo and then we see. However, I have a regional problem now. I think I need to take Kotido and then we see how to conclude. Honourable Minister for Education and Sports, you will speak.

4.40
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report and the recommendations therein. Personally, I feel that the following must be strengthened by the school administration, especially in the primary and secondary sectors.

When it comes to boarding schools, the role of the matron or patron for boys, the role of the senior woman teacher and the teachers on duty need to be strengthened. These three categories of people must strengthen the administration of the school if we are to avoid sexually related incidents.

More often than not, pupils or students compromise the patron, the teacher on duty or the matron by giving them some money so that they are allowed to go to discos and social events at night. Therefore, if the senior woman teacher and the teacher on duty and the matron or patron are properly briefed about issues related to education in the various schools, we shall avoid such problems. They are supposed to be role models and mentors but more often than not, as said before, they leave the students to go freely and they end up in the wrong hands.

As Members of Parliament and especially the males, at times we bring girls to various schools and colleges for education but then we turn around and marry them off. This has happened before. I would like to thank and congratulate the Muslim community. I like their dress code. Girls in boarding schools dress very decently. Thank you very much, the Muslim community. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to give a person from Karamoja region two minutes and they will be the last before we listen to the minister.

4.43
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start straight away from where the honourable member who was on the Floor stopped. 

There are people talking about the dress code as a matter in sexual harassment. I would like to invite to inform Members that there is a place called Karamoja. In Karamoja, our girls are allowed to walk bare-chested. The men are allowed to swing around and move freely. (Laughter) It is not criminal. 

Of course there are very many factors that make the Karamajongs behave that way. The fact is that we look at each other as brothers and sisters. There is no way you can get attracted to your sister. Therefore, I think we need to rule out the issue of dressing and agree to the fact that we have degenerated as a people and have become highly immoral and forgotten the fact that we are brothers and sisters. 

Of course for our case in Karamoja, young girls are engaged in matters of sex due to poverty – (Interjections) – yes, even a cup of porridge can lure a girl to a man. 

Drunkenness of both men and women is another problem and of teachers and their students. We should be thinking about not allowing teachers to drink while on duty in school – (Member timed out.)

4.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me first of all say that we must love our country.

This morning, we were looking at population growth in our country using demographic evidence. If we look at that, we want to break the vicious cycle of getting poor quality people; people who do not have a firm foundation. Families are the firm foundation – we will forever continue to have this vicious cycle of a poor population. We must love our country and we should proudly say, “We are Ugandans.” 

Before you approach a child, someone who is not of your generation, think of your daughter. Men do not think of their daughters. If you imagine some 60-year old man approaching your daughter who is 22 years, you will then understand the pain. Let us love Uganda. You cannot say that you love Uganda when you do not love the people. 

Mr Speaker, we must all be exemplary and it should start with us. We must educate our people to have this early childhood development - I am a teacher of biology. I know that the best you can give to your child is at a tender age; that child will grow morally upright. 

It is wrong to say that if somebody dresses poorly, then it is a ticket for you to go and sexually abuse that child. Shame on you! (Applause) Instead of correcting that child, you want to sexually abuse them instead? I know that we are focusing on people that are older; but let us love our people and act differently. There are a lot of things that we can do together. We cannot – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to do a Bill and I am running out of time. Let us listen to the Chairman of the Parliamentary Forum for Children.

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN (Mr Bernard Atiku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, I would like to congratulate this House upon taking the wise route when hon. Adeke raised this matter on the Floor and Mr Speaker, your Office wisely guided that a select committee be set up. The committee has delivered a good job. I do concur with the recommendations there in.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Government to follow up on those recommendations because those that touch on legal review need to be fast-tracked. The Sexual Offences Bill that hon. Monicah presented here and was referred back for readjustment so that she can re-table, needs to be brought here quickly because the report has indicated that the Sexual Offences Bill should be fast-tracked. 

That should be done because we know that this scourge can only be dealt with if we firmly implement the legal provisions in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to the minister in charge of ethics, in two minutes.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Mr Simon Lokodo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for choosing this point as a theme for debate. I also would like to thank the committee, which has done a formidable job; I commend them for the resolutions and recommendations they have given.

Mr Speaker, the moral fiber of our country has unfortunately degenerated to the lowest levels. When a topic like this is discussed, it refocuses us on the real burning subject of our moral ethical values. The directorate for ethics and integrity has a mission to uphold moral values and principles and as my sister and colleague said, we have come up with a national ethical values policy, which if promulgated and put in the curriculum of our schools, will go a long way in implanting good values into our people. However, the fact is that the complacency that we, as a country, have given to the matter of sex is very painful.

We have reduced sex, which is a sacred value given by God, to a play thing that can be done anyhow, anywhere, anytime and with anything. You can imagine that there are even lunch breaks when people go for nothing else but to have sex.

Painfully –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, painfully -(Laughter)

MR LOKODO: Mr Speaker, painfully, we have unfortunately destroyed our youth with the entertainment choices we have made that today to have a satisfying entertainment you must have somebody’s child dance or walk naked. When I came here with the Anti-pornography Act, I was bashed. 

However, I would like to thank Members for passing and enacting it into law. We now have a law which somehow controls and conducts our behaviour. The challenge remains: how can we help our children to survive the challenge surrounding them because there is a lot of craving for sex? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we hear from the Minister of Education and Sports?

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, I also join my colleagues to thank the chairperson and the committee members for a job well done. I also thank the Members of Parliament for supporting this report. As the Ministry of Education and Sports, we are saying that sexual violence of whatever nature in all education institutions – primary, secondary or university – in this country is unacceptable.

We have taken this report very seriously and we are studying the findings and recommendations. If it means taking disciplinary action against the wrongdoers pointed out in the report, the measures will be administered according to the laws of this country. If it requires change of policy, we are going to make the necessary adjustments in the policy. Even if it means amending the existing laws at all levels, we will do it. We want our children in our institutions protected.

Mr Speaker, I think that summarises it. We are committed and very soon you will see what will happen. I would like to make one correction, Mr Speaker. It is not a policy of my ministry to transfer wrongdoers or rapists. Where it has happened –(Member time out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up, honourable minister.

DR MUYINGO: Where it has happened that a wrongdoer was transferred, it was either because we did not have the right information or something went wrong.

This is where I would like to appeal to all of us that this vice is dangerous and it has frustrated our efforts of making sure that everybody goes to school and stays there. I call upon all of you, colleagues, that where these cases happen become our ears and eyes and let us know.

Somebody talked about values and morality. When we are developing the curriculum at all levels, national values are accommodated. However, you know very well that when teaching is being conducted in our institutions, many times what people want to pick is what will enable them to pass exams.

Therefore, it is very important for each and everybody to take up their responsibility fully. The parents, for example, should be helped to fully take back their responsibility of helping us to instil those values and morality in our children.

I wholly agree with my sister, the Leader of the Opposition, when she says we need to be exemplary, particularly we in leadership. Those young boys and girls take up almost everything they see us do. Where we have misbehaved, they will also try to misbehave. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister?

4.57
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the committee and Parliament for constituting this committee. It is general information in the country that there were systems in the country and previously, we had very strong cultural systems. You could not just play with a girl as you would wish. 

That stage has come where we have a new religion introduced. Both the Christian and Muslim families had strong values. In fact, if a girl were to get pregnant outside the normal system, it would become a problem to the family.

However, society has now opened up. The schools have come and people now go to schools and girls stay away from the family for three, four or six months. The lucky ones end up promoting their understanding to marriage. That is why these days people in the country marry regardless of their tribes and that is the advantage, which is not said. However, it is for those who are lucky that they identify themselves in university or wherever so that they do not just mess up and leave each other but agree and marry and correct the wrong deeds they had engaged in.

I think we should go back to our values. For our children, as the Leader of the Opposition said, it is you the father – you have daughters. If you want to be a sugar daddy or sugar mummy, you are messing up with people’s children and that is wrong. 

In fact, what Parliament is doing is correcting the mistakes the country has got into. We will make sure that the recommendations are followed up and implemented so that we make some laws that can be inhibitive –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, General. You have seen it from the soldier: no asking for more time. Discipline! Once it is time up, it is time up and he is a full general, yet those of us who are not even privates are pleading for more time. (Laughter)

Chairperson, I am just going to ask you to call upon the House to adopt your report because you do not have time to respond to those issues since they have just spoken in support of this report.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA (Ms Robina Rwakoojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues and those who have come up with comments and spared time to read the report.

I would like to also say that as the chairperson of the committee, I am grateful to the members of the committee. I believe some of them are here. We found out that sexual violence is for real and it happens to both boys and girls but more to girls - and it goes through the whole system.

We interacted with learners in primary, secondary, tertiary and universities. At primary level, people mentioned taking books to homes and they find them there. Even at the secondary level, it was the same story. For universities and tertiary institutions, it is mainly sex-for-marks. Even when they go for internship, it happens to them and on their way to school, specifically for girls.

We must deal with the structures. Some schools do not have fences and bathing places. If the girls bathe from outside and people get “optical nutrition” and come back at night, it is very dangerous. The abusers are the teachers, lecturers and the deans of students. 

Mr Speaker, in Kyambogo University, there was a very painful situation. They try very hard to make sure that different lectures mark students and the person at the end of the process, who should give students 50 marks in order to pass, ends up giving 49 and students pay for the one mark by sleeping with them, which is terrible.

There are many effects of sexual harassment. I am glad that all of you found that our recommendations were worthy. 

For the men, I would like to say that think about the female as your wife, sister, daughter or your mother. That is when you will actually feel  it.

Parents should not forget to teach these children. “Charity begins at home.” If a child leaves home knowing that it is dangerous for a girl-child or boy-child in certain aspects to deal with you, then it will help us. Many parents have abandoned children and leave it to the schools and so, children go without knowing that they should say, “No.” 

I would like to thank you very much. I thank the Minister of Education and Sports and the First Deputy Prime Minister for committing to implementing these resolutions. 

To all of you, it was a pleasant task and I thank God very much for that. I am a member of Ugandan Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Uganda) and in 1990, I had done a research on violence against women and so, it was very nice for me to do this with the team. The team was very good and cooperative.  

Mr Speaker, someone talked about poverty. On page 23, you can read about it. It is not that it depends on how poor or rich the area is but because people do not have basics, they give in - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will now put the question that the report of the Select Committee on Inquiry into Allegations of Sexual Violence in Institutions of Learning in Uganda be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we will skip all the others and go to item No.19. 
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2018

5.05
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Mitooma, Member for Kanungu, Member for Ayivu, Member for Makindye-Ssabagabo, Member for Kashari, Member for Gomba West, Member for Moyo and Member for Kibuku District. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Speaker, the purpose of the Bill is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by persons with disabilities and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.

It also ensures that persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments with the various barriers that may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” be read the second time. That is the motion whose question I propose for your debate and debate starts now and to kick off the debate, this Bill was referred to a committee to do public hearings and consultations, come back and advise us on how to proceed with it. 
I will now invite the chairperson to present the report of the committee. 

5.07
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to present this report.

This Bill was shared to Members about three weeks ago. I hope we are moving together. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018.”

“The Persons with Disabilities Bi11, 2018” was read for the first time on 16 January 20l9 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration, in accordance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The promotion and protection of the rights of Persons with Disabilities is embodied in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda particularly, Objective XVI, which states that “Society and the State shall recognise the right of persons with disabilities to respect human dignity.”

I will also need to point out the provisions of Article 32, which states “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.”

Article 35 (1) of the Constitution talks about the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and it states “Persons with disabilities have a right to respect and human dignity and the State and society shall take appropriate measures to ensure that they realise their full mental and physical potential.”

The Constitution under Article 35 further requires that Parliament shall enact laws appropriate for the protection of persons with disabilities. Mr Speaker, this means we are executing an important constitutional duty by enacting this law. 

The object of the Bill is to provide for the respect and promotion of the rights and freedoms of the persons with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, during the course of consultations, we interacted with the following stakeholders:

    a. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social  Development; 
    b. Equal Opportunities Commission
    c. Uganda Law Society
    d. National Council for Disability
    e. Uganda Foundation of the Blind
    f. National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda
    g. National Union of Women with Disabilities in Uganda and others. 

The Committee consulted the following documents:

    a. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.
    b. The Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006.
    c. The National Council for Disability Act, 2003;
    d. The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014;
    e. The 2030 UN Sustainable Development Goals;
    f. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, among other documents.

Mr Speaker, I need to briefly point out the justification for this law. I have already mentioned that it is a constitutional obligation for this Parliament to make a law of this nature.  

Secondly, I would like to point out that Uganda ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its optional protocols in 2008. Therefore, Uganda has an obligation to ensure that its laws are aligned in accordance with the provisions in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Mr Speaker, we are on page 4 because I am not reading verbatim. Many Members here are aware of these issues. This Bill complies with the requirements for gender, human rights, equity and the Sustainable Development Goals. You may recall that Parliament is required to take into account Bill compliance with gender, equity and human rights while carrying out its legislative mandate. We scrutinised the Bill and came to the conclusion that it complies with this requirement.

Let me point out some observations and recommendations on page 5. We noted that even though Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Long Title does not make reference to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 

Our recommendation, therefore, is that the long title and clause 4 of the Bill should be amended to make reference to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its optional protocols. 

Secondly, we noted that the interpretation section leaves many important terminologies that are essential for the purpose of addressing the rights of persons with disabilities in this country. The committee recommends that the interpretation section be amended to take into account the nature of disability as an evolving concept and also to address the missing provisions.

On page 6, we noted that several provisions that are contained in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities are missing in this Bill. These include the rights of women, children and youth with disabilities. The committee recommends that the Bill be amended to expressly include the rights of women with disabilities, children and young people, both of which have specific needs.

The committee also noted that there are no adequate sanctions to enforce compliance with the law. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill be amended to include sanctions in the event of non-compliance to the obligations created in its provisions.

On page 7, we note that several obligations that are supposed to be undertaken by the State are not included in this Bill. This means that non-state actors are required to do much of the requirements to enforce the rights of persons with disabilities. The committee recommends that the Bill be amended to include affirmative action by the State in regard to accessibility, inclusion and other responsibilities of the State.

On page 8, we point out the response of the Executive in relation to our concerns. As the committee was about to conclude deliberations on the Bill, it brought to the attention of the minister the major concerns and gaps in the Bill, as highlighted by stakeholders and noted by the committee. The committee is pleased to report that the minister responded positively by coming up with a number of proposals to address some of the concerns as detailed in Appendix A of this report.

While generating the final amendments, the committee took into account the minister’s proposals. The committee is grateful for minister's proposals, which are fully captured in the amendments attached to this report. 

Conclusion

The committee, therefore, concludes that the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018 be amended to create a broad-based coalition of State and non-state actors in the fight for the promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities in Uganda.

The committee was cognisant of the fact that the question of resources is a central one. Uganda is a developing country with a limited resource basket. Nevertheless, the committee was of the considered opinion that the funds indicated by the steps necessary to achieve the full dignity and equality of persons with disabilities in Uganda on equal basis with fellow citizens are not necessarily prohibitive, especially in terms of the great public policy and purpose entailed by such a measure. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill be passed with proposed amendments attached to this report.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, I have already proposed a question for your debate. However, let me inform you that I received a request from the Member for Persons with Disabilities (National) that she needs to make an intervention in this debate before we open it up. 

There are some issues that she needs to point out as somebody from the sector and likely to be affected by this particular Bill, either adversely or positively. I am going to give her five minutes to speak on this matter. Hon. Juuko?

5.18
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, National): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing the amendments to the Bill; it has been long overdue. Let me hope that when we pass the Bill, it will be implemented. 

There are some issues, which I feel should be considered when debating this Bill. I feel that the issue of the minister giving effect to the implementation of the different provisions of the Bill, at different times, should be reconsidered. When time comes to debate that provision, I will give details. 

On the issue of the minister having powers to amend the different Schedules attached to the Bill, some of these Schedules require constitutional amendments and are not within the powers of the minister.

Lastly, I will also provide full details of the debate on the structures to be used for election of representatives of persons with disabilities in Parliament and also the proposed methodology of electing members of Parliament to this House. This is again a constitutional matter and is also provided for in the Parliamentary Elections Act. I do not think this is the right time for us to work on it.

I request that as we debate the different provisions, I will provide detailed - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I would like you to lay the principles that will properly guide the amendments that you proposed. That is why I have given you five minutes. If you do not explain it now, at committee stage, you will not have time to do so.

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, thank you for this time. Members, when we go to the sixth schedule, which provides for the electoral structure of members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities, I would like to make the following comments:

Previously, the law provided for five delegates from each district to come and form a national electoral college to elect members of Parliament to represent persons with disabilities. While paragraph 1 of the sixth schedule provides for these five delegates, it talks about only three types of disabilities to be represented, including the youth and women. Personally, I would like to propose that the status quo remains because when you look at the coding in the second schedule, it talks about eight types of disabilities. Therefore, if we provide only for three types of disabilities, we would have left out the other five.

Secondly, paragraph 2 of the sixth schedule says that during the election of members of Parliament to represent persons with disabilities, the five executive committee members from each district shall assemble at the national level and constitute four regional electoral colleges. 

Mr Speaker, we have a provision in the Constitution, which provides for election of members of Parliament to represent people with disabilities. That law provides for these delegates to constitute a national electoral college, which elects the five members of Parliament to represent persons with disabilities in Parliament. However, there has never been a demarcation of constituencies amongst these national electoral colleges. 

Therefore, I would like to beg this Parliament to keep the status quo until we amend those provisions in the Constitution. 
I know that everybody would like to have a small constituency but I beg this Parliament to do things right. 

When we had the by-election of hon. Katuramu and hon. Nokrach, there was nothing about them representing a particular region. The two candidates with the highest votes are the ones who came to this House to represent persons with disabilities. 

Therefore, if we do not take that position until we amend the Constitution, elections will be done but after wards, somebody will go to court and have them nullified. Therefore, I beg that the status quo remains until we go back to the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act to demarcate these constituencies. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, debate is now open, starting with Bunya County East. We will use three minutes each.

5.25
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have tried to peruse through the report and looked at the stakeholders the committee consulted and I do not see the Ministry of Education and Sports yet that ministry would be one of the key stakeholders, if anyone is looking at the rights of persons with disabilities. 

We have to take our children with disabilities to school yet there are so many challenges in those schools. In school, there are children with different disabilities and specific needs. There are those who just need occupational therapists. There are those who need physiotherapists and there are those who need speech therapists. 

It is true Government has these institutions but the professionals are not there yet we have such children in those schools. If a child has a disability of speech and there is no speech therapist, one will have wasted their time to take such a child to school. 

Therefore, the committee skipped a very key stakeholder – the education sector. Even people who take these children to school for persons with disabilities are recommended to a certain doctor. These doctors charge a minimum of Shs 100,000. Why should somebody who has a child with disability pay that much? 

Secondly, the children in these institutions are paying a lot of money. Children in UPE schools are studying free but the children in these schools – we have schools here in KCCA that pay a lot of money. 

Consequently, this would have been a chance for children with disabilities to enjoy education, through this law. Now that you did not consult such a key stakeholder, I do not know what can be done. However, if the views I just presented are included in the recommendations; I will be very grateful. Thank you.

5.27
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report presented and recommendations there in. 

Picking from where hon. Waira has stopped, there are very few schools for children with disabilities in the country. For example, in the whole of Acholi sub region, we have at secondary level, only Gulu High School. In the primary section, we only have Gulu Primary School. Therefore, it burdens a disabled child to travel from Kitgum, Amuru and the entire region to come to those particular schools. 

Mr Speaker, it is high time Government respected the rights of persons with disabilities by creating more schools to deliver services to them. If need be, there should be such a school in each district across the country.

Secondly, teachers for children with disabilities are very few and scarce to find. Unfortunately, it is only Kyambogo University that trains such teachers. Therefore, Government needs to invest in training institutes for special needs teachers to attend to children with disabilities. 

Further still, looking at accessibility of buildings, many storeyed buildings do not have the provisions for easy access by persons with disabilities. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, it was resolved that Government crafts a policy for all structures to have a path for persons with disabilities to access them. However, most of the storeyed buildings cannot be accessed by persons with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Government for the affirmative action put in place for persons with disabilities, women and all other groups. However, I have one problem. As my colleague said, the election of members of Parliament for persons with disabilities in terms of affirmative action - I feel this is where we need to be serious as a country. When someone is voted Member of – (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Each time I go to my constituency, I am asked by people with disabilities why the Government has neglected them. It seems the funds we allocate to people with disabilities are too little that they do not reach our people in the districts.

They have representatives at the districts but from the districts to the sub counties down to the parishes and the villages, no kind of assistance is extended to these people. Therefore, it is my appeal that some special arrangement be made to reach all those people with disabilities at the sub county level, parish level and even at village level.

Perhaps, since forming Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) is the way to go lately, why don’t we form special SACCOs to help people with disabilities so that we can help them have a fair standard of living?

With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.32
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report because this Bill has been on hold for a long time. We should also thank the NRM Government which recognises people with disabilities and the emancipation and empowerment. 

Mr Speaker, the Bill centres mainly on representation and rights but I would like to assure this House that if Government wants to help people with disabilities, emphasis should be put on education. I know there are schools for special needs but they are at regional level and children with disabilities are all over. Therefore, we should put a system in schools such that whichever school you go, there is a facility that caters for people with disabilities.

One of the roles of Government should be to reduce the inequalities gap. If we want to help people with disabilities, let us say that a child who is bright should not pay fees but study free right from nursery up to university. Let it be made compulsory because when a person with disability is educated - like me - then the disability part of his body is somehow reduced.

Mr Speaker, let us put it in the law that Government should indirectly contribute financial resources to people with disabilities through fiscal policy. For example, if somebody with disabilities started a small business of up to a certain amount which should be specified in the law, they should be exempted from taxes. Why do we exempt Chinese and Indians and we leave our people out?

I thank the chairperson but we should make this law with soberness to help people with disabilities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.35
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson and the committee for this report. I would like to address my submission on the issue of the missing provisions. I am not happy with the fact that the Bill is silent about the statistical planning and situations of emergencies as far as people with disabilities are concerned.

Mr Speaker, in their consultations, the committee made various stakeholders. The education sector was missing but I would like to note that health is a key stakeholder as far as persons with disabilities are concerned. When you go to a hospital, women specifically are disadvantaged not only once but twice in that in the labour ward, for example, disable patients need a special bed.  

However, this could have been handled well if the stakeholder – the Ministry of Health - was consulted and a number of issues which regard the women with disability were included in this Bill.

To this note, I would like to say that there are so many issues that I feel this Bill have not covered. If we are to plan, which is also missing in this Bill and if we are to help the persons with disabilities; we needed to capture all these stakeholders so that the planning that should have been included should go a long way to help these people.

Secondly, the issue of other disadvantaged groups in the - before we broke for recess, there was the issue of Albinism, which when I looked at the schedule, I did not see it captured here. Therefore, it is my humble opinion that all categories of disabled persons should be included in the Bill, specifically for planning purposes, so that we make mention of all these categories so as to plan as a country other than - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of St Johns Junior Secondary School from Kyotera. They are represented by hon. Haruna Kasolo Kyeyune and hon. Robinah Ssentongo; they are here to observe the proceeding. Please join me in welcoming them. 

5.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill and I would like to start from where hon. Alum ended that the Bill should be comprehensive and cover all disabilities. For example, in South Africa, when a child is born with albinism, even the milk and everything that the child needs right from nursery until they finish school is provided by the Government, including diapers.

I know we may not have got to that extent but we need to realise and recognise the special needs of our people with albinism and to cater for them by providing the sunscreens, the creams that they need and everything so that we can encourage them to go through the school system.

Mr Speaker, I know we have schools with special needs but we need to concentrate on special needs schools so that we churn out teachers for these children. There are proposals that we should have teachers in every school to help these children but I personally find a problem with that. For example, the interpreters, are they going to interpret biology or all the subjects and at all levels?

It is important that we have special needs schools so that all children in, for example, one level are in the same school, learning the same subjects and are not disadvantaged at all. Therefore, the special needs schools and special needs teachers would be important to encourage our kids to go through school.

Additionally, we need to economical empowering them. We have seen persons with disabilities on the roads and in markets, engaging in trade while those who are able-bodied are on the streets begging. I think we owe it to them to empower and encourage them so that they can engage in business and exploit their potential.

Just like we have a special programme for the youths and women, we need to have a special programme for economic empowerment of persons with disabilities and also to carry out skills training so that we empower them. 

5.44
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the cover of the book - on the object of the Bill - is a statement that says, “To transfer the property of Uganda Foundation for the Blind to the National Council of Persons with Disabilities.” When I consulted the minister, she said that there are six properties. I remember that some time back there was land for the disabled in Wandegeya and it was “cannibalised”. I think they remained with only a small piece. 

At one time, they were given land near the old park and I think that land is also being “cannibalised”. Is this Bill going to make good of all those different properties and put them under one institution called the National Council for Persons with Disabilities - the institution that is going to hold this land in trust for all the disabled people?

As I was beginning my campaigns, one of the good things I did was buying a wheelchair for a disabled young man in Kagoma. The young man and people generally were very happy. I wondered, supposing there are 100 in the constituency, will I be able to buy all these wheelchairs whenever I go for campaigns.

That brings me to the point that the Government should plan for the people with disabilities. Wheelchairs should not be like a gift or a privilege. It should be that every disabled person is empowered and given means of transport.

In the public transport system, we buy taxis and put them on the roads but there is no provision for the disabled people to travel. You do not see them being favoured to travel. Even in public buses, we do not have a special place where a disabled person would sit. 

We should find a way of empowering these people to travel safely. Most of them are left on the roads until taxis run out of able-bodied passengers and then they remember them at around noon.

Therefore, we should provide in the law that we should allow –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR BOAZ NINSIIMA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for this presentation. I would like to address Members on the phrase on page 2 that says, “there are no demarcated constituencies”. 

Yes, we know there are no demarcated constituencies according to region as far as disability representation is concerned. We, however, know that this Parliament carries the aspirations of the society. Whenever there is a need, we have to provide. 

Mr Speaker, we know that PWD is a special interest group and it would have been better if they were represented according to their regions. For example, if I am from the central region and I do not have among the four Members a person from the central region, I will not feel represented. 

I have a feeling that we shouldn’t maintain the status quo. We would rather, even if it means amending the law, provide constituencies according to the regions - similar to the way it is done during election of the youth representatives - instead of saying that we shall maintain the status quo, which will not help our people. 

On the side of education, I would like to give a little information out of my experience. One time, in an institution where I used to work, we had a disabled child. We were looking for a school to enroll him. We were told that one of the schools, the only one actually, is Madera in Soroti District – (Interruption)

MS SAFIA NALULE: Mr Speaker, on the issue he has just commented upon, I have shared a lot with you. Even I would like to have a small constituency and I would love for our elections to be on regional basis because there should be a fair representation. 

What I mentioned in that very paper you are holding is that there would be other questions, which are not yet answered. For example, the law still says that we must have five voters per district. Now take an example where you may have about 30 districts in a region and you have 150 voters. If you have got five candidates standing, then you can have someone coming to this Parliament with only 26 or 30 votes. That is not fair.

When we go to the regions as of now, without amending the existing laws, then we may not have solved the issue of gender balance. That is why in the write-up I have shared with you, I propose that if there is any constitutional amendment, the best thing to do is to go for regional elections with two Members of Parliament per region and with an increment in the number of voters. 

MR NINSIIMA: Thank you, honourable. Mr Speaker, I was just giving a scenario – (Member timed out.)

5.49
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to re-echo one or two things in regard to what this amendment is all about and generally the way persons with disabilities are being treated under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Without adequate funding, whether we amend this law and make it one of those perfect pieces of legislation, we will have wasted our time. The disability sector is one of those critical sectors that depict the manner in which we treat this vulnerable group of people in society. Some of us who have travelled far and wide know the various provisions in those countries. I do not want to tie it to whether the country is well-to-do or not but the manner in which people with disabilities are treated, by way of providing for them, shows that indeed, those countries care about their people.

Therefore, this Bill must be fine-tuned with special provisions where we are going to compel Government, particularly through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to ensure that funding is available at all times. All of us here are candidates for disability. Therefore, when we encounter these unfortunate incidents, there should be an immediate response to help.

Mr Speaker, my support for this amendment Bill will be hinged on providing a sustainable resource envelope where Government will be able to respond to situations that result in disability and this resource envelope must be ring-fenced for this particular department, right from the ministry down to the districts and sub-counties where the beneficiaries are found –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not an amendment Bill; it is a new Bill.

5.52
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the Bill and pray that Government is as serious as we are. We have noted that the education sector was actually left behind. 

I have a problem in my constituency where we have many people with disabilities. We have had land, which we know belongs to the people with disabilities. It is found in a very high profile area; in Lubowa, along Kigo Road. However, every time we have gone to the ministry to find out what was happening to this land, they have kept on dilly-dallying and have even refused to give us a report about that land.

We feel that this land could be taken by land grabbers when in fact we are looking for land to put up institutions to help people with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development gives us a status report of that land. It is very expensive and we are not going to have any other piece of land if we lose this land. We definitely need it in order to give support to our people with disabilities. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.54
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the report and the good Bill. Most people with disabilities are complaining that the Government has forgotten about them. They complain that whenever something is prepared, it is for the youth and women; they are always forgotten. Therefore, I would like to put it across that those who are in charge should also think about the disabled because they are always complaining.

Mr Speaker, like a  Member has said, most of the disabled people we have, especially those who are leaders and do not have the capacity to walk, seem non-existent because they cannot access places where they could go and meet with others and even take information.

I would like to say that in this law, the Government should maybe provide bicycles for all these leaders at local government level for transportation. This is because they cannot do their work when they are immobile, when they cannot hold meetings and when they are financially unstable. The most important thing is to facilitate them with wheelchairs to move from one point to another. I, therefore, request that, that is done for them to be able to do their work.

Mr Speaker, it is good that a Member has said that these people need to be facilitated in education. They need to be facilitated in education from primary up to university because I know the Government is capable. Most of them are very brilliant. When you chat with them, you cannot believe what they have in their heads. It is a good proposal and I pray that we all support that the Government provides them with education from primary up to the level they can reach, for their good.

Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the colleague who talked about the SACCO but we need to first look at their transportation. If they can also be catered for like the women and the youth, then we can also create SACCOs for them so that they are able to look after their families.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the terminology is, “people with disabilities” not “disabled persons”. Can we reduce it to two minutes?

5.57
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the presentation and the Bill.

Mr Speaker, I am one of the tenants of the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) in Moyo District. Under economic empowerment, can the Bill look at the Uganda Women Empowerment Programme (UWEP) and whether it is helping people with disabilities? The same applies to the Youth Livelihood Programme and the Uganda Youth Venture Capital Fund. Are these programmes helping people with disabilities? 

We also have Operation Wealth Creation, the National Agricultural Advisory Services and the Presidential Initiative on Skilling and Retooling the Youth. Are people with disabilities being considered under these programmes?

Mr Speaker, most people with disabilities are cobblers; they repair and shine our shoes. Are they being given more skills and perhaps some capital? 

The youth with disability are also involved in sports. Are they being given balls and other necessary equipment? Recently, we paid tribute to a member who competed and was one of the fastest runners with one limb. They should also be considered because a healthy mind lies in a healthy body.

Lastly, there is something in the offing, especially in the NRM, where we are going to line up for party primary elections, if adopted. Will people with disabilities be helped to come and line up? Will those who are blind be helped to stand in the lines? Thank you very much.

6.00
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report.

Mr Speaker, I support what hon. Nalule has talked about. However, we need to look at the issue of increasing the number of voters. For someone to come Parliament with only five or 10 voters is just too minimal. I will give an example of Mityana District. The annual disability grant, which is given to Mityana District, is Shs 17 million. This money is supposed to be given to the disability groups and disability councils but it is too little. Therefore, I would like to request Government to increase the grant next year and put in place services where people with disabilities can be helped from.

Mr Speaker, crimes have been committed against people with disabilities; they are defiled, their properties like land are taken but when they go to a police station to report, they are not properly attended to, especially the deaf. Therefore, it becomes very difficult for the police to help them. Can we have centralised services under the law where such people can seek assistance in case of crimes. 

Mr Speaker, at health centre facilities, it is very difficult for a person with disability to be helped. I am not a health worker but the doctor may only use his or her senses that such kind of a person could be suffering from malaria or something else because they cannot communicate with them.

I would like to thank you once again, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

6.02
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I welcome the amendment to the Bill.

While we fight for economic empowerment, persons with disabilities are segregated at places of work. They may be qualified but due to their impairment, they are disqualified. Therefore, I think Government should come up with a law that requires big companies to employ these people in reasonable positions.

I remember last time when we put up incentives, the telecom companies employed people with disabilities to be venders of airtime. That was the highest level of employment they could attain yet many of them were qualified beyond that. I would like to suggest that Government comes up with more incentives and requirements for these people to be employed. Otherwise, we are just wasting money if they are educated but cannot be employed.

Mr Speaker, the properties for persons with disabilities are under threat. I hear the land at Kireka is under threat. I am told that land is not titled, the fences were broken down and people are already encroaching on that very important asset.  Government must find a way to protect these assets.

The other issue is on the institutions for people with disabilities. They are very few in the country. I had a case of a deaf child but when we looked for an institution to take him, we were –(Member timed out.)

6.04
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have also stood to support this motion particularly the object of the Bill, which is to promote and respect fundamental human rights of persons with disabilities and other rights as well as ensuring there is no discrimination.

When one looks at how people with disabilities are being treated in the community, there are a number of gaps. In the health sector – there was a day I went to a health facility and found a deaf and dumb woman who had come to seek health services. Unfortunately, there was no one to translate for her. The health workers tried to move around to see if they could find someone to help her; they did not find anyone. 

The Ministry of Health should take this up and ensure that in some of these health facilities, some staff are trained to help persons with disabilities for them to access services easily.

In the education sector - I remember when we were in the university, we had two blind students who used braille but complained that the papers they used for writing were very expensive. That meant that whereas we had a better access to writing materials, they had to do so at a higher cost. Government must look into such situations if we are to help persons with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, in some areas, you find deliberate efforts by Government to –(Member timed out.)

6.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to get the definition of persons with disability well. It is good that the issue of albinism has been brought to light. How about the mentally ill people? Are they disabled too? Do they live with disability? If they do, then how do they get helped when they visit health facilities? 

In Gulu, we have institutions for person with disabilities. We have Emmanuel Primary School - Laroo for the Deaf.   Actually, before I came to Parliament, the school was well equipped but now, it is completely neglected. We also have Gulu High school and Prisons Primary school, which are meant for people who are mentally retarded but they also have issues.   

Regarding health sector, we have Gulu Regional Referral Hospital where mentally ill people are not properly supported; that department is ill equipped and sometimes even with no doctor. I remember there used to be Dr Okello Oyok who treated mentally ill people but he died about five years ago. Since then, there is no doctor to attend to mentally ill persons in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, sometimes, when need arises, a doctor is called from Kampala to go and attend to mentally ill persons in Gulu –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS BETTY AOL: We also have centre for persons with disability. That institution used to function well but now, it is not and I think greedy people will grab their land.

I think people with disability should take interest in this centre and so, we should have a law that incorporates all such property and centres for persons with disability. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson going to respond to the specific issues raised by the Member for PWDs National?

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nalule for her submission.

I have two answers. We need to note that even among the vulnerable category of people, there are those who are more vulnerable than others. 

In the original Bill, we had four Members being elected countrywide but Members of Parliament have, in recent times, become more attached to their voters than ever before. The voters take their Members of Parliament personally. So, it would not be fair to elect someone from Masaka to represent someone from Karamoja.

Besides, there are various norms, beliefs, culture and traditions that cut across that cannot be replaced, even in the circumstances. The youth, for example, believe that nothing is for them without them, so we wanted to provide for the more vulnerable sections within the vulnerable community. 

This is why we left the status quo and only amended the fact that people from all districts will gather and then constitute themselves into regions; Northern, Eastern, Western and Central. So, within those regions, they elect a Member of Parliament among the people of the same region. That, to us, was a more representative approach. I thank you. 

MR ROBERT KASULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is, does this mode of election consider the gender aspect; the Woman MP or the most vulnerable? How do you select this? Is it guided by any other regulation or something to make sure that at least gender, the youth and the level of disability will be considered there?

Once you constitute the delegates’ conference, what about the national level because we have a national chairperson who is among us here? So, how is he going to divide the constituency? Lastly, is it going to be done in this provision or in the constitutional amendments? Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I would like to highlight the fact that for the people coming from districts, each has a provision for a woman representative and a youth. The rest of the members are general to persons with disabilities. So, as they converge - given the fact that they have all come up with provisions for women from each unit - chances are that there will be, in the Electoral College, women and youth to stand as Members of Parliament in the regions.

However, one member at the end of it all, after the four have been elected, will be elected from all the people who are there. They will converge and later elect one National Female Member of Parliament to the House to make a total of five Persons with Disabilities as Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, I was the first person to advocate for regional elections. However, I would like to inform this House that right now, the prevailing laws that we have - that is the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act - provide for election of five Members of Parliament to represent Persons with Disabilities using a national Electoral College.  

We need to amend the Constitution to demarcate constituencies so that we can go regional. I have told you that - with common sense - I would like to go for a smaller constituency. The other concern is about balancing gender. We should not apply affirmative action selectively. Why do you allow the four Members of Parliament to be elected at regional level, then you leave one person – the Woman MP – to traverse the whole country?

Mr Speaker, I just shared with you a case of the return of hon. Hood Katuramu and hon. Nokrach after the by-election. There was nothing like demarcation of constituencies. The best two with the highest votes were the ones who came to this Parliament. If we legislate, as the honourable minister is saying, believe me or not, somebody is going to go to court to have the elections annulled. 

That is why I requested this august House to take this matter through a constitutional amendment process so that we can –(Interruption) 

MS NAKIWALA: I thank hon. Nalule. Mr Speaker, this is not new. The Youth Act is very clear on this. There are five Members of Parliament in this House who are youth representatives. Each comes from a region and then at the end of the day, they have hon. Anna Adeke, who is elected from the entire country. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the question is, are they elected regionally?

MS NAKIWALA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, for record purposes, I beg to lay the report, together with the minutes of our meetings on the Table. Secondly, I would like to thank honourable members for their contributions.  I would like to say that most of the issues you raised are already captured in our amendments. I am, therefore, looking forward to the next stage of handling this Bill and I am sure you will be satisfied with our amendments. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will not be able to proceed to the next stage. The time is up. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at two o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 28 March 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 



Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


