

Wednesday, 28 March 2018

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I will cause an amendment to the Order Paper to accommodate the designation of Members to some committees by the Chief Opposition Whip. The Order Paper is therefore amended to accommodate designation of Members.

There are Members who had urgent matters. 

2.09
MR APOLLO OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Local Government a question. During this rainy season, bridges have been washed away by floods. Children cannot go to school, including those in one of the primary schools in Juba village –(Interjections)- It is a slum area in Tororo Municipality.

What is the solution? The local governments do not have funding. The local revenue has dwindled due to the confusion in the Taxi Park and the market. I would like an answer to this. The road equipment was recently given out to districts but as a municipality, we have not received any equipment. The state of our roads is not good.

Lastly, the Ministry of Local Government should come up with a solution so that the local revenue can be organised on a monthly basis. There is disorganisation and it is very difficult to collect money. I do not know whether there will be counter funding, because it is really bad. That is what I wanted to raise.

2.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the urgency of the matter and I will communicate to the Minister of Works and Transport to make sure that we do something about the broken bridges.

2.11
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the very poor state of Iraji Bridge in Pakele Subcounty and Atiak-Afoji Road.

Under the support to refugee hosting communities, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) gave Shs 900 million in 2014 for the construction of that bridge. It was abandoned in 2015 up to now and yet the money was paid. We are requesting that this bridge, which serves the local people and the refugees, be constructed.

On the issue of Atiak-Afoji Road, still under support to refugee hosting communities, the European Union signed an agreement with Government of Uganda in 2016 and Government is supposed to give €12 million. The European Commission has accepted to give the €12 million and commencement of the construction was to begin last year. The President promised that last year the construction was going to commence but up to now, we do not have any information concerning this.

I request Government to let us know whether they complied with the conditions given. Another condition given was that Government should ensure that the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is implemented before the release of €60 million. The rains have started and we are going to be cut off from other parts of this country. Have they complied with the conditions given to them, and when is the tarmacking going to start? We also need accountability and an investigation into the Shs 900 million given by UNHCR in 2016. Thank you.

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need a report from the Minister of Works and Transport on the status of the works that they had started and abandoned. I will instruct that ministry to get back to us, probably tomorrow.

2.14
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. As you are aware, the largest part of the country is receiving rainfall. However, in some places, these rains have caused havoc in form of floods and heavy downpour. Last week, over 50 homesteads lost their houses and 10 churches collapsed in Budaka Town Council. My people are now displaced. You can imagine the kind of hygiene and sanitation situation in that place. 

Mr Speaker, it is in this vein that I call upon the Office of the Prime Minister to quickly come up with some remedies and relief items to rescue our people and all the Ugandans who have been affected. I thank you.

2.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I have stood here a number of times to explain the procedure of handling disasters. There is a requirement that the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), who is the chairperson of the disaster committee in the district, makes an assessment of the magnitude of the disaster and quickly submits this to the Office of the Prime Minister. It is then that we can see what we have and mobilise very quickly to come to their rescue.

I would like to find out whether this was done. If it has been done, I will have to follow it up with the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to make sure that we rescue the people of Budaka.

2.16
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Several times, we have come here lamenting, however my people are still sleeping outside because of wild animals, including elephants and hippos. I remember the minister promised to bring a law and I had suggested we use what I called, “the people-park approach”; should any animal destroy someone’s crops or kill someone, at least there should be compensation. However, the law has been long in coming. 

Mr Speaker, people are sleeping outside. They no longer sleep in their homes. Women are suffering because of their men being at the trenches to keep those animals away. Not only that, there have been several killings. I do not know who gave the authority to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to kill whoever is found in the national park. They kill people but you will not get any sign of a dead body. A one Yoram was killed recently and several other people were killed in the national park but their bodies have disappeared without any trace; we will never see them again.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to come here and explain two issues. First of all, when is he going to bring that law which at least would include a people-park approach, so that the people can get to know the importance of animals? Now someone sleeps outside at night and digs during the day, and then the animals come and destroy their crops and go away without the person getting compensation. 

Also, the minister should come here and state clearly whether the animals are better than the people of Katerera or Ugandans so that we know. Right now, it seems animals have taken precedence over human beings.

Mr Speaker, we had agreed with UWA that the people who sleep outside should go to the national park and get dry wood to at least light fire which can somehow prevent some elephants from destroying crops. However, it is done in a corrupt way. Whoever goes there does it for commercial reasons. When farmers go there to fetch firewood for that, they are arrested and some of them are killed.

Mr Speaker, the people of Katerera are really touched. I do not know if in some other areas people are treated like that. In my area, people are tired. They are saying the minister should come here and tell us the final destination of our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you remember this matter of the communities surrounding the protected areas has been raised many times. 

2.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ruth Nankabirwa): Yes, Sir. Hon. Katoto has been very explicit. He is demanding for the minister in charge to come here and tell us when he will bring the law. Secondly, he also wants an explanation on how we have organised, as Government, for the coexistence of the fauna with the people surrounding the game reserves. The minister is, therefore, instructed to do so. It is because this is what the honourable member has requested. I will make sure I follow up.

2.21
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgency that requires Government’s attention. The urgent issue concerns the arrest and detention of Ugandans in Beni, in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). 

Mr Speaker, last Sunday, I received a call from a lady who identified herself as Mary Munaki. She told me she comes from Kasese but she works in Masaka. She said over the weekend, she had gone to her village in Kasese and her brother, called Kamungele, was arrested and detained in DRC and then released. When this gentleman was released, he came with a chit. He said those who gave him the chit told him I am their Member of Parliament and he should find a way of informing me that they have been detained in Beni since September last year, and they are detained in very harsh conditions with no food. 

The gentleman who gave the chit wrote his name; he is called Malyamungu Rasool and he comes from Agumero Clan, Palaja Parish, Kei Subcounty. When I tried to link up with this clan, I found they had also -(Interruption)– just a moment; let me finish this. When he gave that letter, he said his brother is called Adaku Jenis. When I tried to follow up and confirm the issue, the family members said this gentleman had disappeared since last year. They did not know where he had gone. Therefore, if the information is that he is in Congo, it could be true. 

My prayer is that Government tries to investigate this and establishes whether these people are in Beni. Secondly, if the circumstances under which they were arrested are such that they can be tried in Uganda, it would be better to retrieve them because I know the conditions in DRC are not easy. Some of these countries do not care about the humanitarian situation. 

Those are some of the issues. You can give me the information.  

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform you and this august House that one of my people called Sam Mugumya is also there in prison. This is I think his third year, and he is not alone. From my constituency, Rukungiri Municipality, there are six other members in prison in the DRC. Some are in Bunia and other states within DRC.

The Government has this information. We have requested the Government to allow one member from their families to at least visit them. However, we still have a problem, Mr Speaker. We still request the Government to at least support some of our people who were detained in that country because they are suffering too much. Thank you.

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the issue of Mugumya, I remember the Ministry of Foreign Affairs came here and gave a statement about what Government was doing with the DRC Government. Probably, I will have to follow it up with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Unlike with the other borders where our security agencies have a working relationship, we do not have such a relationship with the DRC. Today, there is a different Governor for that province and tomorrow, another Governor takes over. That is the challenge we have been faced with the DRC side. However, I will seek for more details on the issue raised by the Member of Parliament for Aringa County North so that we can use our embassy in DRC to track these people and see how we can negotiate with the DRC Government to release them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.26
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand here as the Woman Representative for Kasese District in Parliament. 

I would like to thank my colleague for giving such information regarding the people of Kasese. It would also, however, be very necessary, and for better management of this issue, for us to share information as colleagues so that even before we call for the attention of Government, we all have verified information. There are so many people who are carrying out dubious activities and they masquerade. You may find a person who says that they are calling from Masaka and they are calling you because you are their Member of Parliament from Kasese and yet the person does not even know the Member of Parliament.

Therefore, it would be in our interest as leaders to corroborate information. Before we come to the Floor of Parliament, as colleagues you can share and say, “Colleague, I have received this information in relation to your constituency, can we see how to verify the facts?” By the time we call for the intervention of Government, we should all know that it is a problem.

There are people deceiving us. Someone calls you and says that they are very sick and this and that. When you go ahead to follow up the matter, you find yourself a victim of circumstances. I can give an example of a gentleman who died yesterday. He travelled in a taxi and he comes from I think Masaka. He travelled in a taxi and his phone got lost. When he tried to call his number to see whether someone had his phone, the person who received the call said, “Yes, we picked your phone, come and pick it.” When the man went towards where he was directed, he was waylaid on the way and killed. I am told his body was dumped near Kabaka’s Lake. He was buried yesterday.

Therefore, such people may seem innocent as they call but they are not. You may not know the reason and why the person chose not to call the Member of Parliament but looked for the number of another Member. It is good for us to look out for our people in trouble but it would also be good for us to share information. You may find that a person is known to us yet they are not necessarily good in society or you may find that he is an offender. 

However, I would like to thank you, colleague, for stepping in for the people of Kasese. That is what it means to be a national leader without boundaries. It would also be to the advantage of all of us if that information was corroborated. I want to thank you, honourable colleagues. 

It is not that I am stopping Government from taking up the matter. Government should take up the matter and ensure that these Ugandans in other countries are helped, whether they have cases or not, so that justice prevails. However, we should also be careful because we may find conmen or wrong persons along the way who may call us for wrong motives. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that information. Let us be careful about how we handle those issues. 

Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Uganda Chess Federation, led by Engineer Emmanuel Mwaka. One of them is only nine years old and she is holding a title (Applause) 

Engineer Mwaka is accompanied by Nabuyondo Peace Naomi, the youngest Chess Master in Uganda and in the East and Central Africa Region. (Applause) She is only nine years old. We also have Maria Nakanyike, who is the African schools individual championship silver medallist; she is 12 years old (Applause). We have Arthur Ssegwanyi, the highest rated player ever in East and Central Africa, and then we have Nakabo Peninah, who holds the third highest chess title for ladies in the world (Applause). She has a trophy there to show. We also have Sabakuma who is world’s schools chess champion and Katumba Joshua who is a candidate master. 

Honourable members, this team of people are due to be participating in an international tournament, carrying our flag, next month from 20th to 21st of April in Europe and in May in another country. They will be seeking some help from you, Members, and from Parliament in general to support them deal with these matters. They are flying the flag without much support from us; therefore, we need to do something about it. Thank you very much for coming to be part of this deliberation.

In the strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we also have speakers of Pader, both from the district and subcounty level, together with their clerks. They are led by the hon. C.D. Lowila Oketayot. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE TO RULES 157 AND 183 OF OUR RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.33
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In accordance with rule 183, which changed the status of the Committee on Science and Technology from a standing committee to a sectoral committee, I would like to assign the following Members of Parliament who were Members of this committee as follows:

    1. Hon. Abacacon Angiro, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
    2. Hon. Katusabe Atkins, Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline;
    3. Hon. Kabanda Mary, Committee on Equal Opportunities;
    4. Hon. Oguzu Lee Denis, Committee on Equal Opportunities.

Also, in accordance with rule 157, I am withdrawing some Members from committees where they were serving and reassigning them to different committees as follows:

    1. Hon. Jackson Mbaju from the oversubscribed Committee on Local Government Accounts to Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases. 
    2. Hon. Turyamuhweza Fred, from the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) to the Committee on Government Assurances. 
    3. Hon. Robinah Ssentongo from the Committee on Local Government Accounts to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases.

In accordance with rule 184(5), I am withdrawing and reassigning the following Member to another sectoral committee: the hon. Ssentongo Robinah from Committee on Health to Committee on East African Affairs.

Finally, I would like to assign the newly elected Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality East, hon. Paul Mwiru, to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and the Committee on Trade and Industry. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names of the Members designated to committees. I put the question to the proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I had also asked my Opposition Chief Whip to let me leave the Committee on COSASE and go to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I thought he had reassigned me and I have been listening attentively, but I have not heard my name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would this be the right meeting to handle that?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. I do not know how his name was missed, but he had indicated to me that he would want to move to another committee. Accordingly, I propose that hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi be assigned to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and leaves the Committee on COSASE.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that.  
(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NODDING SYNDROME

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Following the discussions we had on this particular issue yesterday, we would like to propose a supplementary budget to this House of Shs 1.335 billion. We want to be able to send it directly to the districts to handle the emergency situation that we are in.

Mr Speaker, we would request that the House considers this matter instead of referring it to the Committee on Budget. I would like to seek your guidance on whether this can be possible now, so that I am allowed to move a motion to handle this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that you first present what you would like to present and then request for what you want Parliament to do. What are you presenting to the House? Honourable members, we need to bring a final conclusion to this matter.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to spend an additional Shs 1,335,294,000 for the intervention on nodding syndrome in Northern Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members of Parliament. Would you like to present your motion properly?

MR BAHATI: “WHEREAS section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resource over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget of that financial year without the approval of Parliament;

AWARE that there is urgent need for additional funds amounting to Shs 1.3 billion to facilitate intervention on the nodding disease syndrome in northern Uganda.

FURTHER AWARE THAT the required additional funds cannot be postponed to the next financial year;

NOTING, HOWEVER, that as indicated in the submission to Parliament of the Supplementary Schedule II, this request falls within the provisions of section 25 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that Government is hereby authorised to spend an additional Shs 1,335,294,000 for the intervention on nodding syndrome in Northern Uganda as…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish his statement. 

MR BAHATI: As table 1, which I am going to lay on the Table -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You did not read the prayer in full.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is Gen. Kutesa, a well-respected General, in order to play cards instead of listening to what they are saying about nodding disease –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, if he is denying it, I am an IT expert, let him bring his iPad and I will show him what he has just been doing a few minutes ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes when you pop your screen, many things show up before you get to what you really want to do with the iPad or any other equipment.

MR BAHATI: “…NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that Parliament hereby authorises Government to spend an additional Shs 1,335,294,000 for the intervention on nodding disease syndrome in northern Uganda as detailed in the Table here attached.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Does it require justification, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this House got enough justification during the last four sittings. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I propose the question? We have not done the other part which you wanted to do; it is part of your prayer before you conclude. 

2.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, I am not in any way against the sourcing of funds to help the victims of the nodding syndrome. However, I would like the minister to first guide me on why we asked for additional funding when in the budget of 2017/2018, under vote 014, Ministry of Health, programme 07, we have money budgeted for nodding syndrome to the tune of Shs 4.5 billion.

I thought that the ministry was only going to re-arrange within the sub programmes to see where to get what we want, and we handle the situation within the same vote under the same programme. I would like to be guided by the minister whether that money has been exhausted before even the end of the financial year, because that money was passed within the budget of this financial year by this same Parliament.

I am talking about the budget of financial year 2017/2018 which was approved. That money runs from page 405 of our current budget under the Ministry of Health. May I know whether that money that you budgeted for under the nodding syndrome was not received? If not, then we can go ahead and give the ministry additional funding -(Interruption) 

MR ALIONI: Thank you very much for giving way. I do concur with my sister. Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2017/2018, Shs 4 billion was approved. If you look at the way they intended to spend it, it was on salaries, allowances, workshops, entertainment, travels and they have used only Shs 1.7 billion out of the Shs 4 billion. We still have Shs 1.8 billion untouched and before spending that, they are again calling for additional funding. 

Why should ministers come to the Floor of this Parliament to talk to us as if we are not informed people? There is money which they have not spent, unless they want to convince us that they have already used the money for other activities of their own interest. So, they have the money; there’s no need to request Parliament to support additional funding. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the information I want to give to my colleague is that based on this expenditure, I strongly believe the money which was appropriated for this financial year is still there. Let them produce that money and we save the situation. Yesterday they lied to us, saying today they are going to process money and today they are bringing another motion saying they want additional funding. This is very unfair to the country. I am so disappointed.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, as I speak right now, this Parliament is about to receive a loan request to pay companies that lost their money in South Sudan. This loan request is being fronted as if it is more urgent than the lives of the people of Uganda. The loan totals to around US$ 50 billion but the minister is here telling us about a mere Shs 1.3 billion and he is emphasizing it as if it is a lot of money - (Interjection) - You will explain it later, honourable minister, at an appropriate time. 

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2017/2018, we budgeted for Shs 4.5 billion for the management of nodding disease. When you subtract the Shs 1.8 billion which they have spent so far, it leaves a balance of Shs 2.7 billion. This means that we should not even be talking about the Shs 1.3 billion which the minister is talking about; we should be talking about how Government is going to release the Shs 2.7 billion. 

Mr Speaker, I want us to be very sincere to ourselves. First of all, the Government has not even bothered to tell us the cause of this nodding disease. However, if they will not tell us the cause, they will force us to tell them the likely cause because we have heard about it and people have told us. Therefore, in the event that there are even rumours circulating that Government is the likely cause of this, Government must not delay at any cost to release the Shs 2.7 billion. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the motion which the minister has presented is misplaced and irrelevant. We must bring a clear motion and talk about the Shs 2.7 billion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have been debating this issue again and again. We received a supplementary request from Ministry of Health to cater for this emergency. 

The issue of accountability - how much money was received, how much money has been spent - is handled through another process. Because we received a request for supplementary funds, it is the request that we are processing now - (Interjections) - Yes! Please let me complete. We have to find a way of solving this issue. If the House is saying that we should first look at the accountability of the money that was appropriated to Ministry of Health for this, then that is what we do. That is not the role of Ministry of Finance.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I pray that the House is not used to steal or to answer the challenges in ministries. When a budget is brought here, the assumption of the House is that there is someone who is going to oversee how money leaves the vote for the intended activities. 

The only problem I see here is that almost all the money that was budgeted for the nodding syndrome, like the honourable colleague has said, is for travel abroad, allowances, fuel, buying computers, newspapers advertisements; the money going towards the victims is only Shs 100 million. In the financial year 2016/2017, we budgeted for Shs 4.4 billion for the same cause - (Interjection) - That is your budget. That is why I said the House needs to be guided on whether this budget we passed has now been set aside and we are implementing other things. Otherwise, programme 07 is about clinical services and it includes nodding syndrome. I do not know whether we are running away from this.

Mr Speaker, during the consultations yesterday, we agreed that we just look within this and see - (Interjections) - Hon. Bahati, listen to me because you were not there during the consultations but your ministry was ably represented. We agreed that we go and look at this budget. That is why I did not want to go into the expenses in as far as the sub programme is concerned. I did not want to go into the details of the budget under each sub programme because I knew that you would come to guide the House on whether these were not in relation to the nodding syndrome. However, if they were in relation to the nodding syndrome, I find it uncomforting to say that we are adding additional funding to the ministry to deal with the challenges of nodding syndrome. 

I support this and I ask Government to look for the money, but we should not use Parliament. We appropriated money under the budget that is currently running; tell us if it is not there so that we give you the money.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Minister of Health is in the House; I want to request her to tell the House how much money she has received for the nodding disease under this budget and whether that money has been exhausted. First of all, she can tell us whether it is enough and secondly, whether it has been exhausted so that the supplementary - (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, we have moved a motion and it is before the House; the House can make a decision. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, is the Minister of Finance in order to ask a colleague, who is the line minister, to tell us how much they have spent without telling us whether he released all the money that the Members are talking about here. He is the owner of the money. Therefore, is the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in order to start derailing us by asking the Minister of Health to tell us how much they have spent without first informing us whether he released all the money that was budgeted for this disease?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should be able to conclude this matter today. Honourable minister, can you confirm whatever money you have released to the Ministry of Health? Would you like to guide the House on that? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I request for five minutes to get the details on how much money was approved for the nodding disease and how much has been released to the Ministry of Health. In two minutes, I shall come and report. This is because the papers that we are receiving are still being received here. I think it would be fair that we give the House the right information. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. How many times have you adjourned the House for consultations to take place? Yesterday, we adjourned prematurely for consultations and earlier on, you gave the Government a lot of opportunities to go and consult. Right now, after you demanded a clear position on the nodding disease emergency funding, the same minister is saying we should give him time to consult. I think this is really insulting the intelligence of Members of Parliament and testing our tolerance levels.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is this minister in order to continue holding Parliament hostage? Even after giving him those five minutes, he will still come here and say that they either need another 10 or 30 minutes.  At this rate, we are going to spend Easter here waiting for the Government to consult and come up with a position. Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the documents that the honourable Leader of the Opposition has raised issues on are clear in two aspects. One is coordination of clinical and public health emergencies including the response to nodding syndrome. This means it was not the only thing. It says, “Including”, and that means there were other responses other than nodding syndrome. The second is coordination of clinical and public health emergencies including response to nodding syndrome. 

When you add up these figures, that is the total response for all other clinical issues and not only nodding syndrome. That is why it might be necessary for us to extract what was for nodding syndrome before we say this total figure was for nodding syndrome. Therefore, what was the percentage for nodding syndrome from these figures? It could help. There were many clinical interventions but what was for nodding syndrome? We shall then know whether the funds were sufficient or insufficient.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Minister of Health is going to give us the information. 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you for looking keenly at the budget of the Ministry of Health. 

As the Speaker has clearly indicated, that budget was for public health emergencies, including the nodding syndrome.  The Shs 2 billion at the top is for hepatitis B and then there is control of epidemics that follows. I do not have the breakdown and I cannot remember it. However, I have sent for it and I will be able to share it with you later on. Anyhow, out of that, only Shs 490 million was for nodding syndrome. I will be able to provide the details in the next 10 minutes when my budget and finance officer comes in. 

However, allow me to also lay on the Table what I indicated yesterday, that we had sent money to the districts. I was called a liar but I would like to confirm that indeed we had sent the money. I only got information that some districts had not yet received the money on their accounts but it was sent on the 9th. I lay this on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that document? 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will read it. Lira District general fund account received Shs 55 million –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are cases of nodding syndrome in Aromo Subcounty. 

DR ACENG: There is nodding syndrome in Aromo Subcounty and it has been there ever since. I have always reported nodding syndrome in Aromo Subcounty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct. Proceed, honourable minister. 

DR ACENG: Okay, perhaps I will start with the districts that the honourable member is so interested in – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

DR ACENG: Allow me to start with Kitgum District, Shs 16, 359,000; Lamwo District, Shs 12,795,000; Amuru District, Shs 6,969,000; Omoro District, Shs 669,000; Gulu District, Shs 669,000 - (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I am only confirming what I said yesterday. The last one is Oyam District, which received Shs 5,579,000. The total is Shs 73,000,000. I lay it on the Table. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, sometimes it is very important for Members to be attentive and alert and indeed they were attentive and alert. That is why they asked for a breakdown of the Shs 73,000,000.

However, last week, what we asked for was Shs 1.2 billion. Is the minister telling us that this was in response to Parliament’s directive that Shs 1.2 billion be provided to the affected persons. 

Mr Speaker, I seek further clarification on her first point where she talked about the Shs 55 million. You read to us the coordination of clinical and public health emergencies including the response to the nodding disease syndrome, which is the subheading, but when you look at the items there is nothing like nodding disease; it is all about general staff salaries, allowances, workshops and seminars, computer supplies and information technology. The other items are welfare and entertainment, printing, stationery, photocopying and binding, small office equipment and telecommunications. There is nothing to do with the nodding disease. Therefore, Mr Speaker, can the minister clarify to the House?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I requested for some time. I have called my budget and finance officer to bring me a proper breakdown. I am unable to give information on this because I have not read it. I beg that you give me 10 minutes to read it.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is based on the explanation we have just got. The money we budgeted specifically for the nodding syndrome is less by Shs 1 billion, according to the honourable minister’s explanation, because much of the money was for other activities. 

Our interest is to have money to save those who are still alive and the honourable minister has already proposed a supplementary budget in order to help those who are dying. Are we proceeding rightly to wait for the minister to account for only Shs 400 million yet without that accountability, what we need for managing the situation on the ground is more than what she is going to account for? 

Won’t it be right for us to proceed on this point, based on the days we have spent and the pictures we have seen, and we continue handling the supplementary budget? Since there are even relevant committees like that of health, can’t we defer the nitty-gritty to the Committee on Health and approve the supplementary budget so as to handle the situation on the ground? Mr Speaker, that is the procedural matter I am raising. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the discussions we have been having here were not highlighting a normal situation. When the budget was passed last year, I guess what we were looking at was not the situation we are looking at right now. It was a normal budget that was dealt with and funds allocated whereby every quarter, Shs 73 million would be sent to each of the nine districts. 

What has come out in the discussions in these so many days is that the issue has reached a stage where it needs emergency intervention. The question that the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development asked was whether the money in the budget was sufficient to respond to the emergency situation relating to the syndrome and it came to the conclusion that it was not. Therefore, the minister has come to ask Parliament to approve a supplementary to deal with the emergency issues while the normal interventions continue the way they have been continuing. That is my understanding of why the minister came up with this particular proposal. 

When I look at the letter that was forwarded to the Speaker by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this money is going to be sent to the local governments that are affected by this disease. It will not be sent to the Ministry of Health. I would like to read the last paragraph of this letter: “Based on the approval by Parliament, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will initiate the necessary action to pave way for the affected local governments to access the funds and it will be included in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill for the financial year 2017/2018.” That is what the proposal is about.

From what you have heard from the Minister of Health, they could afford Shs 73 million for nine districts per quarter. Therefore, can we deal with the proposal of the minister so as to solve this matter?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think that the minister is being diversionary. Yesterday, the senior Minister of Finance said that the money is there but that they do not know how - That statement was made on the Floor of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is the senior minister that had written this letter yesterday.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Can they withdraw the statement, which was made yesterday? Can they withdraw it because it went on record?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not here to withdraw it. This letter was written yesterday, 27 March 2018, and I received it today, 28 March 2018. It is signed by hon. Matia Kasaija. It could have probably arisen from the meeting that came after the sitting of Parliament.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Housing) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister convened a meeting after Parliament had adjourned yesterday. I represented the Minister of Health in that meeting. Therefore, I would like to add information that the money that the Minister of Health has just read was the last tranche that the ministry had. We agreed that it was insufficient to address the current challenge of nodding disease in northern Uganda - (Interjection) – It is about Shs 75 million. This debate was held yesterday. 

The Ministry of Health presented a budget of about Shs 1.3 billion. We took time to discuss the priority interventions, which have to be supported as emergencies. These include, among others, the provision of food to the survivors of the nodding disease and their families in their homes; facilitation of health workers and community development workers to do home visits and carry out rehabilitation, give psychosocial support and physiotherapy to these children. This is to be done as an emergency in April, May and June - the last quarter of this financial year. They shall also work out a comprehensive plan to address all aspects of revitalising the response to nodding disease in the affected areas, including opening the centres which had been closed.

Last night, we had a meeting with the ministries of finance and health and explored the fastest means of delivering the Shs 1.3 billion. We arrived at a conclusion that the fastest way could be through a supplementary request, which could be processed by Parliament, and then the money would be sent directly to the affected districts. 

In my view, the more time we take interrogating the procedures, the more we delay the reception of this money in the various districts and the purchasing of therapeutic food and other items. I would like to beg that if there are questions of accountability, checking whether the money was received by Ministry of ealtHealth and released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that can be done at another stage. This is because all the money which Parliament appropriates is audited. We have got committees of Parliament and the Auditor-General and that process can take place. Therefore, let us not delay the release of this money to help the suffering children in northern Uganda. 

Yes, all of us want accountability but we cannot start auditing this afternoon in this House. That is my prayer to the Members. We are all concerned about the situation in the north. Some of us have seen the children and their families and it is very traumatising. We have agreed that this is an emergency and we should release the money. 

Therefore, I beg the House that we support the motion moved by the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and approve this supplementary to facilitate the ministry to release this money. The issues of accountability and auditing can be done through the normal processes, which we are aware of as Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that be a good way to go, honourable members? We need to conclude this matter.              	 

3.17
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely concur with hon. Chris Baryomunsi, but some of the fears expressed need to be addressed. We are going to pass the budget but if you do not have emergency infrastructure to deal with the problem, it is going to be disbursed in the same way and then the results will be the same. 

The trouble we face now is that Government does not treat this as an emergency. That is why money can go through the local governments and through the normal Government bureaucracy and at every stage where this money goes, it will not only delay but there will also be administrative costs. Therefore, as we approve the motion by the minister, can Government tell us whether they have emergency infrastructure – not necessarily local governments - to deal with this the same way you have dealt with all the other problems that are of emergency nature? You cannot use the normal Government structures to deal with an emergency. I have seen your responses to cholera and all the other – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that the issue is not that we do not want to give money for nodding disease. I remember when I was in this House we gave Shs 14 billion for foot and mouth disease. This was for animals but now we are talking about human beings. 

The issue is that the budget allocation under health emergency was Shs 4.5 billion. This means that if Shs 1.5 has been used, we should not call for a supplementary; we should call for a release of the money under that budget line from the finance ministry, so that it is released to attend to that item. 

For the minister to come and say that now we need a supplementary under this would mean that actually, these funds have been released. However, when we pass money as Parliament, we pass it under the Appropriation Act; therefore, this money must be released by the Ministry of Finance. If the Minister of Finance informed us that they released the Shs 4.5 billion and it was used, that would justify the supplementary request and we would support it. 

What we are talking about now is that any money under the budget line which has not been released should be released by Ministry of Finance and if it is insufficient, then we are available to support the supplementary to top up and deal with the issue at hand. That is the issue. Even if you raise a supplementary, you must show the source of money. It is not true that when you want a supplementary, you just walk into Parliament and come with papers. It is a requirement under the law. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I think as a temporary measure, we can approve the request by the minister. However, they should come back and explain how they are dealing with this issue as an emergency, including by setting up a committee for example. This is because if you receive information from the districts and deal with it as it is, that is where you are going to have problems like sending Shs 500,000 to Omoro as if you are paying mabugo.

Government should therefore set up an emergency committee to deal with this as an emergency, which will also ease issues of releases and follow up. You do not necessarily have to rely on the current infrastructure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I now put the question on this matter? Maybe to help Members, let me read how the money is going to be distributed. I do not know the details but this is per district. The details are contained in another letter. This is what is here:

    a) Kitgum District Local Government, Shs 237,292,000
    b) Pader District Local Government, Shs 284,516,000
    c) Lamwo District Local Government, Shs 145,151,000
    d) Omoro District Local Government, Shs 170,727,000
    e) Gulu District Local Government, Shs 58,478,000
    f) Amuru District Local Government, Shs 68,300,400
    g) Lira District Local Government, Shs 24,619,000
    h) Oyam District Local Government, Shs 26,522,000
    i) Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, Shs 110,628,000

Central Level Activities

    a) Ministry of Health, Shs 60,400,000
    b) Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Shs 199,061,000

That is what is proposed - I have not heard Agago. Agago District is not there. 

MS LOWILA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for reading out those figures because that is where I really have a big concern. I clearly heard the figures you read and how this money is going to be allocated to the different districts. Can I seek clarification on the criterion that has been used? 

It is on record that Pader District has the highest number of children affected. From the figures you read, Mr Speaker, the amount of money that is going to Pader District does not tally with the level of the burden. Can I get clarification on the criteria used to distribute or allocate this money?

MR OKIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you followed our debate on the issue of nodding syndrome in the past few days, there was one critical issue that we all agreed had to be dealt with, and that is the issue of the centres that have been closed. However, when you were reading those figures, I did not hear any allocation for the centres to be re-opened. 

This is a very critical intervention that we are begging for in the interim. The two centres that have been closed are supposed to be re-opened but in your submission, Mr Speaker, I did not hear any allocation to these centres that are supposed to be re-opened. Can the minister clarify whether that falls within the kind of plea and emergency that we are seeking for, for these children? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The two centres of Odek and Tumangu are not part of the Government interventions as of now and the reason is simple - the person who put these up has not yet been able to hand them over to the Government or the local governments. Therefore, if there is going to be an intervention, there have to be discussions with her. These are the two centres that are closed. Therefore, let us leave that out for now. This is because we have these three months to deal with this emergency and in the process, also discussions will be held with Dr Suzanne to see how the interventions can go to the two centres. Let us not mix up these two things.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, maybe I would like to report that on the 5th of March this year, while addressing the nation on the Government interventions in as far as nodding disease is concerned, the Minister of Health informed the country that Shs 133 million had been budgeted for this financial year to respond to the nodding syndrome. This afternoon, she again informed the nation that Shs 490 million is the money that was budgeted for this financial year to respond to the nodding syndrome. During her press briefing at the Uganda Media Centre, she told the nation that Shs 73 million had so far been disbursed to the affected areas. 

Mr Speaker, I am failing to connect the two figures – the Shs 490 million, which is being told to Parliament, and the Shs 133 million, which was reported to the country. As we approve this supplementary budget, these are some of the questions that we would like the minister to come back here and address us on. In that way, we can be able to monitor our budget properly and to understand whether there are some people in the ministry who are failing the minister or whether it is the minister herself who does not know how to manage her budget. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification on two issues. The first is on the distribution of the Shs 1.3 billion. I have not heard Agago District being named and yet it is one of the districts that recorded cases. Besides that, the hospital in Agago District called Kalongo is handling some of the cases from Pader District. I also wonder why some districts, which do not even have cases, have been considered and Agago is not considered at all.

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister whether it is possible to reconsider this. Unless I have a problem with my ears but when she was reading the list of the beneficiaries of the Shs 73 million, which she tabled, I really felt the figures were very unfair. Out of the Shs 73 million, she is allocating Shs 55 million to Lira District, which has the fewest cases. She is allocating Shs 6 million to Amuru, Shs 6 million to Kitgum, and Omoro is getting only Shs 600,000. Did I hear it well? Is there any fairness in that distribution? Is there some other agenda behind such kind of distribution? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.33
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County North, Pader): Mr Speaker, this morning I talked to the responsible persons in Omoro, Kitgum and Pader because we were working with Caritas and members of Acholi Parliamentary Group to get the latest statistics. It was established that Pader has 2,247 cases and 82 have died. Kitgum has 2,167 and the deaths are at 224. Omoro has 383 cases and 55 deaths; however, there are 62 new cases in Omoro.

Mr Speaker, what this House should help with - Let me say this as formally as possible. I told my chairman LCIII, “If I do not tell you that anyone from Kampala should meet the victims, let them die at home”. This is because there are some people who are seeing this as money for them to eat. Therefore, we told our people that if they do not tell them to gather the nodding children, they should not do it.

Mr Speaker, in all fairness, there are 0.01 per cent reported cases of nodding disease in Amuru, Lira and Agago. This nodding disease is residing in the belt of River Aswa, and we thank the President for coordinating an aerial spray there. So we should not talk as if when money goes to the district, then that district is also going to be okay, when we have cases of children in thousands. 

Therefore, I appeal to this Parliament that if there are new cases, the ministry can have their own interventions but the areas where these children who have been living with the nodding syndrome in Pader, Kitgum and Omoro – 4,797 children – is where this supplementary budget should be directed. Therefore, I would like us to support the minister. 

As for the Shs 494 million advanced earlier for nodding disease, we have accountability committees here so this is diversionary. This Parliament cannot handle nodding disease indefinitely. Let us welcome this supplementary budget of Shs 1.3 billion. However, we have to agree on the districts that are worst hit. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be struck off the list; there is nothing like gender in death. (Applause) The Ministry of Health can use their other monies, which they have to do the monitoring and supervision. (Applause) Even the gender ministry has its own budget. 

Members, I implore you; later, I will request the Speaker to give me time to read to you the guidelines because if the money reaches the accounts of the districts - In Omoro, we shed tears because when the Shs 52 million arrived – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was Shs 12 million.

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, the previous one and not this one where they are just allocating like cattle. Omoro was given Shs 52 million in 2012. What the district did was to buy tyres for their cars, serviced their vehicles, bought internet and got allowances for going to the field. The children are the same way as if this Parliament did not send any money. 

I really want to thank this Parliament for the spirit they are showing. However, please, for the Shs 1.3 billion, we have had consultations and we have draft guidelines that this Parliament should pronounce themselves on. They show what the money should do. 

In Atanga, for example, in hon. Lucy Achiro’s constituency, there is a health centre with male and female wards. They volunteered the female ward for the children suffering from nodding disease and they combined the males and females in one ward. We should pronounce ourselves and say that a temporary structure should be put up for them, which can be done in three days, so that the women are not in the same ward with the men. These are the interventions we need as local leaders. There are four motorcycles, which are grounded and they need Shs 1.3 million. 

Mr Speaker, let me read the guidelines I am proposing. We will agree on the figures but you should help us on where the money should go. We request, as part of the guidelines –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, before we go to that, can we deal with the motion? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am saying as a condition precedent to the motion, the moment we pronounce ourselves on the figures, which I am support, give us some little more time to give the actual needs on the ground. This is because I know that as the presiding officer, you cannot do this. 

I support the motion by the minister and thank him for the initiative to bring a supplementary budget within one day. However, after supporting it, let us propose some guidelines that the minister can send to the districts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is before us. The minister should reconsider some of these figures and guide us on how we take the final decision; for example, Shs 120 million for the Ministry of Local Government for workshops and seminars and Shs 80 million to cater for allowances during this period of handling the emergency.

Honourable members, I would like to make a correction. The money for Lira District is Shs 5.5 million and not Shs 55 million. I think the minister read an incorrect figure.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to make an adjustment on the figures you have read. From the meetings we had yesterday, the Ministry of Health is not part of this supplementary. We have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - (Interjection) - Give me a second so that we can take a decision after knowing why this figure was proposed.

Mr Speaker, we formed an inter-ministerial committee, which is going to look at this issue from different aspects. The Ministry of Health is handling the clinical aspect while the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is going to handle social support and rehabilitation. We can make a decision on this but I think we should be told why that figure was allocated to them. The Office of the Prime Minister will monitor and coordinate this but –(Interjection)– Kindly listen; this is going to happen next financial year.

Mr Speaker, we are requesting for this money to cater for the emergency, and that is why we took a decision that it should go directly to the districts - (Interjection) – Well, there is the component of social support and rehabilitation but the House will take a decision.

Therefore, the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is Shs 199,061,000. The budget for Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is Shs 110,628,000. Pader and Kitgum districts, as hon. Odonga Otto said, have been allocated more money than others because of the situation obtaining there. The money allocated to Pader District is Shs 284,516,000. 

We will need your decisions because according to hon. Odonga Otto, leaders from northern Uganda were of the view that Amuru probably does not require these resources as of now. There is also Agago District and I do not know whether we can swap Agago with Amuru. That is a decision the House can take - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like to give the minister information.  There is a centre in Omoro District, which the President has committed to re-open. I have not even asked for a centre for Pader because the centre in Omoro is just a 20-minute drive from Pader and it can handle up to 700 children.

Even if there are one or two cases of nodding disease, even in Lira, this centre is a state-of-the-art facility and it can accommodate the victims. It offers feeding, education and music therapy. The facility is much better than a health centre II. It is not a matter of mentioning all the districts. In any case, Omoro and Kitgum districts should even get more money than Pader. I should not be selfish because they do not refuse referrals from Bolo. The centres are more advanced and can accommodate the children.

Honourable members, let us focus on the life of these children and not our individual districts. That is not going to help because when children are taken to Odek Centre in Omoro District, they are not chased away. They welcome them as Ugandans because they have better facilities.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify that in coming up with this budget, the District Health Officers (DHOs) had a major input. This is what we have proposed. We think that what we are proposing can help in the next three months and then the other issues will be handled in the budget for financial year 2018/2019. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we are to save Ugandans, we need to be precise in planning. What has come out clearly with the nodding disease is that children in northern Uganda are suffering. 

Someone made a very clear presentation on the Floor, highlighting what Government should do. One of the things that came out was that the centres did very good work and all of us saw the good work done by the centres. Secondly, there was a volunteer who did very good work and we saw her output, and the lady is still committed to come and help. 

I would like to propose that we should commit the money to re-open the centres and facilitate that lady to come and continue with her work as Government plans on how to sustain these centres, which have been doing very good work. Otherwise, all the money will end up in the air. 

We are saying the money should be given directly to the districts. In the newspapers recently, districts were accused for not accounting for money they spend yet you are pumping them with more money. Why don’t we commit the money to some good work for Ugandans? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have looked at this letter from the ministry and I will pick Amuru and Omoro.  Travel inland is Shs 51 million; is it necessary when the officers who are already in those places have their mechanisms under the budget of transport? The other aspects are workshops and seminars; do we need Shs 120 million? 

Those people already have their monies under their ministries to deal with those issues. We are talking about an emergency intervention for the next three months. For allowances, they have allocated Shs 80 million; is it going to be a special assignment to the people working in Government or is it part of what they ordinarily do?

Honourable members, I would like request you to look at the Shs 51 million, Shs 120 million and Shs 80 million and then take a decision on them, especially on how they should be redistributed.  

3.46
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to be on record in supporting the motion because we needed this money yesterday. I also would like propose something in regard to the allocation of this money. 

I have heard people saying this and that about their districts, which is okay. However, in Amuru District, the worst hit subcounty is Atiak and from Atiak to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is about 100 kilometres. It is in Okidi, which is located in the belt that hon. Odonga Otto was talking about.

When I was carrying out my campaigns, I found serious cases; there were two children in one family who were affected. We must make sure that these children, however isolated, whether they are in Kaberamaido or anywhere else must be catered for because they are children of Uganda. That is my biggest concern.

We must find a way to ensure that children who are in Okidi, Atiak Sub-County can access these facilities and are treated as children of Uganda. That is what matters to me and that is what I want to put on record. These children are the same. They are children of Uganda and I am very happy that finally, Parliament is agreeing on this.

I would also like to comment briefly on the Shs 73 million that is being given for the quarter for the nine districts. If I can give an example, Dr Suzanne Gazda, who established these centres that are being talked about, was almost using that amount in a day to take care of children with Nodding Syndrome. 

Our own Government allocates Shs 73 million in a quarter for nine districts. This is a big question to ask. This one is an American who does not even live in Uganda but saw the plight of the Ugandan children and gave her personal money. This should be a challenge to all of us. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.49
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the motion moved by the minister and I would like to appreciate the manner in which the House is proceeding.

However, my concern is on the allocation that was given. In 2012, when Government started intervening on the issue of Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda, there was a formation of inter-ministerial committees, which the minister has just talked about now.

If today we are talking about Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda and referring to this as an emergency matter, which needs to be intervened on and the minister comes up here and tells us that the same strategy of using the inter-ministerial committee is the one we are going to use, I am worried we may not achieve the goal.

Why am I saying this? In 2012, funds were given to different ministries and line departments, including Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to intervene on livelihood. However, at the end of the day - I was the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Pader District by then. What did we achieve from that inter-ministerial committee? The Office of the Prime Minister was put in charge to monitor and today, again, the minister is telling us the same thing. Are we really sure that we shall realise the impact of this money we are spending? We need to change strategies and approach. We should learn from the past.

The allocation of Shs 190 million to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is going to be a waste.  From the past experience of 2012, if we are to assess the impact made by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in the communities of Nodding Syndrome, I do not think we shall be able to appreciate anything in this Parliament –(Interruption)

MS NAMUKHULA: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I would like to give information about the money going to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The ministry already has line staff in every district. There is a whole department headed by an assistant commissioner with a budget. 

We are sending some little money to the districts to do the work and leaving this money at the centre, which is supposed to go to this department. Why isn’t the Shs 198 million also divided to the districts for the community department to do the socio-psychological work? Thank you. (Applause)

MR OKUMU: I would like to give additional information. Every Government ministry has operational funds. They also have contingency funds and also do re-allocation. There is, therefore, no need to budget for them on this money. Whether they are a district or RDCs and they want to do monitoring, they have their funds.  Monitoring should not always be attached to any emergency that comes up. The information is that this entire money should go to the centres. Let the other Government departments and officials use their operational funds. (Applause)

MS LAMWAKA: Mr Speaker, I am speaking from experience. There is no need to give money to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development at this point. We did not achieve much from the past. Why must we allocate such an amount of money? I am convinced that we need to change our strategy of intervention if we are to realise a difference with this current situation.

For us to achieve in this, there is need for us to look at critical areas, which we must spend on and allocate resources to, not flooding money across the board to everyone. The victims are not getting anything from this money. The money is not trickling down. We must show cause for allocation of funds from Parliament and that is why I am emphasising this. I thank you.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, with your permission, allow me to explain something. This budget was generated by the district health officers in the different budgets and it is based on the burden of Nodding Syndrome in each of the districts. I agree with Members that we can reallocate the money that is budgeted under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

However, the criteria should follow the principle of burden. The burden is as indicated in there. The districts that have more money have more burden. That is my humble appeal. (Interjections) Amuru has Nodding Syndrome cases and it cannot be removed from the list. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agago?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, with due respect, there are no Nodding Syndrome cases in Agago. (Interjections) The cases that were there – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable minister finish what she was saying, please?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, the one case that we had in Agago was actually a case from Pader and that case went back to Pader. We can clarify with the district health officer. There is no case in Agago. That is why Agago does not appear on our list, including the previous list – (Interjections)- Oyam has Nodding Syndrome cases and so does Lira. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministers for now coming clear on the issue of Nodding Syndrome. We pleaded as if these are not the children of this country but I am happy. They could not identify that it was in the budget. However, in the next financial year, we have to have a clear figure for Nodding Syndrome.

What I want to be handled procedurally right is, she stood on the Floor and said the allocation for the other Shs 73 million was Shs 55 million to Lira District and it was – (Interjections)- No, let her clear this on the Floor of Parliament that it is Shs 5.5 million. The whole House was saying, “Shame” and it is like she is biased towards Lira District and not taking care of the rest of these other districts. It is not acceptable, Mr Speaker. 

Also, let us not take these things on tribal basis. It is going to be very bad. Let us handle Uganda as a nation. All these children are for this country. Even one child who is sick matters. Let us not consider this based on the district or regions we come from. Let us take care of all the children of this country equally.

Therefore, withdraw that one. Thank you.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I sincerely apologise. It was a slip of the tongue. Lira was allocated Shs 5,579,000 and not Shs 55 million. I am very sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I am one of the Members of the Ninth Parliament who visited these children. I would like to state clearly here that while going to see the children suffering from the Nodding Syndrome, I did not attract any allowance. We were led by hon. Beatrice Anywar and we went there to specifically see the children. 

The procedural matter I am raising is whether the Minister of Health in front of us here has had time to visit that place. (Interjections) The reason I am saying this is; I heard on radio and TV when the minister was stating that there was no Nodding Syndrome and members from Northern Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, do not take us back; that is not necessary. We have gone beyond that point. We have reached where we now have to find a solution.

Honourable members, there is Shs 251,060,000 in this document that was given for allowances, workshops and seminars and travel inland. That money should not be there because it does not make sense because the ministries have their vehicles already. For the emergency phase of the next three months before the next budget comes in, this matter should not be there.
 
MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would wish to propose that the money remain there but be transferred for maintaining and running the centres so that it is directly spent on Nodding Syndrome challenges. However, we should not remove it from the budget. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am not saying we remove it. We should keep the money there but reallocate it.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the honourable members, allow me give some explanation. Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is a referral hospital with specialists. The money that is put under Gulu for workshops and seminars is to train more health workers on Nodding Syndrome management. The allowances –(Interjections)– I am telling you what it is, honourable members. It is for you to decide because the truth is; there has been gross attrition, which I explained to you. The health workers to manage the Nodding Syndrome are not there and this money needed to be provided for. The allowances are for outreaches, to move to the communities to treat the patients.

If the general consensus is that the money is removed, it is okay but I would like us to know there will be that gap. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, travel inland is Shs 51 million, workshops and seminars is Shs 120 million; I have not talked about fuel because it might be- This is in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Then, allowances in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is Shs 80 million. For whom are these allowances? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To supplement what the Minister of Health has said, we had a meeting attended by the district health officers under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister and they are the ones who generated this request. Like on the issue of travel, the centre is basically providing fortified foods to the children and also doing rehabilitation, which includes physiotherapy, counselling and other forms of psycho-social support. 

The children were sent back to their homes. So, we agreed that in the immediate within the three months, the health workers and the community development officers should be enabled to do home visits and perform the work which was being done in the centres before they are re-opened. Therefore, the health workers will be travelling from the health centres to the homes of these children to do the rehabilitation. So, that is where the issue of travel comes in. 

So, it is an essential element of managing the disease in the immediate. Then later, when the children are put in the centres, then that is- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for giving way. Honourable minister, let me give you a typical case of what happens in Pader. The sick children, as of now, are home with their parents. They are tied to trees because the parents have to dig. If they have seizures, we have village health teams that have been given local knowledge without pay. They are called and they ride their bicycles to help suppress the seizures. If the case is severe, they move to the health centre II and that is why we are saying Odek, Bolo, Atanga, Okidi and Tumangu should be empowered. Then, in very extreme cases, they now move to the referral hospitals in Kitgum and Gulu.

The cases of referrals are less than five per cent because many parents have learnt to live with the problem. They cannot even afford transport to go to Gulu. 

Therefore, those allowances, I would plead with you, honourable minister, let it go to the districts so that the village health teams are empowered. The people at the referral hospitals do not need allowances. The problems will find them there.

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Lamwaka and I was in Bolo where some of our members shed tears. I think I was the only who tried to stay strong because of the situation there.

On the ground, the people were asking for only one thing; that we give local solutions to local problems in terms of giving guidance on how to manage this problem.  They suggested the local facilities there be empowered and the children are withdrawn from the villages and taken to those centres so that people can go back to do garden work. These people are living in prison; the children have imprisoned the parents. The parents cannot go to the gardens.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are opening up. We have covered that ground already.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I have got the information.

MR AOGON: That is the information. Mr Speaker. It would be proper to divide the money that has been supplied to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development into three. Add the money to the centres so that we take it to the children. Otherwise, it will remain on the road.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member. Your information is right but what we are saying is that this money we are approving is for the emergency in the three months. In the next financial year, when the centres open, the children will be taken to the centres- (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: The clarification I would like to get from you is twofold. First, if you look at the budget items read by the Speaker, only Shs 15 million will go to feed the affected victims of Nodding Syndrome. 

The biggest chunk of the money will go to those people who ordinarily drive cars and the like. Therefore, how is that aspect of the expenditure helping the victims for whom we are here to appropriate?

Secondly, the bulk of the money going to the districts is only recorded as sector conditional grant non-wage. It is not even clear how these particular districts will apply the money. Most likely, the same formula and criteria will follow; travel inland, workshops and seminars, fuel, lubricants and oils, allowances, maintenance and the like. Is it possible to show this House how this sector conditional grant to these districts will also be used to help the victims of the Nodding Syndrome? (Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: Mr Speaker, there is the issue of allowances and I know that in civil service, there are different types of allowances. We have night allowances and then, we have what we call safari day allowances. All of them are inland but safari day allowance is something like Shs 12,000 which is paid to an officer to go to the field and come back to the duty station.

In this case, I would think that this type of allowance can be applicable to those officers, the community development officers and the health personnel who are going to mobilise the patients so that they come to attend health service in the centres. However, when you refer to the full night allowances, it is much more and it is not necessary here. 

Therefore, in my view, what we could recommend is a safari day allowance of Shs 12,000 and then, perhaps fuel for motor cycles so that these community development assistants and health assistants can go to the field and mobilise the patients to come and attend the service. That is what I am referring to. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Nobody is saying that there should be wasteful provision of allowances. Nobody in this House should agree with that. The Shs 15 million hon. Niwagaba is referring to is special food for children admitted in Gulu referral hospital. It is not for the entire budget of feeding the children.

However, I would like to suggest that we can re-look through the figures at committee stage and we increase or decrease in accordance with our rules. But the major point I was explaining is that we can adjust the figures but also we must understand how the management of the cases will be handled in light of the fact that the centres are closed, and these workers will have to be enabled to reach out the children wherever they are in the homes. That aspect has to be captured as we discuss these figures. I can take the information -(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: The information I would like to give the honourable minister is that when we reached Kitgum District, the medical officer told us they have guidelines from the Ministry of Health. And of the guideline hey have indicate that when they receive money for nodding syndrome, then they have budget guidelines on how they should allocate the money in percentages to every RDC, DISO, DPC. 

That is the information we got and when we see the money going to the district, we appreciate. But would you, if these guideline do exist anyway, may be the mistake I made was not to ask for such guidelines; I admit that. However, if these guidelines exist, I would say that for now, the three months under which we are receiving this money as an emergency response, let us put these guidelines aside and we look at - 
We may not necessarily say, let the RDC, DPC and DISO have part because we are looking at the magnitude of the matter and an emergency; let the RDC and DPC use the money that they have for monitoring and the biggest part of the money goes into medication and the feeding of the victims. Thank you.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I would like to state here very clearly that we do not have such a guideline. If it exists, I request that it is laid at the Table. Our guidelines are very clear when we send money. It is for special meals - I am talking about the little money we were sending. Special meals, fuel for outreaches, allowances for outreaches and management of the patients and outreaches for the health workers. If such guidelines exist, I kindly request that it is laid at the Table.

The RDCs, DISOs have never participated in management of Nodding Syndrome. The LCV chairpersons do participate but we have never paid them –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just information to help the Leader of the Opposition. In Pader, we were given the list of how the money, which was spent and I read the list in one of the rallies in Bolo. There was political monitoring, LCV chairman Shs 150,000 per day, driver Shs 75,000, political monitoring alone took Shs 7 million of the over Shs 40 million you gave us. I read it publicly in a rally.

Therefore, what the Leader of the Opposition is saying is true and as the money goes, we may have to, at an appropriate time, review the guidelines together so that the right person benefits. Thank you.


MR BAHATI: Just one final comment on the use of sector conditional grants. It is the only way we can send resources to the districts. We have wages and categories of budget items that we use to send money to the districts. However, in this particular case, we will follow with the communication on what this grant is going to do so that it is not mixed up in any other thing.

I agree that if there is any specific item or guideline that we need to give the district so that this money is used for the purpose of handling this emergency, we will do that. However, I would like to beg that we can proceed and approve the supplementary so that we handle the situation of Nodding Syndrome as urgently as it is required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you making suggestion on what you are going to do with the figures?

MR BAHATI: We are proposing that we can remove the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and-(Interjections)– no, we are saying we remove it first and then reallocate it. Therefore, we are removing it and re-allocate it. (Interjections) No, for the resources for Gulu Referral Hospital, the Minister of Health has explained why it is very important.

Some of these are just part of the charter of accounts but if you talk about allowances, you need this money in the referral hospital to sort out these issues. That is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the workshops and seminars under the referral hospital, she has explained that it is trainings. However, the budget line in the charter of accounts it appears as workshops and seminars. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that we remove the money from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and then allocate it to the different districts. The best way would be on a proportional basis -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was hoping that you would have done that already by now. 

MR BAHATI: The burden basis needs calculations, which I cannot do now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that there is a factor that you used to come to those figures. Apply the same factor to the balance of the money accordingly if you use the same criteria you applied to that money.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, in three minutes we shall add the figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The workshops under the referral hospital are for training. Please, can we move forward with this matter?

MR OJARA: On the same matter. When this money is put in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and allowances is removed, it goes to almost about Shs 199 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us be clear so that we do not waste time. The money that is going to be re-allocated is Shs 199 million, which is for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. All the money under Gulu Referral Hospital will remain as it is. Can we deal with the issue of the Shs 199 million? Please, let us not complicate this.
 
MR DULU: Mr Speaker, we are talking about only three months and we are not going to hire new experts. We are talking about people who are already trained to handle this within this period of three months. I do not understand why we are allocating money to train people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The people who were trained left.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, for this money to be able to achieve its objective, we should allow leaders of those affected areas to have input of how it should be allocated. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, could you help us with the figures, please?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the purposes of approving supplementary estimates for interventions funding for the Nodding Syndrome.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET SHS 1,155,294,000 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018 FOR UTILISATION OF INTERVENTION OF NODDING DISEASE SYNDROME IN NORTHERN UGANDA 

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I move that we re-allocate this figure. I am moving these funds from this vote to the following - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, there is no money on vote 018.

MR BAHATI: It is zero

Vote 155 - Gulu Regional Referral Hospital

MR BAHATI: Gulu Referral Hospital remains as it is, Sh 110,628,000. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, although in principle I have no objection to the money allocated to Gulu Referral Hospital as indicated, my concern is the items of expenditure -  and I beg to move that the items of spending that money, particularly allowances, lubricants and the like be removed. And the money be re-allocated to feed the children in that hospital who are suffering from the Nodding Syndrome. 

DR ACENG: Mr Chairman, the money for special meals under Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is used to feed critical patients who are referred there and admitted and it is a special diet of high protein because they come with severe malnutrition and that is only Shs 15 million.

The allowances as I indicated before are for outreaches because the health workers have to go to the community where the patients are. They spend the entire day there and they need to be facilitated. 

The workshops and seminars are for training, you explained it already.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this matter has been explained over and over again; what is the final figure?

MR BAHATI: Shs 110,628,000

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is vote 165 honourable members I put the question that the amount Shs 110,628,000 be appropriated for purposes above.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 508 - Gulu District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Shs 78,478,000 –(Interjections)– We have adjusted the budget -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we shall deal with the issue of how this money is going to be used by the districts in terms of guidelines. Let us pass the figure and then the guidelines will be issued to show the districts how this money should be utilised.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, when the Leader of the Opposition left Kampala, hon. Betty Aol had alleged that there are nodding disease victims in Loyo Boo yet there was none. We even had to cancel the meeting. 

We have districts which have 2,000 people and there is no case of Nodding Syndrome. The one at the referral hospital is more than enough to handle issues at Gulu District, because if we appropriate it now, when we reach Omoro, Pader and Kitgum, there will be no money to remove from. Therefore, I insist that we stand over that money allocated to Gulu and dispose of others.

DR ACENG: Mr Chairman, there are cases of Nodding Disease Syndrome in Gulu. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the amount of Shs 78,470,000 be appropriated to vote 508.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote – 527 - Kitgum District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Kitgum District Local Government has Shs 267,292,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 267,292,000 be appropriated to Vote 527.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 513 - Lira District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Lira District Local Government has Shs 34,619,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 34,619,000 be appropriated to Vote 513.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 547 - Pader District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Pader District Local Government has Shs 324,516,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 324,516,000 be appropriated to Vote 547.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 570 - Amuru District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Amuru District Local Government has Shs 78,300,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 78,300,000 be appropriated to Vote 570.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 572 - Oyam District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Oyam District Local Government has Shs 36,552,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 36,552,000 be appropriated to Vote 572.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 585 - Lamwo District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Lamwo District Local Government has Shs 175,151,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 175,151,000 be appropriated to Vote 585.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 615 - Omoro District Local Government

MR BAHATI: Omoro District Local Government has Shs 219,727,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the amount of Shs 219,727,000 be appropriated to Vote 615.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding _)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered a supplementary request to intervene for Nodding Disease Syndrome in Northern Uganda and approved it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker I know that we are tired and in a hurry but there is no case of nodding disease syndrome in Lamwo, so, you cannot allocate Shs 190 million. We have to be fair. We could give that money to Kitgum that has lost 224 children. I am asking that we recommit the funds.

MS OKETAYOT: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to hon. Odonga Otto that much as the committee that went to the ground did not reach Lamwo, there are cases of nodding syndrome in Palabek Ogili and Palabek Gem - that area bordering Pader District has cases. Therefore, let us be fair, as you said, and we take care of those children.

MR OKIN: Mr Speaker, let me give more information as well. According to the statistics that we received, you will find out that Pader has 2,247 and Kitgum 21 –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we please deal with the issue raised.

MR OKIN: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. Omoro has 383. When you look at the way this money has been allocated, I think it is not fair because if Lamwo whose numbers you were not able to establish is getting 196 yet Kitgum has 2,000 and you are giving only Shs 2.63 million, are you being fair?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are the issues with Lamwo, honourable minister?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, there are cases of nodding syndrome in Lamwo District and I can provide the statistics but I do not have them now. However, I previously provided the statistics of the Nodding Syndrome cases; they are there in Lamwo District.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE APPROVES A SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET OF SHS 1,335,294,000 FOR REVITALISATION OF INTERVENTION FOR NODDING DISEASE SYNDROME IN NORTHERN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have a total on the motion. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, after the adjustment that we made using the burden of incidence, the total figure comes to Shs 1,334,233,000. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House approves the supplementary budget of Shs 1,334,233,000. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that Parliament authorises Government to spend additional Shs 1,334,233,000 for revitalisation of intervention for Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, you directed that this money be spent pursuant to guidelines. Can you direct the minister to lay the guidelines on the Table for us to monitor whether the guidelines so issued are in accordance with the spirit of the debate captured in this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we have a summary of the items that would be covered by this money? Just give us the guidelines right now and then we will finalise it later. What are the issues to be covered by this money?  

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I beg that I lay comprehensive guidelines on the Table tomorrow. However, the major issues to be covered include food, outreach services and clinical management of the patient. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Tomorrow, we will receive the full guidelines and adopt them. Is that okay? Thank you, honourable members. 

MR BURUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, four people died in Cheptui River, which connects Karamoja sub region. Through your wise guidance, Mr Speaker, you directed that the Minister of Works and Transport should come and make a statement informing this House why innocent people perished on Cheptui Bridge. 

Mr Speaker, I can see the minister here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the statement ready for this bridge that broke and the matter came here last week? 

4.41
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Azuba Ntege): Mr Speaker, the statement is not ready. I request to present it next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But in the meantime, have you done anything on the bridge to facilitate movement of people? Is there a temporary structure there? 

MS NTEGE: Mr Speaker, just for information purposes, that bridge is part of Muyembe–Nakapiripirit and it had been put out of use. Everybody, including the police, was aware of this. Notices were put up informing people that the bridge was not supposed to be used as of that time. 

It is unfortunate that the accident happened but the bridge was out of use. There were also procedures guiding people that there was a bypass where they were supposed to pass. Thank you. 

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate. It is true that the bridge was completely out of use but remember, that bridge connects seven districts. I have been talking about it all the time – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has just said that there was an alternative bypass for use. 

MR BURUNDO: No, that bypass also broke down sometime back. As I speak, Mr Speaker, there is nothing completely. Like the minister has rightly put it, they stopped people from crossing this major bridge. There was no alternative and as I speak now, nothing is going on and the whole region is completely cut-off without a solution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there no alternative to the bridge where usage was stopped? 

MS NTEGE: Mr Speaker, I request that I give the answer to that at a later stage. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Before this incident, the committee had visited this bridge twice and we brought it to the attention of the minister. However, it is surprising that the alternative has not been worked on. That is why people risk their lives because they have to cross from one side to the other. 

For the last two weeks, we have been trying to summon the minister and the chairman of the board of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to address these issues. We have had to send them away because when one comes, the other misses. 

We have summoned them on this matter for the last time tomorrow. We have also directed that after tomorrow’s meeting, we need to go with the minister again for the third time to visit the bridge. This is because we cannot stand a situation where colleagues cannot even reach their constituencies after this incident. We have been there twice and they have given us guarantees but nothing has been done. They have failed us on this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you been able to cross to – 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you very much. I was there over the weekend. I went through that road to the point that we are talking about, where the vehicle was swept off the bridge. The bridge is bent, very low and both sides have chances of vehicles sliding off hence killing people. 

There is also a diversion which is dangerous. The owners of the diversion have said that one cannot pass through without paying money and people are always standing there all the time. When I went, they told us to pay money and people paid money to pass through a bad road; so, that is the situation there. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. I think you are the only honourable minister that has been very useful. 

Mr Speaker, when you see a colleague being truthful despite collective responsibility, then you know there is a big problem. The minister herself has not gone there – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now hear a commitment from the minister on the Floor of the House. You have made the point, honourable. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport as well as the military used to have temporary mobile bridges. However, they have not been able to provide them. Therefore, let the minister respond to the comments made by the minister who was there a few days ago.


MS NTEGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, the ministry used to have many bridges but at the moment, we have none in stock. It is true that the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Attorney-General have been called for a meeting tomorrow. The meeting was supposed to take place last week but it did not due to technical reasons. That is why I beg to give a statement next week. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVICTION OF RESIDENTS OF APAA VILLAGE, AMURU DISTRICT

4.48
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The statement I am about to make has been posted on the Members’ iPads. This is a statement on the evictions in Apaa area and it also touches on the death of a civilian called Okello in Adjumani District, which occurred on 27 March 2018.

There has been a longstanding dispute over the boundary of Amuru and Adjumani districts. This boundary dispute was resolved on 23 October 2017 when the Government resolved the issue through a communication delivered by the Minister of Local Government. The area of contention was Apaa that was confirmed to be in Adjumani District. 

However, in spite of that resolution, some leaders have continued to claim that Apaa is in Amuru District and have told the local community to continue paying allegiance to that district.

Besides Apaa having been confirmed to be in Adjumani District, it is also a gazetted national park reserve as well as a national forest reserve. Both the National Forest Authority (NFA) and the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) have been sensitising the people to leave the gazetted area and Zoka Forest since October 2017 when this declaration was communicated. However, because of the influence of some leaders, the advice has gone unheeded.

On 6 March 2018, the District Security Committee of Adjumani resolved that a joint security force comprising of Uganda People's Defence Force (UPDF), Uganda Police Force, UWA and NFA rangers should take appropriate action to remove the encroachers from the gazetted land.

The incident on Friday, 23 March 2018 occurred around 16.00hrs when the combined force I mentioned above were on patrol in Apaa. This joint force was attacked by a gang of 18 people wielding spears, pangas and arrows at a place called Acholi Bur, east of Zoka Forest. The gang charged towards the joint force and the commander ordered the men under his command to withdraw. 

However, the gang took advantage of the withdrawal and charged
towards one private Tibaikana and surrounded him. He fired three warning shots in the air and one on the ground but a one Paipus Okello continued to advance towards him with a panga aiming to cut him. The soldier, in the circumstances, was left with no option but to act in self-defense and he shot at Okello who, unfortunately, died instantly. 

The attackers ran in disarray and the following items were recovered from them: two pangas, four spears and 16 arrows.
This incident was registered at Adjumani Police Station where the recovered weapons were exhibited. 

We made the following observations:

(a) 	Apaa area had always been a hunting area managed by UWA and without human settlements before its gazettement as a forest reserve.
(b) 	Loggers and charcoal burners are camped in the gazetted area illegally for purposes of making money while destroying the environment. 
(c) 	Some occupants of the forest reserve had started vacating the forest reserve voluntarily until some local leaders started discouraging them to leave. 
(d) 	The joint force was officially deployed to save the environment by stopping illegal charcoal burning and unauthorized logging. 
(e) 	It has been since established that the purported court injunction stopping evictions from the gazetted land in question does not exist.
(f) 	The border between the two districts of Amuru and Adjumani as demarcated are currently being manned by police on both sides of Adjumani and Amuru.

The way forward is that the UPDF command in the area has constituted a board of inquiry to investigate the incident which occurred in Apaa on 23 March 2018, under which Mr Okello died. In the meantime, the suspect has been put under custody as investigations continue.

The people of Amuru and Adjumani have been called upon to remain calm as the encroachers on the forest reserve are being sensitised to leave the forest reserve peacefully. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, would you like to -

4.55
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement notwithstanding the fact that I intend to find many flaws in it. I would like to know from the minister when this particular land was gazetted. In your statement, you claimed that this land used to be a hunting ground and that it had no occupants. If it was gazetted at the time you are yet to tell us, what formed the considerations by Government to gazette it?

If the people you claim are encroachers and they are being forced out because they are encroachers, can we know when the encroachment began? Which particular people encroached on this land and what actions were taken when encroachment began? I would like to remind you about the limitation period, especially in respect to individuals getting ownership of land under the limitation period and whether that land belongs to them or not? 

However, if Government is to be honest with itself and gazetted this land when there were people in occupation, did Government compensate the then occupants who were the legitimate land owners? If Government did not compensate them, what plans do you have to ensure that our people live peacefully and freely alongside the protected environment? Thank you.

4.57
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the statement by the minister and it sounds like the issue of Apaa is just a recent thing. The minister himself knows very well that when he was a minister of local government, he participated in this matter. We had some interactions with you over the same matter. You remember very well that the Minister of State for Lands travelled to Gulu, to Apaa and you are quite aware of the controversy that arose out of that.

Therefore, the issue of Apaa has been there. Last year we met the President and the same issues were raised. Why do we behave as if we are in those olden centuries? If our people in the past who could not even communicate amongst themselves were able to crisscross, interact and live in harmony, what about us today who are able to communicate and understand issues?

There are four issues in Apaa

The issue of administrative boundary: you say it has been resolved. Granted. Let it be in Adjumani but there are many issues that will always be asked. For example, we were paying graduated taxes for so many years, where were the people of Apaa paying taxes? We voted in many elections, where were these polling stations? If it was error and now it has been discovered that it is in Adjumani, it is alright because it stays in Uganda. Let us go to the next issue.

Since you say that the issue has been resolved, that it was an error that people were voting in Gulu - it was Gulu then and it is part of Adjumani now. 

However, the fact remains; that language you are using, talking about encroachment is misleading because there were people living there. Let us address the issue of boundary. If Government has now discovered that it was a mistake and that area is Adjumani, it is okay because Adjumani is in Uganda. There are many Madis and Acholis who live across. That is done.

The second issue is the right of ownership of that land where the people were living; that is what you are not clear about because people have been living there. They did not go there yesterday. You are actually lying to claim that those are encroachers who have gone for charcoal. Those people were chased because of the war. That is why after the war, they returned. This charcoal thing is just a recent thing that has been taking place.

Thirdly, if we come to discover that that was a wild life area, there are procedures Government always takes. It has happened elsewhere. I have never seen UPDF and other kinds of forces deployed in Apaa deployed elsewhere to evict people. Why Apaa? 

When you were a Minister of Local Government, you refused to go there because you did not agree with the approach that was then taking place. There were heavy deployments of UPDF loaded with artillery, Self-Propelled Guns (SPGs), Rocket-Propelled Grenade (RPGs) against citizens of this country. Why must you bring such a force? 

Government always has an approach of either to resettle these people, or if the population is much, to de-gazette the place. It is as simple as that. We are not dealing with refugees. We are dealing with citizens of this country and, therefore, the state must take responsibility.

The fourth one is the issue of human rights. You have violated the rights of Ugandans. You have murdered Ugandans. That is not the first person killed in Apaa. How many people have been killed in Apaa? 

We went there in the previous Parliament, the entire leadership, even you, Deputy Speaker – you have travelled there. You saw the situation in Apaa. A whole commissioner of police was heading the operation. UPDF was led by colonels. People were pulled and tied up, they were surrounded. UWA was there. People were subjected to all forms of suffering. You violated the rights of Ugandans. Why do you treat citizens like that? Therefore the question in Apaa is also about rights. You cannot mistreat people to that extent. What bad motive is there?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is not the first attack that has happened. The minister has given his version to justify his office but the fact remains that even as recently as last year - you remember the attack with bows and arrows on the people of Apaa. Where were you as UPDF when people were attacked and killed? Why were you not protecting these citizens? Citizens of Uganda must all be treated equally. You remember that story very well how people were hit with bows and arrows from behind and in front. They were evicted in all – where was the UPDF and where was Government?

The issue of Apaa will take long to be resolved. As people of Uganda, we need to live in harmony. I have no problem with administrative boundaries. Those are temporary things. Administrative boundaries are created from time to time. There is no problem with that but the nitty-gritty of some of the issues – 

There is also a rumour that that place being secured so that some refugees who now want to settle permanently in Uganda can get land. There is that accusation. I thank you.

5.04
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to the minister’s statement regarding the issue of displacement in Apaa. I earlier thought that the minister had very deep notes and previous studies that he could use to help us understand more. However, when he made his statement, I wondered because I respect the minister a lot in terms of the law and even his works in the ministry before. I am now very worried because of his statement in regard to the issue of Apaa.

It is very clear that during the insurgency in the north, the current victims that have been displaced again actually sought for this placement in trading centres and left those places in Apaa.

As they left, UWA and National Forestry Authority (NFA) took advantage from 2002 to go and begin gazetting these places as part of NFA and UWA. It is very embarrassing for the state to take advantage of victims of war in Northern Uganda. 

It is tragic to now say that the land they are now in does not belong to them simply because Government, at that time, could not take care of those that were displaced from that area. It is very disheartening to turn them around to become perpetrators. 

How could Government go ahead to legalise its action on victims that sought protection in internally displaced people’s camps? Sadly, to date, when they went back, they are now being attacked. Now they are being said to be on a land that does not belong to them, that they should leave. 

I request one thing, Mr Speaker, that this land be de-gazetted and given back to these communities that lived up to 2002 in this land.

Secondly, Government of Uganda should also explore - in 2010, we were signatories to the displacement conference in Munyonyo where Ugandans said they would take the initiative to come and follow up what they called the African Union Model Law on Displacement. 

To date the Office of the Prime Minister has not even produced any Bill regarding displacement. We have displacement in three categories; conflict, economic and sometimes political. When you look at all these, we have not done this. We have only remained with IDP policy but the law is not there. Under international law, even the people of Apaa have the right to remedy on what they lost. 

Therefore, there are two options, we either move for de-gazettement so that these citizens are taken back or we seek for remedies and these people are given due compensation –(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Lyandro for giving way for me to give this very important information. I would like to inform the august House that since the voting started in Uganda, the people of Apaa were voting in that area. As we talk, we have two polling stations –Valentino A and Valentino B. It is quite unfortunate that the minister said there were no settlements in Apaa.

Secondly, we have four people who have valid land titles given by Gulu District Local Government within that area. Two people were shot dead in one of the people’s land with the land title which is still valid. We have all the copies of that land title when we went to court. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the information I want to provide to this House is that some of the information that was given to the minister was to satisfy the interest of those people and we know them. Let us follow the right information. We are the people who come from that area and that is our land. Our parents, brothers and sisters are staying in that particular land. We need to speak the truth for the betterment of our people. Thank you.

MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, let me now conclude. I insist that we need to explore the issue of degazettement and if Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and National Forestry Authority (NFA) continue with their actions, I think it will tantamount to structural violence. This is because the way it is going, you may even be seen – as the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs – to be part of what I will call “conflict entrepreneurs” in situations where citizens were suffering during the war. 

I am very clear, honourable minister, and you are very near to me to have listened through the microphone and even straight. I insist there are only two alternatives. We move either for compensation for these victims –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already said that.

MR KOMAKECH: Yes, that is for emphasis because it is very painful to hear that even Okello was shot because of self-defence. It is very defenceless and the minister should even withdraw that statement. Thank you.

5.10
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Government for having moved to the level of announcing itself on the border position. I agree with the position that the people of Adjumani, Amuru and beyond have co-existed and we still co-exist. Therefore, when we are talking about rights over ownership of land – as we co-exist – it should never be on tribal basis. That is my advice to Government.

When we are debating this, let us avoid tribal sentiments. We have intermarried and let us have the circle continue so that others who are not coming from Amuru or Adjumani would be able to help us because these are national matters.

Mr Speaker, no one loves the loss of lives of any person in this country and beyond. Therefore, the reoccurrence of the death of people over this land and other things are very unfortunate. However, the issues of security are paramount and do not depend on one side. Provision of security begins with us. Both people from Amuru and Adjumani have got a stake to ensure that there is security and protection of lives of people.

Mr Speaker, I pray that this House maintains that Government averts the reoccurrence of the death of people regardless of where they hail from. The security in both areas should be strengthened. It is not about seeing people dying and we come here to request you to talk on these issues. The Government has got the mandate to protect the lives of Ugandans and beyond. The Government has got the right to provide security for the property. Therefore, I am of the view that Government should be given all it takes to ensure that there is safety of our lives and property regardless of tribe.

Mr Speaker, the people of Adjumani have agreed and have continued to maintain their stance on the conservation of wildlife reserves. They have agreed on maintaining the forest status in that area. We are not ready for anything to do with the degazettement. The issue of boundaries are clear. If any person is moving a motion for degazettement, the administrative positions need to be respected. The people of Adjumani are not for any degazettement. This is what I wanted to say. Thank you.

5.15
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. However, I think we should move away from this business of thinking that once a minister gives any statement it satisfies us. First of all, hon. Adolf, you are a lawyer and know the ingredients of self-defence. When you read what you have put here, you cannot give a justification for the killing of people.

Secondly, as the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, I want this to go on the record that at least Ugandans trust the UPDF. When you say “I am bringing police and UPDF soldiers in front of you” people will prefer having UPDF next to them. Look at this situation. Your report betrays itself. You talked about “a troop patrolling”. As the minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs when you talk of “a troop” I do not know how you have classified it – whether it is a platoon or company – but you can tell us.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, at least we have generals in this House: Gen. Moses Ali, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire and I have seen another one just there. When soldiers are patrolling, the way they move and even handle a gun you will tell the difference between them and policemen. A soldier who is trained and he is going to face people who are likely to attack him, holds the gun facing up so that when he is to shoot the bullets go high, not on people. 

In addition, where exactly do you shoot somebody if you are to shoot? If you shoot in the chest, the intention is to kill. Already here we are reading that they had two pangas, four spears and 16 arrows. I do not know whether they had arrows and bows. That is what they are saying and bows are not talked about. How do you use arrows to kill people –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO ENGOLA: Mr Speaker, I just want to help him with more information that this was a team which was patrolling in the park and they were attacked with those weapons, which were mentioned here by the minister. They opened fire in the air several times but the enemies advanced to them with pangas and all kinds of swords, bows and arrows. You cannot wait. Did you want them to be cut and -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The allegation the minister has brought forward that some gangs moved with spears, pangas, bows and arrows is wrong.

When the attackers arrived at the home of this young man, Okello, where he was with his family members, they asked him to run. When the boy started moving, they shot him from the back. As we talk, we have the postmortem report indicating that the boy was shot in the back. Is the honourable member in order to allege that the boys were moving with bows and arrows, pangas and spears and yet it is the UPDF that created that kind of scenario? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are factual matters that I am not aware of. However, if there is proof that the bullet was from the back and not the front, that would be another matter for another time. I do not have the facts and so, I cannot rule on that point of order.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, I am happy that the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs has given that kind of information.

During the by-election in Omoro, we caught him with his soldiers in a Government vehicle. I ran after him and attacked him with his soldiers and they did not shoot me; I have a video of it here. You can imagine - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did you do?

MR SSEWUNGU: I found him in Omoro - we had a DP candidate who was also contesting in the by-election and the minister went to campaign with his soldiers in a Government vehicle. I was with the President of the DP Party, Mr Norbert Mao. We ran after the minister with his soldiers but he ran away. I attacked him but he did not shoot me yet he sent defence for someone who shot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying you attacked the minister?

MR SSEWUNGU: That is what I am saying. If he could not shoot me, he should not defend others who have made mistakes.

Mr Speaker, I would like to beseech the minister that when land disputes in districts – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know the rule on microphones. You can raise the information without using the microphone. 

MR SSEWUNGU:  I will take the information.

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Thank you very much, for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Ssewungu that the issue of the land boundary is not only in Apaa. Last week on 18th March in Otuke District, we had people from Abim District in Awach Sub-county. Over 300 of them came to Otuke and our police officers could not withstand them. They came with many pangs to attack our people. When police intervened, they went back and on the following day, these people came with guns and confronted police.

These people who came – during the insurgency, they disarmed all the arrow boys in Lango and disarmed the Karimojong. I do not know why these Local Defence Units (LDUs) have still remained with guns. There was even gun fire between the police and the arrow boys. After the scuffle, they looted three cows.

The issue of land boundary is not only happening in Apaa. It is happening in Barimai in Otuke District, Napak, which is another border of Otuke and Amuria. Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to ensure that there must be total disarmament and not leave any portion of communities to continue robbing people as far as boundaries of land are concerned. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: I would like to begin by requesting hon. Adolf Mwesige to look at Makindye Military Barracks. It is one of the busiest areas in Uganda. In Makindye, soldiers drink with civilians and enjoy themselves but we do not hear that kind of incidence.

I would like to request that for the time being, we must help the UPDF not to go the same way the police did in terms of shooting. Even when we have operations here –

During the by-election in Jinja East Constituency – Mr Speaker, you saw what happened; you could easily talk to the soldiers and they controlled us better compared to the policemen. Honourable minister, your ministry should be defending us. Do not give reports. 

In fact, honourable minister, have you taken time to go to Apaa to meet the people and find out what exactly happened or are you just fetching information to appear here? If you need a chopper to go there, the UPDF has it. Fly to Apaa, speak to the people, and establish the facts so that you can find the exact issue. I rest my case, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MS C.D OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find difficulties comprehending some of the issues that come on the Floor of this Parliament because of the incompetency and the information given on the Floor.

Just yesterday, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Dr Chris Baryomunsi - I am grateful he is in the House - gave information on this Floor of Parliament that compensation was not done because of court injunction. However, today, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs in his statement has said that it has been established that no court injunction existed and both ministers are Members of the Executive but giving contradicting information more or less at the same time.

Again yesterday, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs denied the involvement of the UPDF in the eviction. Today, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is now justifying the actions of the UPDF. Sincerely, I find many contradictions that indicate some ill intentions.

As far as the land of Apaa has been confirmed to be in Adjumani – I do not want to argue about it – the minister in his statement confirmed and gave evidence of the people who have been occupying that land. The minister said that the joint force was attacked at Acholi Bur. I do not know who gave that name to that particular area.

Mr Speaker, the issue of Apaa is not new. On the Floor of this Parliament, I made a statement on behalf of Acholi Parliamentary Group at a time when we also lost our dear ones. We gave evidence of the infrastructure like schools and health centres that were put up by Government in this very place. My brother has already talked about the polling stations. What are really the intentions of all this, making our people and children die and suffer?

We appeal to Government to come out clearly and let us know what these intentions are all about. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We are about to exceed the one hour which is for the ministerial statement. I am going to ask hon. Akol – hon. Dulu, would you like to speak?

5.29
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, hon. Lucy Akello is telling me to calm down and talk with sobriety. It pains, especially when the honourable minister is talking about some of the issues, which I thought - as Government, you should be thinking about the citizens of this country.

I personally met with the 4th Division Commander in his office and in our discussion with him - which is recorded although unfortunately I have not carried my recorder today. I should have played it but if you want it, I will get it – he made it very clear that the officer who shot this man made an error. He did not mention that the soldiers were attacked. 

I made a phone call to the Commander of the Defence Forces which is recorded. If there is need for playing it on the Floor of Parliament, I will do it. When I called the CDF, he said he was not aware of the operation in Apaa. The only operation that he had championed and ordered the 4th Division to do is for evicting those who went with their cows illegally to Acholi sub-region. It is recorded.

I feel hurt when the minister comes here and says there is no court injunction. I would like to lay it on the Table of Parliament. The court injunction is here. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Housing for his statement yesterday because he knows and is aware of what he was talking about. 

I would like to bring it clearly here that all activities that were taking place, including the opening of the boundary and the action of the Minister of Local Government to go and declare that the place is in Adjumani, were all done illegally. There is a court injunction that stopped all those activities, including eviction. 

You wonder why the Minister of State for Housing yesterday came on the Floor of Parliament and told you that they could not compensate or do degazetting of the place because there is a court injunction, yet they can afford to get four different forces in this country, including the UPDF and all of them to carry out eviction.  

I beg to lay this on the Table. This is the court injunction which was issued by the High Court of Gulu on 15 February 2012. It states, “It is hereby ordered as follows: That there is a temporary injunction against the 1st and 2nd respondents and their agents and servants from any further eviction, destruction, confiscation or conversion or interfering with the land rights, occupation and uses of land belonging to the applicants in the areas of Lakang, Pabbo, Apaa in Amuru district, pending the determination of the main suit.”

This case came up for hearing on the 15th of this month and the court adjourned it to 29th of May. Therefore, all activities that are taking place, whether reopening the boundaries that you are talking about; or the declaration that Apaa belongs to Adjumani or whether you are talking about the eviction that you are doing; are all being done illegally without respecting the other very important arms of Government.

I personally wrote to the Minister of Local Government, objecting to the boundary administration unit launch between Amuru and Adjumani districts. In a letter signed by hon. Lucy Akello and I, we informed the minister that this issue is before the courts of law and that what they were doing was illegal. I lay this on the Table.

When the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs was talking about the activities that the people were patrolling Apaa, I personally went to the area. Fortunately, I took pictures of all that happened there. I have pictures of the huts of people which were burnt down. 

I have a picture of a community school which was burnt down by the soldiers; a picture of food items of people which were all burnt. I even have a picture of three people who were badly beaten and injured and another of a Mzee who lost his son and was shot in the back. He was crying and I was with him. I lay them on the Table.

It pains especially when Government behaves like the LRA. If you know what happened in Northern Uganda during the war where our people suffered in the IDP camps and then you find a Member of Parliament from Adjumani district who comes here and says, “We are not ready to de-gazette the place.”

The people were removed from their homes to IDP camps in 1996. When they were in the IDP camps in 2002, you moved to Parliament and gazetted their land and you said this would be for animals. In other words, you are demeaning human beings in Northern Uganda, especially those who were displaced.

When they talk about voluntary return from 2006 - Government asked people to voluntarily return to their homes. As they go back to their original homes, they tell them that they are in the game reserve and should leave the place. It is unfortunate. This is not a normal area where you can talk about a forest reserve or game reserve. This is a unique situation. Think about the human beings who suffered in the war and are now suffering with the Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda.
It is unfortunate that you can come to this Floor and say you are not ready. It pains even more to realise that they are even bringing people from Adjumani and settling them where they have evicted the people. You even realise that there are other parts of it which have been given to investors for sport hunting. It is painful.

My request is simple. People of Apaa belong to this country. The Government has two options; to either give them alternative land where they can go or de-gazette the place. Thank you very much.

5.36
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the issue of Apaa is not the matter people are talking about here. The issue of Apaa stems from the insincerity by the leaders who are fighting the locals.

It is very unfortunate that up to now, they do not understand the suffering of our people there. As I speak now, people from Pabbo and Lamogi are not on talking terms. People of Lamogi feel that the people of Pabbo have cheated them in distributing free land that belongs to the people of Adjumani. It is on record.

If you go there right now, this is what you will get on the ground. 

Mr Speaker, if this land belongs to your ancestors, you will wonder whether you will begin measuring and distributing the land that people from Pabbo should have this side and the people from Lamogi should have the other side. They will kill each other. You can imagine a situation when we went there with the Minister of Local Government; hon. Akol took to drinking and he started inciting people when everybody else was seeing.

The issue of Apaa is the local leaders there who incite the people not to obey the law. That is the issue and not anything else. We went there one time and many people were going there too. We got a man whose name I have forgotten, but I had written it down somewhere. When we interviewed him together with people from UWA, he told us they were transported there by some of the leaders. Among the leaders he mentioned was the then LC III Chairperson of Pabbo, Mr Ojara. I then asked him where he was before, and he told me he was in Pabbo, but not that particular area.

So, instead of the Government providing transport for picking people from where the animals are to their original places - you can imagine this kind of situation. Before that, an area survey was carried out by both - (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. I would like to inform my colleague on the concern about the burial grounds of those who died. If it can be traced, most of them were not even buried in Apaa or in Adjumani. Also, people are still questioning how only men could die when it is a mixed community created by God. If people did not transport themselves to attack - those are the issues being raised. Thank you.

MR DULU: I thank you for that information. Fortunately, some of us came for those burials because we are relatives - (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, I wish to bring to your attention that in the cultures of Acholi and Madi, we do not kill women in wars. Even from the 3rd up to the 7th of June last year, when they attacked, women were beaten only, but not killed. Even recently when they attacked the people there, they did not kill women; they killed only men. 

As they said here, we have been living together in harmony and they know this culture. Is it in order for her to come on the Floor of Parliament and say because only men were killed, then the land does not belong to them when we even said very clearly that we have land titles? If need be, even tomorrow, we are going to lay them on the Floor of Parliament. We have elections which were done in Apaa in 1980s and yet you are saying there were no human beings there. Then, what were those polling stations created for? When census was done in 1980 in Apaa - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR AKOL: Is it really in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That sounded more like a clarification.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, what some of these leaders have forgotten is that we are relatives. Some of us came for those funerals. You can imagine someone killed in Apaa is transported to be buried in Pabbo Trading Centre. If that is your ancestral land, why wouldn’t you be buried there? Another dead person was taken to Nwoya. 

The other time, when we asked the elderly man, he was very open. He did not know about these people’s trick. He said they were told there is free land there and that is why they went - (Interjections) – my prayer is that these leaders who take to drinking when ministers go there and incite people openly be brought to book. I thank you.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is Parliament of Uganda and we are leaders of this country. If we went down to our constituencies, you would see how much the local people are killing one another because of land wrangles. It is true the war disorganised us in the northern region; many of us stayed in the camps and you are well aware of that. This House knows very well that for 20 years, many of the people in northern Uganda were in the camps. Some of them went back to resettle in their places. 

However, what we see from this debate, Mr Speaker, seems like Adjumani versus Amuru. Can we handle this thing as Parliament of Uganda? Isn’t it procedurally right for this House to get a select committee, or if it was selected already, can we have a report? However, if it is not there, can we have a committee which can investigate thoroughly? It is because now, the House is not even contented with what the Minister of Defence brought. Can we have a committee –(Interjections)– I am on procedure - to go and investigate and report to this House so that this House adopts the right thing for this country; something which is beneficial for both Adjumani and Amuru? 
Mr Speaker, -(Interjections) - I am still on procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, raise the procedure.

MS JOY ATIM: I said is it procedural enough, Mr Speaker, for this House to constitute a select committee to go, investigate and report so that if we are passing this, it is in favour of both Amuru and Adjumani to stop our people from dying? We have to live in harmony. Thank you.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, what my colleague is talking about is what had already taken place. A committee had been selected sometime back and they submitted a report here; most probably, she was not around. That is what I would like you to take note of. Thank you.

5.46
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is not only limited to Apaa, but it cuts across most parts of the country. It is true that because of the insurgencies in most parts of the country, the settlers abandoned their original ancestral lands to seek safety. 

However, because of the current peace in the country, people are returning to their ancestral lands. There is no person in this country who can force himself to where he was not born from. At least, we have elders who could tell us where we were born and where our fathers were born.

Secondly, we have historical or mother maps made during the colonial times. What has happened to these maps? Have they been altered? The forest reserves and wildlife authority came and got people settled there. They were only evicted because of Government interest. However, there were indigenous people already there. 

A case in point is my area Tepeth; the Tepeth were the first people even to come to Uganda. They are indigenous people of Uganda. However, when the National Forest Authority came, they tried to evict them and they refused because they had nowhere to go.

Now Government came with what they call “encroachment” with the National Forest Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority; my only prayer is that we have the lands minister here. Why should we go and incite our people as leaders when we have maps in Entebbe? Who has stolen those maps? 
If the maps are in the archives in Entebbe, why doesn’t the lands minister come and resolve these land conflicts using maps and not ourselves as leaders? Like the way it is happening now, Madi against - we cannot resolve it in that way. We cannot. 

My prayer is that the lands ministry comes forward in all these areas where there are land conflicts or boundary conflicts; a case in point is Moroto District Local Government. I have a problem between one sub-county which belongs to my constituency and another sub-county which belongs to another constituency.

I have presented this matter to the lands minister and the relevant ministries handling that matter but they are delaying and people are likely to die. Why should they delay? How much money is needed to come and open an administrative boundary? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I think we should close. I will only pick hon. Lucy Akello. We should close and then find a way because this debate will go on for a while.

5.50
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to respond to the minister’s statement. The issue of encroachment has been discussed by most of the Members. I would like to agree with the position that even before the so called gazettement was done, people were living there and there was voting taking place. 

For the information of this august House, yesterday I stated something that as you approach or about to enter Apaa centre, you will come across some sort of a mini-barracks or detach. They will want to know your identity before you access.

I have heard my colleague, hon. Dulu, saying that the leaders are inciting the community. Personally, I have not reached Apaa because when you organise to just go and even greet people, you will get a whole detach waiting for you. We are not allowed to reach Apaa. That is why I asked yesterday whether Apaa is in Uganda or South Sudan.

There is a market in Apaa that brings together people in Adjumani and without that market in Apaa, people in Adjumani would find life very difficult because most of the food items are grown around and sold there. Therefore, it unites both the Amuru and Adjumani people. It is a very big market that has been in existence for long. When we talk of encroachers, I wonder; encroaching since when? They have been encroaching; why didn’t you stop them in 1980? 

Secondly, when we talk about self-defence; the six boys who were undressed, locked up in a house and kept naked - was that also self-defence? When we talk about self-defence, the more than 12 young men who were shot and killed while running away; was that also in self-defence?

Sincerely speaking, the people of Apaa belong to Uganda. We have been bringing issues of gross human rights violation in this House but we have never, not once, heard any Government official saying they have arrested, prosecuted so and so because of the killings that have taken place in Apaa. Be it that the person comes from Adjumani or Amuru; we have never. Is this fair? Is this being sincere? Are we being sincere to ourselves or it is easier to say, “It is self-defence”? 

Let the people of Apaa continue to die because you consider them as animals; let them die. Let it be “self-defence” in your own words, honourable minister. And let them continue to die; kill them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me pick briefly hon. Olanya then I have you next.

5.55
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put the record right. My colleague, hon. Mark Dulu, made a statement that when our people die from Apaa, they are buried in Pabbo or Lamogi or somewhere else.

Mr Speaker, I feel we should not be playing with deaths. If we have to start counting the number of graves in Apaa; you may run away. No one has ever been transported from Apaa and buried somewhere else. A case in point; we have the boy who was shot dead by the police officers and was buried in Apaa. The boy called Alaba who was imprisoned in Adjumani, when he came back and died, the man is buried in Apaa; the names are countless. Therefore, one should not play with death. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, from the submissions of the honourable member, he mentioned that the Lamogi and Pabbo clans no longer talk among themselves. I feel this is a very wrong allegation. I come from Lamogi clan and we stay together; there is nothing of that nature.

Therefore, the honourable member wanted to show that the people are quarrelling among themselves to justify the cause of whatever they are doing; which is very unfortunate. In conclusion, hon. Joy Atim from Lira came here with a very good proposal that let the independent team go on the ground and have access so that they come with balanced information. You heard what hon. Mark Dulu and hon. Ababiku said that they are not in for any committee. What ill intention do you have?  

Mr Speaker, when some other people submitted, they said let the place be de-gazetted; hon. Ababiku put it clearly that for them as Adjumani they are not in for de-gazettement. Therefore, this is a clear indication that the land is not for Adjumani but for Amuru. They are now saying, “After all, the land is not ours; let it be given away” which is very unfortunate. 

As I conclude - (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. When I stood up, I said that Adjumani people are not for de-gazetting. And at the beginning, I said that I was very happy for the pronouncement by Government over the border conflict.

When I disagreed with their proposal - is he right to go and misinterpret my statement saying that my disagreement was based on a situation that the area does not belong to Adjumani? And yet at the beginning I said that I was happy with the declaration.

It is we who have the administrative mandate now to pronounce ourselves on whatever takes place in Adjumani and we have the right to initiate activities. Is he in order to misinterpret my statement? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The position has been made clearer, honourable member.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the honourable minister is here today. Honourable minister, the killings that took place last year in Apaa whereby 12 boys were killed by bows, spears and arrows -

We submitted the names of the killers to the security personnel but up to now you have never arrested or prosecuted anyone. Can you clarify on that and inform the august House. If you continue with that impunity I think it may be dangerous.

Finally, for the purported demarcation that the minister and the rest were talking about; the day the security personnel went to demarcate the boundary - the laws of demarcating boundaries are very clear. 

The Acholi who were there were shot at; boys were arrested; teargas was fired and there were no human being in that area; it was only the security personnel and the officials from the Ministry of Lands doing their own thing. You should have called all the neighbours to be around to witness. For them they chased away people and started doing their own things.

Mr Speaker, we need to put it very clearly that we are not respecting the so-called demarcation; therefore our people shall continue staying there and let the Government stop the security personnel from killing our people. We do not need war at the moment because we have suffered enough; kindly let the honourable minister reign in on this matter and let our people continue cultivating.

Like I said yesterday, this is the time for planting but people are no longer cultivating. They are living in fear, in the bushes as if we were still in the war times. Let us take care of the innocent civilians who are there.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I pray that something is done for the betterment of our people in Apaa. 

6.01
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand here with a very heavy heart. This is not the first time we are talking about the issue of Apaa. First of all, I must pay my condolences on the death of Mr Okello.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to our leaders from Amuru; let us find a mutual place to meet as leaders. How do we solve this problem irrespective of what is happening? We should find a neutral person to chair our meeting so that we sort out our problems. “When elephants fight, it is the grass which suffers.” We are here talking but our people are suffering -

We have more problems that must bring us together; in the north, forget about Adjumani or Amuru. If you take the north as a whole, we have more problems that we need to come together and solve. This bickering should stop. 

When we speak here, we should speak on behalf of Ugandans. The Government has taken a position and declared that Apaa is in Adjumani; whether you are going to respect it or not, it would be unfortunate - (Interjections)– that will be discussed in this meeting I am suggesting.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, we had a meeting with the First Deputy Prime Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister. It was agreed that a commission of inquiry should be instituted by the Government. From March last year up to now, no commission of inquiry has been put in place.

Mr Speaker, you ruled in April last year that for the Office of the Prime Minister to sort out this problem of Apaa, they should come on the Floor of this Parliament; because this is where it was created, but nothing has been done. The Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga on the 21st of June last year ruled that there was confusion about the boundary; because one said eight kilometres inside Adjumani District, another one talked of 10 kilometres.

There is need for re-affirmation of the boundary and Government was to do it and report back on the Floor of Parliament within one month but nothing was done. However, on the 13th of October, the local government went and declared that Apaa is in Adjumani.

Then the First Deputy Prime Minister comes here to praise the announcement. Are we proceeding right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sometimes you make it difficult for the presiding officer to handle some of these things. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Having made that offer, I would like to give some information for record purposes. East Madi hunting area together with Amuru up to Paraa are all hunting areas until 1974. Part of Amuru has been de-gazetted. That is the fact that you can crosscheck if you want. Since that time, this hunting area has been controlled. It had been gazetted by the colonial government before independence. People from both sides would come and meet there while hunting. 

Therefore, nobody was allowed to live in those controlled vast areas. If you want to talk about when people lived there, they have never been allowed to, right from colonial times. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As leaders, we should be sober as we try to solve existing problems. I would like to agree with what the First Deputy Prime Minister presented that even when nations were formed, people sat down. When boundaries were being re-drawn in a number of places, discussions took place. From the side of Acholi leadership, there should be no problem with your proposal. 

However, the procedural point I would like to raise is about who can convene such a meeting and under what umbrella should it be? We have attempted it before. Mr Speaker, I remember that when this issue first came to Parliament, you requested that you and I lead a delegation to northern Uganda to go and have a dialogue by addressing people on radio in Adjumani and Gulu to cool the situation. You came to Gulu and we had that radio talk show and it gave us mileage.

We initiated another dialogue in the Prime Minister’s Office where I led the Acholi as you led the other side. It was a very good dialogue that collapsed. Therefore, we do not object to this new proposal because we feel that there should be a heart- to-heart talk. Pronouncements can be made but they can also be corrected. I know of some people who get so excited –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with the procedural matter that you want to raise?

MR OKUMU: Therefore, can I get from the First Deputy Prime Minister, on his proposal, how we should proceed when establishing such a dialogue because we would be willing. That is the only safety net we have to unite our people. You have just given a general thing but in principal we support that. What procedure should we take in establishing that dialogue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the mere fact that you used the word, “procedure” does not make it so. You were supposed to address the procedural matter to me but you have addressed it to Gen. Moses Ali. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I do not know whether I should answer that or not. However, as he has said, I would say he should liaise with me as Acholi leaders outside this place and we find a way of identifying who to co-ordinate us. The two of us should discuss from out of this place if you have accepted. 

I would like to also say that as of now, Apaa is in Adjumani District, so whether to de-gazette it or not lies in the hands of Adjumani District Council. It is a fact that cannot be contested.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Mr Speaker, in 2014, the inter-ministerial meeting that came out with the resolution that Apaa is in Adjumani and must be declared so was chaired by Gen. Moses Ali. I have that document. It is the same Gen. Moses Ali who is coming here to brag that Apaa is now in Adjumani, when it was done following his personal and selfish interests. Is the honourable member in order to come and brag here when the declaration was done fraudulently following his personal interest?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even when there is a violation of order, you have no authority to violate the order of this House. In the course of trying to articulate your point of order, you violated one of our key principles of debate. You imputed improper motive on another Member, which is not allowed. 

Hon. Olanya used words that he should not. You should be courteous to each other so that we can find solutions that are lasting. I beg you, Members, to avoid using words that can escalate situations that we can keep under control. 

I was not in the meeting to know what was decided upon but what I have heard from the Minister of Local Government is that the declaration was made by the Minister of Local Government that Apaa is in Adjumani District. I heard that from here. I suppose that is a formal position of the Government.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to also give information about the border that when the Minister of Local Government declared Apaa as being in Adjumani, then a sign post was fixed to help travellers to identify the border. That common border sign post is being manned by both policemen from Amuru and Adjumani. 

The first sign post was removed by somebody whose name I will not mention. (Laughter) There was fear that if we did not protect this sign post, it would also be removed by the same man since he is still breathing. (Laughter)

We do not know what we can do about whether it is proper for hon. Akol to keep his political office in Apaa as of now, because it will be tempting him to go back to Apaa to manage his office when it is already in a wrong place. I think he should go and relocate his office.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, Government was not aware that there was a court injunction stopping them from carrying out any activity in Apaa because it still belongs to Amuru. Today, I have brought to their attention that there is a court injunction as I put before this Parliament. 
Is it in order for the First Deputy Prime Minister to order me to go and close my office where I have been voted, because these are my voters? You ask hon. Mark Dulu if he was voted from Apaa, never! Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as citizens of this country, we are allowed to be anywhere. In fact, I have a branch of my constituency offices in Kampala. Therefore, General, leave those aspects please. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Okay, Sir. Thank you for the ruling. We then appeal to the honourable that when he comes to Apaa, he should not come with a motive to disrupt peace. If that happens, then probably the member has to be asked to leave because his staying there will continue to bring disorder in that area. 

Therefore, next time, if you hear that the member has been arrested for provoking people, then that will be his fault because in this country you can stay anywhere –(Interruption) 

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, you ruled clearly that you also have offices in Kampala. As I talk now, the First Deputy Prime Minister is a big office in the country. Nevertheless, he is threatening my life and it has even happened. When I was driving from Apaa to Kampala, I got those groups of people in the barracks. They put logs on the road in that I could not go anywhere. I told them that they could not arrest a Member of Parliament like that and they had to write to the Speaker of Parliament. I think they were consulting the General for about 45 minutes while I was there. Is it in order for the First Deputy Prime Minister to threaten me with arrest? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I heard was a bit different; he said that if you go there and cause chaos, you will be arrested but if you go there to do work, there will be no problem. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I think I should end here, Sir. I would also like to thank you for this last ruling. This is true; even if I go to his constituency and cause chaos, I think he would not accept it. So I rest my case. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to say something? I have this motion of justice to process. 

6.20 
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I would like to start by clarifying on the court order that the honourable member has laid on the Table. It is in respect to his claim that it stopped the boundary opening. He said that both the boundary opening and the declaration by the Ministry of Local Government were illegal. That is not true. 

The court order that has been laid is in respect to activities or in respect to restraining Uganda Wildlife Authority. It is restraining Uganda Wildlife Authority –(Interjections)- yes, I have a copy. It reads, “Uganda Wildlife Authority; a temporary injunction restraining them – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it specific to Uganda Wildlife Authority or to the respondent? 

MS AMONGI: Yes. Let me read it. “It is Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Attorney-General. The restraining order is in respect of eviction, destruction, confiscation, conversion, interfering with their land rights, occupation and uses of land belonging to the applicants.” It is specific to the applicants. The applicants here are eight. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development lawfully reopened boundaries of Apaa. After opening them – (Interjections) – no, I am actually giving information to the House. The boundary opening was done successfully and it was communicated to all parties. 

We held several meetings with the honourable Members of Parliament from Apaa. When they disputed, we even sat with them in a meeting chaired by H.E the President and they know what we agreed on with them. 

What I can advise is that if they still do not want to abide by the resolution we had together with them at State House, the only other option, Mr Speaker, is that for us, in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we are guided by the colonial borders. The colonial borders were first done in 1911. Then at independence, it was reaffirmed and another edition in 1964. That is what guides us. 

However, if Members feel that they are not satisfied with maps in Entebbe, we have another option. Let them write a letter explaining their dissatisfaction with the maps obtained from Entebbe. 

In the Commonwealth Archive Centre in London, we have an office of the map for all the Commonwealth countries that were under the colonial Government. They can accept themselves to constitute people from both Adjumani and Amuru together with our technical team. We have done that in the case of the Japadhola of Tororo. Let them participate in obtaining an independent map from the archive centre in London. Let us come and go together on the ground and reopen it if they want. 

However, as it stands now, we have not had anybody in writing disputing that they want another source of information. Based on that, you did not write contesting that you want another option. I have not seen that letter –(Interjections)– yes, you can produce it tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker, based on that boundary opening, the Ministry of Local Government went and communicated the position of Government based on that. That is the position that we stand by –(Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I have been forced to rise on a point of order. The issue of Apaa is older than the current minister in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. When this matter first arose, the Acholi Parliamentary Group obtained a map from the colonial office in London. We shared it with Government and gave them copies. We said that should be the map that would show us the colonial boundary. We have copies of that and we even shared them with Government. 

If there was a dispute at that time, you should have told us not to rely on that map and do something jointly with the ministry. Unfortunately, you were not there.

Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to come and stand here and claim that we did not access any map from the colonial office? She has said that would have been the only option but indeed, we actually did that and presented it to Government. Unfortunately, Madam Minister, you were not yet a Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development at that time. Probably, you should crosscheck with the technical officials who would be able to advise you. 

Is she, therefore, in order to mislead the House and say that we have not had the opportunity to access the original map from the colonial office, when we actually did and shared it with Government? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please the statement from the minister was clear. She said as of now, the border was reopened, which stated the conclusion of Apaa with the many districts. 

As of now, they have not received any objection. She has also said that the objection is so that we contest the source you have used to open the border. She is saying that we are contesting the source you have used. We want the use on another source of information. Hence, can you please come with that letter tomorrow since you said that you have got the letter? Please finish what you are saying.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just rose to give information to my colleague, the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. When I presented a report in this House, to indicate that the ministry was reaffirming that Apaa is located in Adjumani District using the boundaries which were first demarcated in 1911; hon. Simon Oyet before the formal sitting of the House, indicated to me that he had a map from London. I requested him to Table it after I had made my report. This report was tabled, we debated it and he was around but he never tabled that map which he formerly told me that he had. 

Therefore, I would like to give you information that that map has never been brought before us. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the map which the Member is talking about, like I stated earlier - when you have a dispute between two people, you cannot walk to London as one party, pick a map and bring it when the other party was not a participant. That is not how we solve land disputes. Where there are two parties, I have given you a solution of what we do. If you have an issue, we will have both parties plus technical people to go to London together, obtain the map and we go to the ground together. Concerning that, we will be open enough if it can contribute towards concluding this matter.

Lastly, my issue is on land rights. I think the honourable members are aware about the resolution we had and a position which was taken firmly when they were there is that; Government does not have any problem with the people of Acholi from where they are settled so long as they are settled in an area which is not gazetted. In Apaa, there is an area which is gazetted and that which is not. Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) which was part of that meeting also notified us that, that area is not de-gazetted. They further said that they had issued a tourist license to an investor who also has a legal mandate to carry out activities of tourism in the area.
They also indicated that if it is to be de-gazetted, the district local government initiates the de-gazetting process and in this case, it should be Adjumani District to initiate, send it to Government and it would be de-gazetted. As it stands now, any land right –(Interjections)- can I finish the land rights and then come on the other one –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: You are giving us very useful information which some of us were not privileged to have. In your statement, are you suggesting that in actual facts, there are people in Apaa that are subject to the land that has been gazetted? If so, when did they begin to stay in that land; was the gazetting made after they had occupied the land or before? If so, has Government come up with a solution for those affected citizens?

MS AMONGI: Yes. The de-gazetting was done before. We asked the district leadership at that time to sit together and give us a data of those who are settled in the gazetted area. However, the de-gazetting was done before the settlement –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, why don’t you give her information properly?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: It is okay. Mr Speaker, if I am to ask her for the point of information, she would not have accepted. (Laughter) - This is one of the ways we use to take over the Floor. Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that in 2012, when the joint operation started carrying out evictions, the Minister of State in charge of Tourism by then, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu went to Apaa village and met me there. At that time, the place was not gazetted. Hon. Kamuntu wrote a Statutory Instrument in 2012 and claimed that by the power of the minister, he had given the Statutory Instrument that Apaa is for UWA. After evicting people and destroying their property, when leaders stood firm, that is when hon. Kamuntu wrote the Statutory Instrument. It was not gazetted before and the eviction started before gazetting.

We need to speak the truth about the land in Apaa. The Government of Uganda has handed over that land to the investor called Bruce Martin. I met Bruce Martin in 2012. He told me that he had paid huge amounts of money to the Government of Uganda. All they are doing is monkey tricks to make sure that the land is handed over to Bruce Martin. This investor wanted the land for two activities. He told me that he was going to set up sport hunting on one side and on the other, he wanted to grow cotton.

Bruce Martin even came to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to register his cotton plantation. All that the Government is doing is a monkey trick to chase away people from Apaa so that they give the land to Bruce Martin. You have to be clear and truthful because we know the truth.            	
MS AMONGI: The first gazettement was in 1963 under Uganda Gaming Department Statutory Instrument No.17, which was gazetted as a hunting area for licensed gun holders. If there was any in 2012, it could be probably expansion or amendment. However, we can have that letter clarified.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude. In respect to – I already stated here that UWA told us in the meeting that that particular land was licensed to that investor and I did not disagree with you. The law allows UWA to give licenses to people who are going to conduct tourism activities in their gazetted land so long as it is outside the activities which are outside tourism. (Interjections) – No, I will not allow any clarification because I have to conclude. I thought you are a Catholic like me. How can you change from one to another?
MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek for clarification. I have heard from the honourable minister and my good friend hon. Gilbert Olanya. He has stated that the investor wanted to grow cotton. Since you have accepted what hon. Gilbert Olanya is saying, the clarification I would like to seek, is cotton growing a tourist attraction? Thank you.

MS AMONGI: That would be very untrue that a concession can be given by UWA for cotton growing. If you want, we will bring the concession agreement on this Table from UWA on this particular one. 

As I conclude, I would like to appeal to both sides. Like a Member said, this is a community that has integrated; we are committed to ensuring that the land rights of everybody settled there in respect of the border are protected. Let us work together and conclude this matter once and for all. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.37
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I think my colleague, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has summarised this subject very well. I would like to thank the honourable members for the concerns they have raised. I would like to say that each department in the Executive has played its part. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, as far as I am concerned, has played its part - specifically the surveys department because that is the specialised authoritative department that can guide us as far as boundary demarcation is concerned. 

The Ministry of Local Government has communicated the Government position. The UPDF and the police as usual are determined to keep peace, protect people and their property in that area and in the rest of the country. That is the mandate of UPDF and it will continue to do so. 

This is not to say that there are no mistakes. If there are mistakes, we acknowledge them and we correct them. When I was giving my statement, I did not exonerate the UPDF officer who killed Mr Okello. I said the matter was being investigated and the division commander has put up a board of inquiry to investigate the matter – (Interjections)- I don’t accept the clarification. As soon as the investigations are complete, action will be taken. I beg to stop here, Mr Speaker. I beg everybody respects the positions that the specialised authorities have taken - that is the only way we can guarantee peace in the area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue of Apaa keeps coming back. Whenever we think it is settled, it comes back. Therefore, let me make a communication as we are opening tomorrow’s meeting on what I would advise to be done to help this situation. Let me do that. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
 
ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FY 2017/18 TO ACCOMMODATE SHS 9,635,089,962 TO CATER FOR WAGES FOR VARIOUS VOTES

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table an addendum to supplementary schedule 2 for financial year 2017/18 to accommodate Shs 9.6 billion to cater for wage shortfall for a number of votes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. This stands referred to the Committee on Budget to handle the wage shortfall. Members of the budget committee, please handle this expeditiously.

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE REWARD OF UGX 6 BN WAS GIVEN TO 42 PUBLIC OFFICERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE HERITAGE OIL AND GAS ARBITRATION CASE
6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the treasury memorandum on report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) on the investigations into the circumstances under which the reward of Shs 6 billion was given to 42 public officers who participated in the heritage oil and gas arbitration case

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. This stands referred to the Committee on Public Accounts to look at because the recommendation came from them.

THE SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the semi-annual report of the petroleum fund for the financial year 2017/2018 as required by the Public Finance Act, 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let the record capture that.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports, for the financial year 2018/2019. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, for your information, I received this policy statement on the afternoon of Friday 16 March 2018 and I signed it off to the committee using the authority of the Speaker but we are now formalising the proceedings. Therefore, it is already with the committee.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, it is the same with the other case. I received this policy statement and forwarded it to the committee on 16 March 2018 but we are receiving a formal copy now.

6.44
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Azuba Ntege): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That is the same issue. I received this statement on the 16 March 2018 and I have already forwarded to the committee. Let the records capture that.

6.44
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it? (Laughter) Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The rest of the items appearing on the order paper are part of the statements already laid.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 13 OF THE JUDICATURE ACT, CAP 13, TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF HIGH COURT JUDGES FROM 49 TO 82

6.45
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution under Section 13 of the Judicature Act, Cap 13, to increase the number of high court judges from 49 to 82 moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

 MAJ. GEN. OTAFIRE: The motion is seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not by you, honourable minister. (Laughter) It is seconded by the honourable member for Ruhinda, honourable member of Adjumani, honourable member for Gomba West, Leader of the Opposition, honourable member for Ndorwa. Just state the motion. I think this time you have come on the right footing so we are okay.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIRE: Mr Speaker, thank you. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Clause (1)(b) of Article 138 of the Constitution requires Parliament to prescribe the number of Judges of the High Court;

AND WHEREAS Section 13 of the Judicature Act, Cap. 13 makes provision for -
(a) the Principal Judge; and
(b) Twenty five Judges of the High Court or such higher number of Judges of the High Court as may be prescribed by Parliament by Resolution;

AND WHEREAS the current number of High Court Judges has been found to be inadequate;

AND WHEREAS it has become necessary to increase the number of Judges of the High Court for the following reasons-
(a) The huge case backlog;
(b) The insufficient number of High Court Judges compared to the number of litigants;
(c) The steady increase of crime and conflict;
(d) The increase of the awareness of the population of their rights, which has led to a litigious population; and
(e) The increase in the number of cases filed;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
That in accordance with section 13(b) of the Judicature Act, Cap. 13, Parliament increases the number of judges of the High Court from 49 to 82, the Principal Judge inclusive.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the motion before you. Would you like to speak to your motion or it is a self-explanatory motion?

GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, the motion is self-explanatory –(Laughter)- and overwhelmingly supported by both sides of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

4.48
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I am seconding the motion in my capacity as the Shadow Attorney-General. I only want to put across two or three riders and one is that some time in 2008, we had a similar motion, which Parliament unanimously seconded and approved. Unfortunately, we have had one big challenge with the appointing authority – his persistent refusal to do his constitutional duty of appointing. 

When we are passing this resolution, I will invite you, honourable minister, to tell us when the judges will be appointed to fill the vacancies that exist and to comply with the number you have come asking us to increase. We have had a problem in appointing even the highest of the Judiciary: the Chief Justice. Every time the President wants to be begged and reminded that he must appoint. 

For us to approve this motion – which I seek Members to approve – we need a firm commitment from the minister that once this motion has been approved, these judicial officers will be appointed in such and such a time so that we do not come again to “urge him to appoint”. I did not like it in 2008 when I had to bring a motion to “urge him to appoint” and the following day he called a caucus and came in military attire asking us that if he does not appoint, what shall we do? To remind him that he has a constitutional duty to appoint - that is all we need from him and we need that appointment in time.

Secondly, we need to stop depleting the Judiciary by assigning judges to other positions when we have very many Ugandans who are qualified and capable of doing those other jobs. Right now, we have almost 10 judges who are on assignment in other duties yet we are crying of case backlog and lack of judicial officers.

Mr Speaker, I invite Members to support this motion but we need a firm commitment from Government as to when these judges will be appointed. Whether they are cadre judges or not, we do not mind but let them be appointed. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is clear. Honourable minister, this same resolution was passed by the Seventh Parliament in 2004 to increase the number to 82. The honourable member is informing the House that a similar resolution was passed in 2008. Now, you have come this year asking for this same number. You do not seem to be acting on previous resolutions of Parliament which you yourself actually request. Please, tell the House when this matter will be settled once approved so that we do not again deal with the matter that you are going to come back five years later to ask us the same question.

GEN. (RTD) OTAFFIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very cognisant of the concerns of the members of Parliament. As you know, only recently, we swore in a number of judges who were appointed recently. Earlier on, we requested for the filling of 16 judges but as you are well aware, when we consulted with our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with our purse, they said “let us start with 12. We shall add another eight”.

Now that Parliament has opened for us to increase to 82, these judges, Mr Speaker, should have been appointed yesterday. If the purse of the Treasury was willing, we would have appointed all these judges yesterday. It behoves me to come here and ask you to allow me to appoint these judges incrementally because our purse and the competing priorities do not allow us to appoint this number of judges at once. If I had my way, I would have appointed yesterday. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with this motion?

6.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that the number be increased because this has always been our policy option. In 2006, we proposed the same. In 2009, we proposed the same and that is even why I am quoting the dates when Parliament approved the increment of the judges. 

When the General comes in with the proposal, saying “we would have recruited these people even yesterday but it is because of financial constraints” - Mr Speaker, I am speaking with a heavy heart. My people from Kasese have stayed in jail for over one and a half years without being heard. The reason being given is that there are no judges. I am now happy that we are increasing the number and I wholeheartedly support the increment. 

I have two issues. The Chief Justice, Bart Katureebe, in his report of 2017, addressed certain issues. He indicated that indeed he needed manpower. However, he said that among the many issues why we have a lot of backlog is that there is absenteeism of judicial officers from station without notifying court users; corruption; some judicial officers had also decided not to be sitting on Mondays and Fridays; there is poor case management; ineffective support supervision and of course the leadership vacuum. There are a lot of issues that were talked about. 

Even when we increase the number of the judges, Mr Speaker, if some of these issues cannot be managed – for example, supervision and ensuring that the officers are on duty and ensuring that they are fully facilitated – we may not have done anything to save the situation.

The second issue is the one which the mover of the motion has just pointed out that “if there was money I would have even done it yesterday”. May I ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us even before we approve the motion? This approval has been coming every other day. We have seen the need. The number of Ugandans is increasing. We are realising that the cases are becoming more and more. The level of criminality is getting higher every day. Are we sure there is money to cater for the increase so that if there is no money we pass the ones you can manage this financial year and maybe next financial year when you have more money we pass another?

We do not want to come back here for the same motion. I am telling you this resolution was passed by this same House on 4 September 2009 but this is 2018. We are now bringing it in form of a motion. Can we know from the minister in charge of finance – as we pass this motion – whether he has the money ready to pay for the increased number? We would pray that you look for this money so that Ugandans who are in jail – some of who are even innocent – can get justice. The lawyers will agree with me that justice delayed is justice denied. Help us to know whether there is money.

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, this issue was discussed in Cabinet and as Government we agreed that we come to the House to seek for an increment for judges. As and when they are appointed, we would be able to avail to resources – we cannot budget for people who are not appointed.

I would like to urge Members –(Interjections)– we would be able to provide resources according to the recruitment plan of the judiciary.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: The Chief Justice has for a long time been asking for the increment and I would like to imagine that in the structure of the judiciary, it would come. Therefore, by the time you come to ask, you should be ready with the money but only requesting for manpower. It should not be that the manpower is available but you are still looking for money. That might delay us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What the minister has said is that as soon as they are recruited, they will make money available. They cannot avail money when there are no officers.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, what we would like to get from the minister is that – I have talked to the Chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission, the President of Uganda Law Society and many lawyers have applied and Judicial Service Commission is ready to appoint. The only thing they would like to hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is whether Government has money to appoint the 49 plus judges if we approve the motion today. That should be the structure of the judiciary. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, when the Chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission requests that answer from us, we will give it to him. We cannot give the answer to Judicial Service Commission through the Shadow Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the money available? That is a simple question. 

MR BAHATI: Honourable members, you appropriate money. Let us get this clear. This is not how budgeting works. We cannot get money and put it there waiting for recruitment – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development for accepting to listen to my point of clarification I would like to seek from him.

Previously, as you have heard and the Speaker knows, Parliament passed a resolution. What happened to those resolutions? You never made money available to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Today, you want us to pass another resolution and then you start to look for money. 

The clarification I am seeking is: Why didn’t you look for money in the previous years when we passed this resolution to facilitate the Judicial Service Commission to recruit and yet you now claim you are sure that as soon as we pass, money will be availed. What would be the difference between what transpired especially, the two times Parliament passed this resolution?
	
The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is becoming non-committal. If these proposals were already in the ministerial policy statements – I am not sure whether the minister has it in his ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2018/2019, so that as we look through the budget, we could be able to adjust what is available. Can I get that clarification?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, if this motion is approved to increase the number of judges, then we will avail the resources to the judiciary as and when required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion? I put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament under Section 13 of the Judicature Act, Cap 13, to increase the number of High Court Judges from 49 to 82 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not want another motion for the same subject. This motion should operate to cover you until the number is reached. It is full establishment now.  

Honourable members, it is now 7 o’clock and we were supposed to have adjourned at 6.00p.m. I have undertaken to come tomorrow in my communication to make guidance on how we go on with some of these matters so that it does not come back here; it can now be settled with finality so that the people can have some peace wherever they are living. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 March 2018, at 2.00 p.m.) 

