

Tuesday, 3 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I want to begin by altering the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Health to update the country on the issue of the Coronavirus in the country and the world.
 
On 4th December, the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill was read for the first time. It has been under consideration in the Committee on Gender, Labour and social Development. I received communication on 5th January, about the Bill that some contents in that Bill fall across different ministries. I have opted to send it to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to consider and report to us. The 45 days will start after the Committee on Presidential Affairs has commenced.

The second issue is on the situation of the Coronavirus. The United Nations has cancelled the meeting of the Commission on the Status of Women, which takes place every year, in New York. This year, we shall be represented by our permanent representatives there. All countries have been advised not to travel for the meeting.

The third issue is that last week, we talked about the issue of   national identification cards. This week, I received very disturbing complaints from the citizens. There is a young lady called Leilat Najjuko who lost her national identity card in 2016 but it has taken her three years to get a replacement. She has been going there every three months because she was told to check for it after three months for replacing a national identity card. She finally got it in 2020. It has taken her four years. 

A more disturbing case is from a lady called Hadijah Mwanje. She lost her bag together with the national identity card and telephones. However, the journey to replace her simcard has been a nightmare. She was required to pay first a fee of Shs 50,000 to replace the card. Then she had to pay Shs 1,000 for a confirmation letter, which she had to pay in the bank. The bank charge is Shs 3,000 for payment of Shs 1,000. After that, they told her to get a confirmation letter but getting that confirmation letter from the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA) has taken many months. 

What was worse was that when she got the letter, she was told that the letter had to be activated before she could go to the telecom company to get a replacement. It has taken her three months.

In fact, she said she has been going to NIRA at 4 o’clock in the morning but that NIRA deals with the first three people in every queue. The others are told to come back again at 4 o’clock in the morning. I really do not know why we are treating citizens like this. It is dirty and ugly.

I know we asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to come but I think this is too much. Honourable members, this is a very serious issue. We have been told that agents no longer want passports and driving permits; they only want the national identity card.

The ladies asked me whether the national identity card is the primary document and nothing else is valid. I told them I do not know but promised them that I would ask the Government to tell us. Honourable members, our citizens are suffering. I hope that we can find - 

2.48
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for that information. Indeed, Ugandans are suffering.

I one time had people who came from Serere. It took them about two weeks looking for the national identity card and yet they had nowhere to stay. They requested that as a Member of Parliament, I write a letter so that the people at NIRA could help them. Otherwise, every time they come, they are put behind.

There was a time when NIRA was updating national identity cards but up to today, Ugandans who registered have not received their national identity cards. I actually have people who have moved to NIRA several times but they have continued to tell them to come next week yet nothing has worked.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to report that there were students who were registered under the education scheme. They were told that they were going to get identity cards. It is very unfortunate that they do not have their identity cards nor the National Identification Numbers (NIN).

Recently, the army was recruiting and they wanted young people who had not given birth - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I would like to report to you that most of the young boys lost out because they could not be recruited since they wanted the national identity cards. The students did not have the identity cards yet they were recruited as students of schools.

When these students go to NIRA, they are told that their names are under the schools. There is so much mistreatment of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, the expiry period for the current national identity cards is 10 years. If the process is moving on – we have already used seven years and we only have three years. What is happening? In fact, we do not know what the Shs 50,000 we pay does. When you come to get a national identity card, they tell you to get a letter yet you have to pay for that letter. When you go to these telecom operators like MTN, they will tell you your letter expired; go back.

Madam Speaker, this is something that I have witnessed and it is a very critical issue and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should come here and save Ugandans. Thank you.

2.50
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, the issue of replacement of national identity card is very difficult. In fact, it is easier to enter heaven than to get an identity card. 

As I talk, some of us born of interracial parents - a Ugandan father and a Kenyan mother - NIRA has made it very difficult for my people to get national identity cards. They force you to bring a Ugandan national identity card of your parent yet they know that you mother was born in Kenya. When you bring the Kenyan national identity card of your parent, they do not honour it at all.

Even the students who recently sat for the Uganda Advanced Certificate Examinations have no national Ids. In fact, my people are worried how they are going to be enrolled into the university.

Madam Speaker, the issue you have brought is a big pain to our people. 
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what do we do?

2.52
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter that you have raised is very important and we speak with a lot of pain because we represent so many voices out there.

Last week, I had a meeting with the elderly because I had seen an announcement on TV concerning the SAGE funds from the Ministry of Gender. One of the criteria was that everybody must have a national identification card to access SAGE funds but then I wondered; if able-bodied people like us and our voters cannot access national identity cards, what will happen to these old women and men above 80 years who are supposed to benefit from the fund?

We have to come up with very tough conditions to NIRA to come up with an explanation to all Ugandans to make sure that we do not go through all these difficulties to get national identity cards. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: I want a way forward.

2.53
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like the few colleagues who have spoken this is a real thorn to many of our people who are upcountry. Recently, we adopted that we consider our people who have reached the age of 18 to be enrolled to vote but we have not yet found out from the Electoral Commission why they are hesitant.

The fact might be that NIRA does not have that information to collaborate the quick entry of those people into the register -

THE SPEAKER: Way forward on identity cards.

MR ANGURA: The minister should come here and explain to the country and give us a timeframe within which everyone who has not accessed the identity card should get it. Otherwise if we leave it open it will continue.

2.54
LT (RT) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker. NIRA is headed by a lady who was a university lecturer at the Faculty of Law; she is called Judy Obitre- Gama, a daughter of a military officer. She is a competent person.

First of all, to swing into action and talk to the head of the ministry, Gen. JJ Odongo because NIRA is under his docket and demand an explanation. If they have a problem of money - because I have heard that they have obsolete machines. Let us first listen to them to find out what exactly the problem is and then we move.

2.56
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, the requirement of an identity card is administrative and we must demand, as Parliament, to relax that requirement. At registration, you are issued with a national identification number. That is all that people should be asked to produce when they are applying for SIMCards because they will have discharged their burden as citizens, registered and have a registration number. Demanding for an ID is causing these problems;

The way forward is to ask the Government to relax the requirement for citizens to have the identifications cards when they go to seek for services. We can relax it to a level of producing the national identification numbers, which are issued at registration.

2.57
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have had issues of kidnaps and many others. We do not want to go to that area but I recall very well when we called the minister here and tasked him - we raised the issue of national identification cards but I am shocked to see that there is no answer to date.

I am of the view that in order to find a solution, we have to go deeper and study the problem. We have to understand the cause because we cannot just come here and begin talking without deeply understanding the cause of all these problems.

I pray that the committee goes with these specific terms of reference to expressly work on this assignment and bring a report, which we should deliberate on.

2.58
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when we registered for these national identity cards which we used as voters identifications cards, we picked them from the offices of the different branches of the Electoral Commission in our districts and a lot of money was pumped into procuring equipment to capture data for these cards.

I suggest that the process of replacing and obtaining the national identification cards be decentralised so that there is an inter-agency cooperation between the Electoral Commission and NIRA to capture data at the permanent offices of the Electoral Commission.

That will save Ugandans from transporting themselves every time and again to Kololo to look for national identification cards. I think it is a better solution.

THE SPEAKER: Last time when we had a debate we talked about decentralisation.

2.59
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been a victim. There was a mistake on my card, I applied for a new one but it has taken more than a year. I have been going to Kololo and I am tired.

A select committee of Parliament should be put in place to investigate the problem with these people. We have been told that the company that supplies the material is well connected; so, we want the committee of Parliament to establish and find out the cause.

If a Member of Parliament like me cannot get my card, what about an ordinary person? The teachers were told to get their cards and make an application before December but they have failed. Many Ugandans are suffering and yet getting an identification card should be one of the easiest things. 

Let the committee of Parliament investigate and come back and report to us. If there are inefficient people, they should be dismissed and we get new people to take up the jobs. I beg to submit.

3.01
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal of hon. Wamanga Wamai of setting up a select committee. This matter has been raised here time and again and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was tasked to bring a report to this House but to date, we have not received any.

That select committee must be given a timeline of not more than two weeks to complete work and bring the report to this House. 

Secondly, I would like to suggest that in the meantime, for those who have paid money already - I have my constituents who have paid money. They have been coming here several times to Kololo. Imagine it is Shs 50,000 to come from Agago and Shs 50,000 to go back. You are then supposed to pay Shs 50,000 again for accommodation and so on let alone the fee for replacement. You are tossed left, right and centre but you are still unable to get your ID for a year and so on.

For those who have already paid and have been processing; I would like to suggest that in the meantime, the IDs are taken to their respective districts and they get their IDs from the office of the Electoral Commission. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.02
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. You have raised a pertinent issue in not only matters of security but it also touches matters of voter registration.

The first question we should be asking ourselves is how did the data that was captured vanish? For instance - as you look for a way forward - the lady you have quoted, Hadijah Mwanje, had her data captured. Her ID got lost and she followed all the procedures and paid. 

If you took my biometrics in form of fingerprints; the moment I place my fingerprints, you should be able to retrieve my data immediately. As a result, you print a card. That is what happens in matters of driving licences. When you lose it, you get a police report and a letter from your local council in order to prove your identity. In any case, when you present it, they only pick your biometrics and print another card.

The issue of contention here is not as to whether Hadijah Mwanje is a citizen of Uganda. That has already been solved in the capture and issuance of the first card. Therefore, at loss, the issue should be that we should instruct the minister in charge and NIRA, which draws its funds from what we appropriate here in Parliament, to issue lost IDs within 72 hours. That is what we should do as legislators. 

Secondly, why charge people Shs 50,000 for replacement of an ID? It is a document; it is a mere card that is printable. Who wants to tell us that it takes $10 to replace such a printable card in any case? Our people have been beaten by thugs and their property robbed. So, you get someone who is a victim of robbery and –

THE SPEAKER: What is your way forward?

MR NSEREKO: The way forward is that we should scrap this because any charge onto a citizen must be approved by Parliament. When did this august House approve that Shs 50,000 be charged on a person who has lost a national ID? Two, when did this Parliament approve that one has to pay Shs 1,000 to get a letter, when we appropriate monies for stationery for NIRA and the Ministry of Internal Affairs?

Why do you again charge someone Shs 1,000 in order to print for them their national identification number that we refer to as a NIN? In any case, when it is not –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have a way forward.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister. I think –(Laughter)- I should be given opportunity to give alternatives. One should be that the House pronounces itself on a speedy process of people retrieving their data and be given an alternative identity, other than the ID.

Secondly, the representative in charge of People with Disabilities mentioned about people who are vulnerable in society, like the elderly. On registration for Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), in order to verify their dates of birth, an ID is a requirement. Many live far from areas of re-verification. In some areas where you have NIRA offices, the People with Disabilities have to climb stairs. There is no due consideration for people –

THE SPEAKER: So, what is the way forward?

MR NSEREKO: The way forward, Madam Speaker, is that we pronounce ourselves on the scrapping of the Shs 50,000 as a replacement charge. We appropriate money for NIRA and as a House, we have not pronounced ourselves on the Shs 50,000 as a charge for replacement.

3.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I would like to agree with the Member for Kampala Central that we scrap the Shs 50,000 without delay because people are poor. Why should we charge the poor people? 

Secondly, I want Parliament to investigate the officers who are doing all this. There seems to be a syndicate. There seems to be a plan, which is actually why they are delaying to issue cards. There is an element in reports talking about corruption and payment of money right there we must investigate this matter, Madam Speaker.

For example, my wife is also a victim. She has not got her ID for the past three years –

THE SPEAKER: What is the way forward?

MR ABALA: The way forward is, and I have said it point blank, that we must review all the policies that are causing problems such that our people should be able to address some of these problems early enough. That is one thing I would like to say.

Finally, the people who are found to have caused these problems must be brought to book. Last time, you issued a statement here. Unfortunately, it has been ignored; this means that contempt of Parliament has been, in my opinion, committed. (Laughter)

That is why we must hold people to account for why they are doing whatever they are doing in the country. I thank you very much.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERAL DEVELOPMENT) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been to the NIRA offices in Kololo, having lost my identify card. In Malawi, my bag was stolen together with the contents. 

What I would like to state is that definitely, I had to be taken through the process of getting a replacement because they identified me. However, I got it after two months. I would like to agree that it is a nightmare for an ordinary person.

What I would like to state here is that last week on Thursday, 25th February, hon. Mbwatekamwa raised this matter. You directed that the Prime Minster comes and briefs this House. What I am saying that since that was the position, let us have the Prime Minister brief this House on the steps that are being taken to correct this. Thereafter, we can move after he has presented that report.

We can then –(Interjections)– Yes; it is just this week. He was supposed to come today, 3rd March. I was simply reading your directives, Madam Speaker.

I would like to suggest that this statement be brought and then we can find a way forward. However, I agree that the process of actually getting a replacement or a new national identity card is actually a nightmare for an ordinary person.

If you go to Kololo, you will think there is a seminar going on. People are just seated up there from morning and you do not know how someone can be moved. I asked, “So, how are they called into the offices?” because they are seated up on those seats there –(Interruption) 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that even if the Prime Minister comes here, he will try to cushion the Government’s position when the people are suffering.

Therefore, as one of the ways forward, in fact, we should not wait for the minister or the Prime Minister’s statements. Let us, as Parliament, pronounce ourselves. One, let us remove the payment of the Shs 50,000 and also reduce the legal requirement of this national ID. I think it is intended to fail our voters from benefitting from SAGE because the conditions are hard.

Therefore, the information I want to give the minister is that the Prime Minister will give a statement, which will just cushion the Government side yet people are suffering. We should drop the Shs 50,000 and that legal regulation of requiring IDs for everything. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to state that I was surprised when I went to replace my National ID - because they had to retake my passport photograph yet I thought this information was already captured in the system; even my biometrics had to be taken afresh –(Interjection)- yes, they had to take my photograph and do everything afresh. So, it is more of an administrative issue though there may be serious technical challenges within. 

I would like to request that we allow that directive to first take place before we find a way forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, things to do with the rights of the population should be treated with urgency. If the Prime Minister wanted to speak to us today, he should have sent me the statements either yesterday or last week.

3.13
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Asamo for highlighting the plight of our students who have not yet received their national identity cards, despite the fact that they were registered from their respective schools.

Madam Speaker, it is even worse for the candidate classes. As we speak, senior six students are approaching the deadline for exam registration. However, they do not have national identity cards and so, schools are now asking parents to instead pay for birth certificates. 

As a way forward, I would like to propose that we direct NIRA to treat the students’ national IDs issues especially those in candidates’ classes, as a special case and print their national identity cards within the shortest time possible - within one month for them to be able to register.

Madam Speaker, about national identity cards for the elderly, when you go to NIRA offices, you get piles of identity cards that have never been distributed to the owners. I would like to suggest that instead of keeping these cards at the districts, they could take them to sub county offices so that the elderly and other people can receive them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have just seen a statement brought to me; not by the Prime Minister but by the Minister of Internal Affairs; it has just come now.

3.15
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time. Our people along the borders are suffering and complaining. They are being discriminated against like non-citizens. I pray that we, the people who live along the borders, should use the LC I, LC II, and LC III systems to identify people who qualify to receive these cards.

Otherwise, as I speak, there are so many people who are complaining and who will not get these cards, especially in the areas around Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo, Obongi, Adjumani and Busia; they all are along the borders and there is a problem. There is need for serious identification of these people using the LC system. Thank you very much.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This House has set a precedent because on two occasions, we have been addressed by experts on two subject matters outside the bar. 

I remember at the time of the nodding syndrome, the Speaker – the presiding officer then - invoked Rule 230(3) and invited a doctor to address Parliament outside the bar. I also still remember that one time while we handling the tax related Bills, the presiding officer then also invited a tax expert to address us outside the bar.

Madam Speaker, under Rule 230, in addition to the two proposals on the way forward either of having a select committee or referring the matter to a committee of Parliament, we can invoke Rule 230(3) and invite the head of NIRA to respond to specific questions outside the bar using one, the precedent that was set and secondly, applying Rule 230. I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what value that will add. To me, there are things we need to investigate and not just to be told from that bar.

3.18
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to contribute to the way forward. Looking at our rules and in view of what has been said so far, we should strengthen our parliamentary committees to do a good job. 

Therefore, I propose that the sectoral committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which covers amongst others, the Ministry of Internal Affairs takes over this matter, under Rule 183(2)(l).

And when you look at Rule 185(b) and (e) - because under there, the functions of the committee include, among others, to initiate or evaluate action programmes of those ministries and sectors and to make appropriate recommendations on them and to also monitor the performance of ministries and departments under that sector. Rule 195 says that subject to the instructions by the House, the deliberations of every committee shall be confined to the matters referred to it by the House.

We should give confidence to our committees instead of allowing other bodies to come in and allow them in a speedy manner with instructions from the House to investigate this and give us their views. Members can go there with their complaints; they will be listened to. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I agree with the idea of setting up a select committee because if the sectoral committee was to help this House and the public out there, by now they should have brought this matter here. It wouldn’t have been the Speaker to bring this matter to the Floor.

First of all, we may not know but I think even the people in NIRA are yearning to have this issue addressed. I sense a system failure that the people in NIRA are grappling with and for us to get these facts, it is only right that we empower a select committee to soberly interact with NIRA and the public and report back here so that we can give a way forward to address this problem.

Madam Speaker, when we were coming up with the idea of having the national identity cards, we raised issues on the kind of technology that was being employed or procured to process these national identity cards. We have the least quality of IDs if we are to compare with other countries. In other countries, national IDs work as driving permits. They also have bank details and much more, just like hon. Nsereko said.

What I should be able to do after my fingerprints have been taken is to - if I have lost my identification card, I report and get a police letter and take fingerprints. Within a few minutes, I should be able to have a new identification card.

We have a challenge that is systematic, which may look small on the surface but I see the entire system needs to be overhauled –(Interruption)

Mr acidri: Thank you, hon. Bernard Atiku. Today, I would like to support some of the efforts being made by Government.

We all know that the NIRA has just got a new Board, which is being led by a former commissioner in the Electoral Commission. We are optimistic that with the new Board, they will be able to streamline policies and programmes within the institution. Therefore, I would like to appeal for calm. 

Mr atiku: Thank you, hon. Acidri for informing the House that indeed, NIRA has had a new Board, which came in with vibrancy. Hopefully, it will also be part in getting a solution to this problem.

I support the proposal for a select committee with a clear timeline to undertake this investigation and report back to the House so that we can resolve this matter once and for all. It is also important to inform the public that somewhere somehow, we have also given room for this laxity to come in. I remember NIRA making announcements for the public to go and pick the identification cards that had already been processed. Right now at district headquarters, there are so many identification cards that have not been collected. What do we do with those identifications cards?

It is important that people begin realising the importance of national identity cards. When we are told to go and register, let us do so. When we are told to go and pick identification cards, let us go and pick them. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I do recall that this House directed that the identity cards, which are at the district, should be taken to the sub-counties. 

Anyway, the minister has come with a statement. I will add him to the Order Paper under item 3(V). We will give him an opportunity to speak to us then we will decide how to move.

Honourable members, we had a misfortune. You remember a young man who seemed to have collapsed from a hostel in China. He is a grandson to hon. Masika. He is called Shafik Mbogo. He was at Shenyang University. I would like us to stand for a moment of silence and sympathise with our colleague.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Speaker: There are a few matters of national concern. I would like to repeat that issues, which are for the constituency, should come in as questions. 

3.26
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is brief. You will recall that when hon. Jovah Kamateeka was awarded an honorary PhD degree, we congratulated her.
 
Last year, 104 candidates sat Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education Examinations (UACE). One per cent failed but our colleague, hon. Peter Sematimba, passed. (Applause)

It is only fair that since he passed, we congratulate him as a House as we have done for the rest. I wanted to bring this to your attention. If he is around, we would like him to stand so that we see him. Thank you. (Applause)

The Speaker: Honourable members, on your behalf, let me congratulate hon. Peter Ssematimba for overcoming a barrier that had caused him discomfort with his foreign qualifications. Congratulations, Peter. (Applause)

3.27
Mr Johnson muyanja (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 
We have been talking about national identity cards but there is also another important matter of birth certificates for all primary pupils who are going to sit for the Uganda National Examinations Board Examinations (UNEB).

Birth certificates used to be issued by sub-counties, town councils or the lower Local Governments. However, right now in our rural areas, parents are being referred to NIRA to get birth certificates, which is equally very expensive and making parents to suffer a lot. 

On Friday, I tested it myself when I was in Mpata Sub-county. A parent was told to go to the sub-county from where he was referred to Mukono. When the same parent came to Mukono, he was referred to Kololo.

My prayer is that the minister concerned should come out and simplify this. Almost all these centres are far connected to some areas. 

Birth certificates used to be given at a minimal fee. I remember five years back, we used to pay Shs 5,000 and we could get short birth certificates from sub-counties, town councils or divisions. That is my humble request.

The Speaker: Are you saying that they need the one from the registrar of births?

Mr MUYANJA: Yes.

The Speaker: Don’t they want the short one?

Mr muyanja: They do not want the short ones now. In the past, we could use the short ones, which we could get from sub-counties or town councils.

Therefore, we are complicating work for our parents and the schools. Registration for the Primary Leaving Examinations may be concluded when those certificates are not yet available.

The Speaker: Those are under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Isn’t he under the Registrar of Births?

Mr agaba: Thank you, hon. Muyanja, for giving way. The information I would like to give briefly is that before, for those of us with children in Primary school, we have been using immunisations cards because these trace the identity of the child at least up to the level of registration. However, they no longer accept immunisation cards. We have been advised to use these cards to acquire the birth certificate such that the child can be registered.

The Speaker: Honourable members, aren’t we under obligation to register births of those children? Why do you wait to go with the immunisation certificate? A child should be registered at birth. It is our duty. Isn’t it? It is out of laziness. Those who do not have are lazy. Why wouldn’t a child be registered by the time they go to primary one? We are being idle. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will explain to us what is happening. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable member diverted us but hon. Muyanja’s issue of was not that we should present immunisation cards. The issue is that children and parents are being sent to NIRA. The issuance of birth certificates is not under the Ministry of Internal Affairs but it should be under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. There is already something wrong. 

I think it is incumbent upon the Attorney-General, who is responsible for that specific docket, to issue a statement here and respond. From today onwards, even before his statement is made, this anomaly should be addressed. 

Otherwise, this does not call for a two-day statement. He came here to make a statement but we do not need it. He should respond and we solve this once and for all, unless he is also a problem. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of registration services, please take note. 

3.33
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I thank hon. Muyanja for bringing it up because he just told me about it. The responsible organ is the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) and they should be the ones to deliver them to the place. It is not National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). Immediately after this, we are going to inquire why that is not being done.  

3.34
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the Attorney-General is talking about is not true. Personally, for my children, I have birth certificates from both NIRA and URSB; the process is very tedious. 

First of all, you must get a letter from the hospital, where the child was born. Then, you are issued with a short certificate. When you go with that short certificate to NIRA, they will not accept it. They want a letter from the LC I and LCIII. When you go with that, the parent must attach a copy of their national Id. Afterwards, you pay Shs 5000 to NIRA. 

When I went to NIRA, I asked them, “how come I got the first birth certificates of my children from URSB and now it is NIRA issuing them”? In my opinion, this is a dilemma. Which one is authentic? Is it the one of NIRA or URSB? –(Interruption) 

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Lucy Akello, that my children have the URSB certificates. However, when we had to lodge in an application, first for passports, then later when one of my twins was joining first year, they still demanded of me to present a birth certificate from NIRA. 

Therefore, I had to go and submit this other certificate from URSB, pay money and then I spent two weeks chasing after the one of NIRA yet I had the other one from URSB.  

MS LUCY AKELLO: Yes, Madam Speaker, it is true that a child would not get a passport. I would also like to confirm that for me to get a passport for my children, I had to get the NIRA birth certificates. That is what is really happening. 

THE SPEAKER: What is provided for in the law?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, in the Registration of Persons Act, Part V states here under: 
“Compulsory registration of birth
Registration of every birth within Uganda is free and compulsory.”

THE SPEAKER: What section is it? 

MR NSEREKO: It is in Part V. I will give you the section because I am just speaking from what I have here. It further says: 
“A registration officer in charge of a registration area shall register birth and shall enter in the register of, or cause to be entered the prescribed particulars of every birth.

Upon registration of a birth by a registration officer, the authority shall allocate a national identification number to a child identified as a citizen of Uganda or alien identification number to a child identified as an alien.” 

Now, when we were making the law - indeed, the law that was there referred to the URSB. We made this one for the compulsory registration of all citizens. That is why NIRA went ahead and carried out a registration exercise of children at schools or attempted to allocate national identification numbers (NINS). 

The question the people are asking up to now is where did that data vanish to? That goes back to the question you asked in the beginning, Madam Speaker, that the data captured is never correlated or what has been captured has either been lost and no one is being open to the people of Uganda. 

That is why at every stage, people are told to “cough” something whereas registration, like you clearly ruled in the beginning, is compulsory at birth. When you give birth, there is an officer at every local government or at an available hospital to take records of the mother, father and place of the birth. If the mother or parent has a national identification number, then they register that number. 

However, as it appears now, this House put all the powers of registration of births and deaths in the hands of NIRA. 

THE SPEAKER: Who is the registration officer, if I was in my subcounty of Kidera?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, NIRA can decentralise some of its functions to junior officers. The question is as to whether they have done so. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, in relation to the primary seven children, the candidates who have not yet got their final birth certificates, why can’t they use the short birth certificate from the hospital because it identifies the father, the mother, the child and the date of birth.

3.40 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Registration of birth is a responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. As for the Ministry of Education and Sports, what we need is confirmation that you are a registered Ugandan. We have not really come up to say that it is either the short or long certificate. If it has been understood that way, I will go back and correct that wrong impression. 

THE SPEAKER: We would like to know whether NIRA actually appointed registration officers in our districts and subcounties because the children are born in those villages.

MR SILWANY: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification specifically before the minister takes the Floor and I would like him to answer it. 

Madam Speaker, when people are being registered centrally, for example, in Kololo, they queue for about seven hours after travelling from their districts. They are then told to come the next day. They have reached a level of calling their members of Parliament. One person called me to help her get a national identity card. She said her daughter had been lining at Kololo for the last three weeks – honourable minister, for three weeks, somebody is pushing to get a national identity card.

I want the minister to come here – and that is lining now to finish the process; not getting the identity card. Then after, you walk – honourable minister, I want you to give us full clarification on all these issues when you are coming to answer these questions and why this is happening in the registration of people in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us know – did you appoint registration officers? I think the country needs to know that they do not have to come to Kampala.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I noticed that you have given me time to present a statement arising out of your direction to the Prime Minister out of the debate of last Tuesday.

It is unfortunate that I was late because I had a personal issue, which I could not avoid and I had to attend to it. It is a personal issue; I do not want to bother Parliament with it.

Having said that, regarding specifically the question you have asked, yes, the Registration of Persons Act, 2015, passed by this Parliament – and I am grateful to my colleague, hon. Muhammad Nsereko for having clarified that you, as Parliament, gave that function of compulsory registration of persons to the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA).

The details and what has been done and so on are in my statement and at the appropriate time, I suggest that for avoidance of repeating myself, when I get that time, I could answer them. Thank you.

3.44
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo Count East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance concerning business, which is going on between our country and other countries. 

I went downtown in Kikuubo, Nakasero and other places to make research. I was trying to check on imported second hand clothes, shoes, handbags, underpants and bras and I discovered that they are dirty and coming from countries which have been mentioned as battling the Coronavirus.

However, businessmen are very busy importing bales of those clothes and things from Italy, Germany or even China and people are very busy buying them. Moreover, the virus can be passed through those clothes – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers, honourable member?

MR MASIKA: I am worried for Ugandans. I would like to ask the Minister of Health and the Minister of Trade and Industry to make Ugandans aware how they are guarding them from this disease, which can be transmitted through second hand clothes.

Once one person is infected, it will be like setting fire on a mountain. I do not know where we shall run. I would like to request the Minister of Health and the Minister of Trade because we are guarding against things coming from the East but some are coming from the West. 

I am very much worried because I have just lost my grandson, whom I have been paying school fees for, in China. I have been in communication with my wife and children on how things are coming in every day and I am very much worried.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Minister has heard. Honourable Minister of Health, I do not know whether you may want to discuss with the minister of trade so that you give us a response on this issue – importation of used clothing, especially inner garments.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, indeed, it is true, the outbreak of Coronavirus has disrupted a lot of business and a lot of economic activities, not only in Uganda.

However, I would like to say that the outbreak was declared on 31 December 2019 and the fact is that some of these businessmen and women store some of their goods for many months.

Some have been in their stores since last year and some of them even when they import, the bales have been there for many months. Therefore, I do not think that sale of bales can really bring problems because Coronavirus had been there for two months.

3.48
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Entebbe Expressway. Recently, I was ging through that route to Entebbe and as I approached Nambigirwa Bridge, I saw a cow crossing the road.

When coming back, I took keen interest to see how it had passed there. I saw that the chain links had been removed. When I continued driving to Busega, I found that the green chain links had been vandalized by some people.

Madam Speaker, I wonder the type of Ugandans doing such things. I also wonder because that road has the police patrolling full time. I wonder whether they see those people doing such things.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the authorities take keen interest to find out what is really happening and they should take immediate action. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Would that be the Minister of Works and Transport? The ministry of works should examine the complaints by hon. Koyekyenga; that the chain link on the Entebbe Expressway has been vandalized but also to report to us about the issue of lights. We have been waiting for an answer on the issue of lighting; there are no lights on that expressway. Minister of Works and Transport, we require answers. Come back to us next Tuesday on both the lights and vandalism.

3.50
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Bisiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding an Act of Parliament – the Capital Markets Authority Act, which established the Capital Markets Authority for the purposes of promoting and facilitating the development of an orderly, fair and efficient capital markets industry in Uganda.

The functions of the Authority are well stated in Section 5 of the Act. However, Madam Speaker, there is a public outcry that the sector is not growing, that the authority is promoting monopoly instead of promoting the inclusion of more investors into the sector. 

Many Ugandans have ended up investing into bond schemes and cryptocurrencies, which are not regulated in Uganda and in the end, they have lost their money simply because the investment sector, which is supposed to be orderly, fair and regulated by the Capital Markets Authority is not developing.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, would like to ask the minister to inform the august House on the progress of the capital markets sector in Uganda ever since the authority was established. In particular, I would like to know how many registered, licensed, authorised and regulated stock exchange, investment advisors, registrars and security brokers there are. 

I also ask the minister to inform the House on what the Capital Markets Authority has done to promote the sector to the general public and to facilitate its development in comparison to other jurisdictions like Kenya. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is given two weeks to come and update the country on the impact of the Capital Markets Authority Act.

3.53
MR FUNGAROO HASSAN (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. It is about the suffering of the elderly and sick people who served this region honourably with the hope that they would get pensions and gratuity to manage their lives after retirement. 

This is a case of former employees of the former East African Railways and Harbours Corporation of the East African Community. I have many of them but as an example, I would like to bring to your attention cases of two people who are in my constituency, brought to me by their chairperson of an association formed by the employees of the former East African Railways and Harbours Corporation.

One of them is called Mzee Madiko A. Adrisi. He worked with the East African Community but from the time he retired in 1977 to date, there have been problems with the payment of his pension. Another is Mr Johnson E.A Kapalanga, also a former East African Community employee who was a captain of the East African Railways and Harbours Corporation piloting the ship on the sea. All these people were last paid their pension, in 1992 and 1994 respectively. They have gone to both the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of East African Affairs and they have been moving in and out of Kampala but all in vain. 

Mr Madiko is sickly and is about to die. His question is: will Government pay his money after his death? Mr Johnson E.A Kapalanga is at home - we call him “Alemuree.” He is an elderly person too. These people served with honour and during their time, there was no question of corruption. What are we going to do? Anyhow, my prayers are:

    1. That as a matter of urgency, let their money and that for other employees of the defunct East African Community be paid because this is not money one is going to look for; it is money that was saved;
    2.  That failure to pay them their pensions quickly is sending a bad signal to those who are still working. It is breeding corruption because people know that if they steal now, they will have – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service, please secure the details of those – Oh, hon. Karubanga is there. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that many senior citizens who retired have not been paid. As Ministry of Public Service, we decentralised all pension payments to the respective votes. 

Last financial year, the Ministry of East African Affairs was given enough funds and there were announcements, made to all those who had claims to go with authentic documents and those who did so, were indeed paid. 
However, at the close of the financial year, many had not submitted their authentic documents and so, the money was taken back.

I would like to say that Government agreed to pay them but it is only after providing authentic documents for verification. There were a lot of ghost pensioners and so, we cannot pay unless we have verified. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, please submit the details to – 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table, the documents as assembled. The first is a complete file with all verified documents. They were even confirmed by people from the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of East African Community. These documents belong to Mr Johnson E.A Kapalanga, a former East African Community employee.

The second file, which also complete and assembled with all documents, is for Mzee Madiko A. Adrisi, a former employee of the East African Community. If all the documents are here, why are you not paying them? I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.     

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON CORONAVIRUS UPDATE AND PREVENTIVE MEASURES TO BE TAKEN BY THE PUBLIC

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a statement to Parliament, of an update on Coronavirus and preventive measures to be taken by people. 

The outbreak of Coronavirus was declared by the People’s Republic of China on 31 December 2019.  The Ministry of Health would like to set the record clear that there is no confirmed case of Coronavirus in Uganda as per today.

On 31 January 2020, the Director General of World Health Organisation declared the novel Coronavirus as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). This declaration means all member states must put in place measurable conditions to prevent, detect and respond to the outbreak.

In many affected countries, the virus affects economies through disruption of travels, trade and associations. The best option of controlling Coronavirus is through prevention. This requires deployment of human resource, logistical supplies and financial resources to enable adequate capacity for early detection, management and control. 

Global Situation

Globally, as of 2 March 2020, the total number of confirmed cases of COVIDl-9 was at 88,948 and of these, majority are in mainland China. The disease has spread to 64 including Egypt, Algeria and Nigeria in Africa and recently Tunisia, Morocco and Senegal.

To date, the number of deaths from Coronavirus disease has gone to over 3,000 and the World Health Organisation risk classification has been upgraded to VERY HIGH risk for China at regional level and global level.

Ugandan Situation 

Uganda has no confirmed case of COVID-19 as of today 03 March 2020. However, risk of its importation remains very high. As you are aware, Uganda has maintained its open entry policy for travellers even from affected countries as most of these nations have major business, tourisms and other links within our country.
 
To date, a total of 722 travellers have been isolated for purposes of follow up. Majority of these are Chinese nationals, some are Ugandan citizens while others are from other nations.

Out of the people who came out of these countries, 41 per cent have completed their mandatory days of self-isolation as per the recommendation of World Health Organisation. Additionally, so far samples from those suspected to be having the disease have been tested and all tested negative. 

So far 14 samples have been taken and the most recent were taken from four foreigners, one from France and three Chinese who were isolated at Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital tested negative for Coronavirus Disease (COVID 19). The four individuals will now undergo self-isolation for 14 days and will be monitored daily by Ministry of Health surveillance officers.

Action taken

The Ministry of Health has enhanced surveillance measures for all travellers from COVID-19 affected countries. Currently with guidance from World Health Organisation (WHO), all travellers from countries with higher number of cases are required to undertake 14 days of mandatory self-isolation. 

So far the Ministry of Health has flagged China, Japan, Republic of South Korea, Islamic Republic of Iran, Thailand, Italy, Germany, France and Singapore.

All high risk travellers under isolation are monitored daily by the Ministry of Health surveillance teams. Travellers who develop symptoms during follow up period are checked, samples taken and tested at Uganda Virus Research Institute.

The Ministry of Health continues to engage media outlets and other communication channels to disseminate public information on COVID. We have gone ahead to develop information materials for educating the public on the disease and these materials are now available in different languages.

Screening at Entebbe International Airport and all other border points of entry like Malaba-Busia, has been strengthened with deployment of additional health workers, equipment and infection prevention materials.

Entebbe and Naguru Referral Hospitals as well as Mulago National Referral Hospital Grade A have been prepared to receive and manage suspected and confirmed cases in case of any eventuality. 

In addition, all regional referral hospitals are being prepared to manage people who might fall sick. Eleven (11) ambulances have been provided to transport suspected cases to the appropriate level of care.

The Uganda Virus Research Institute has the necessary equipment and reagents to test and confirm any suspected COVID-19 sample in the country. Uganda is one of the countries that has the facility to test the virus. The Ministry of Health has also mobilized a mobile laboratory facility for additional testing capacity. Training for usage of this facility has been completed and arrangement for its use is being set.

Preventive measures to be taken by public
 
The Minister of Health has been providing regular press statements to the public on the necessary preventive measures. The Ministry also issued the DOs and DON'Ts guidance to the public for prevention of COVID-19

What must be done to protect one's self? (DOS) 

    1. Regularly and thoroughly clean your hands with an alcohol-based rub or wash them with water and soap 
    2. Cover your mouth and nose with tissue or a handkerchief when coughing and sneezing. 
    3. Maintain reasonable distance between yourself and someone who is coughing or sneezing 
    4. Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth with dirty hands. Hands touch many surfaces which can be contaminated with the virus and you can transfer the virus from the surface to yourself 
    5. If you have fever, cough and difficulty in breathing, seek medical care immediately or call a health worker and alert them about your condition.
    6. People with flu - like symptoms should use facemasks to cover the nose and mouth and stay home where possible, in a well-ventilated room.
    7. If you are caring for individuals who have symptoms such as cough and fever, you are encouraged to use a facemask to cover your nose and mouth for personal protection 
    8. Clean and disinfect frequently touched surface such as doorknobs/handles, car doors and others daily with regular household disinfectant or water and soap, including the offices where we sit and public places.
    9. All travellers coming from countries affected by the Coronavirus disease follow guidance given by health workers at the airport and other border entry points, including the Members of Parliament.

What must not be done? 

    1. Avoid hand-shaking and hugging at all times. Allow me congratulate you, Madam Speaker for leading by example. You did that many times, even when attending the women leadership conference. I would also like to thank His Excellency for leading by example. We need to ask Ugandans, and our people – 
    a) to avoid handshaking;
    b) to avoid close contact with people who are visibly sick with flu-like symptoms (fever, cough, sneeze); 
    c) when sick with flu-like symptoms avoid going to public places, offices and public gatherings; remain at home to avoid infecting others;
    d) you do not need to wear medical masks if you do not have respiratory symptoms such as cough, sneezing or running nose; 
    e) we are asking the public not to take self-medication, especially antibiotics; 
    f) do not spit in public; find a secluded place like toilets or pit latrines in which to spit; 
    g) anybody, including members of Parliament, should delay travel to countries that currently have many patients with coronavirus. If you must travel, please, follow the protective and preventive measures issued by the World Health Organisation; 
    h) avoid travel if you have flu-like symptoms.

Madam Speaker, in addition to the dos and don'ts, the Ministry of Health, together with the Ministry of Water and Environment and other relevant ministries, agencies and departments as well as development partners, will this month launch a campaign towards cleaning our environment and maintaining good hygiene and sanitation. Having, living in and keeping a clean environment is a constitutional right, according to Article 39 and Article 17 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The campaign that will run under the theme “A clean Environment - My responsibility” will ensure that every last Saturday of every month is designated for the cleaning up of our environment.

We appeal to all Ugandans to join hands together and ensure our environment is clean so as to prevent common preventable disease. We call upon all hospitals, health facilities, schools, institutions of higher learning, market places, offices and worship places to practise frequent hand washing, avoid handshaking and maintain clean environment. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I am confident that the Government of Uganda, with a good track record in management of public health threats, including the recent spread of the Ebola outbreak from the neighbouring Democratic Republic of Congo, will do everything possible within her means to prevent, detect and respond to any suspected case of COVID-19. The mortality due to COVID-19 is relatively lower compared to Ebola, which the country managed previously.

We need, however, to appreciate that the COVID-19 is knocking at every country’s door and this requires vigilance and alertness from all Ugandans. I, therefore, advise and urge all Ugandans to remain vigilant and alert, avoid rumours and fears. The Ministry of Health will be giving frequent updates and information to the general public about this disease.

We, once again, urge all Ugandans to avoid handshaking, hugging, mass gatherings and to observe infection, prevention and control practices such as washing hands with soap and clean water at all times both at health facilities and communities. In case of any public events, all the organisers should work together with the Ministry of Health and security agencies so that we observe close infection control measures. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to debate much. This is really just information. One minute, hon. Okupa.

4.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the minister tell the country where one can get these face masks in case they have the respiratory symptoms you have metnioned?

Secondly, you have talked about self-isolation – that people who come from these countries with high cases of coronavirus should do self-isolation. However, you are forgetting that as one is on the plane, in case one is infected, he is with many people. As they alight at Entebbe, you identify and say, “please, go for self-isolation.” What about those who have been moving with them?

The third issue is about putting Naguru as one of the isolation centres. I live there and last week, I had a patient in Naguru. It is one of those very congested hospitals. At night, patients even sleep on the stairs. I think it would not be the best place for us to have an isolation centre. It should have possibly been another place, which is isolated, like in Nakasongola there –(Laughter)- or in the islands on Lake Victoria. Identify a place and build a temporary health facility. That is what it means to do isolation – because you are isolating them from the majority.

Madam Speaker, finally, the minister should give us the list of the countries with high coronavirus infection rates, where she said people who are coming from are going to be isolated.

On the issue of the schools, we get worried about our children and good enough, the Minister of Education and Sports is here. You should insist on the schools, where our children go, both day and boarding, to have these sanitation facilities and encourage the children. Otherwise, they are among the most risky places. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the precautions and information given. I am concerned about the fact that the minister said they have not yet received the money that they put in the budget to help in the prevention. I think it was around Shs 25 billion.

In your communication, you gave a number of instructions and dos and don’ts to the population. However, I hope it is the same message you have given to the facilities. It is a fact that the facilities down at the lower levels do not even have enough resources to keep the basic cleanliness and disease control measures. They do not have things like jik and now, you are talking about hand sanitisers. What have you provided to those facilities for them to be able to effect your dos and don’ts? Thank you.

4.18
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for giving us very good precautions against this dangerous virus. I would like to find out a few things.

Honourable minister, I would like to find out the status of our students who are in China as per today. We have not heard about them for the last one week. Can you brief us on how they are?

Secondly, you talked very seriously about public gatherings. We are going towards the campaigns and elections are at the door and in a few months, we are starting our primaries. That means we are beginning to gather people in large numbers. I would like to find out from you, honourable minister - what advice do you give to the Government? Would you advise Government to postpone the forthcoming elections? (Laughter) The situation is serious.

Madam Speaker, we need to take this matter seriously because we shall be moving up and down and gathering people in large numbers. (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I am giving information. The minister said that we should avoid public gatherings. I presume Parliament is a public place. I do not know what will happen, though there are no cases. The minister said we are at a high risk. I really do not know whether Parliament will operate properly with that kind of statement. Otherwise, this is causing fear. Thank you very much.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Finally, honourable minister, currently, if you go to prisons, you will find that they are very congested. A very small room accommodates more than 100-200 people – sleeping in that room like this building. 

4.21
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): I would like to find out from the minister something on page three of her statement. She said 722 travellers had been isolated for 14 days. I would like to find out from the minister whether this virus cannot be transmitted if one does not show symptoms. 

Secondly, the WHO has given us guidelines but I would like to know the status of the vaccine. Is there any research? Do we have the vaccine now? Thank you.

4.22
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information. However, I would like to seek for clarification.

The minister has told us that some people have tested negative. However, I would like to seek more clarification regarding the quality of tests. I do not know whether they are diagnostic or confirmatory tests.

The reason I am asking this is that recently, a lady has been circulating information on social media. She went and tested and her results were negative, yet, she is HIV/AIDS positive. I would like to find out from the minister how confirmatory these tests are. Otherwise, some of our laboratories are known for giving false results. We know what Ugandans can do. These people can easily be compromised; a patient can be positive, yet, you are telling us they are negative.

Madam Speaker, that lady has been circulating results, which indicate that she is negative. The test was done from one of the facilities. Honourable minister, we want a confirmation from you whether these test results you are giving us are confirmatory or diagnostic results.

4.23
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to also congratulate the ministry for the planned “clean environment” campaign. I wonder why it has taken that long.

Regarding the Coronavirus, one wonders; if it was Uganda that had these high risk cases with many people dying, would Ugandans be allowed to travel the world freely? Why do we keep an open travel policy and allow people from high risk countries to come in? They are coming intentionally. They are leaving their places and coming here so as to infect us. Why have we kept an open travel policy?

Secondly, we are planning to spend a lot of money, which we could avoid, if we restricted the entry of people from the high risk countries. Why don’t we work with the other countries to ensure that passengers are screened before they board the planes?

Madam Speaker, the environment on the plane is even worse. It is conducive for people to contract this disease. I think we would achieve much more, if we made sure that there is screening at the airport. Of course, we will continue to screen but you know very well that it is high risk. Otherwise, we do not have what it takes and the virus does not have a cure.

To say that people are being screened and quarantined is not enough for us since we do not have the capacity to contain it. I would suggest that we take the precautionary measures to avoid infection rather than wanting to treat. Thank you very much.

4.25
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for that good report.

One, this is a very highly contagious disease and very difficult to control. You are talking about measures at very big airports, for instance, Entebbe. What about these small crossing points like Kisoro, Kagitumba, Kitagata and Mutukula? 

Madam Speaker, remember people move by buses not necessarily by air. I would like to, therefore, know from the honourable minister what measures we are putting in place to cover some of those small entry points.


Two, you talked of massive public awareness. They are not there. It was actually until recently that while in the constituency, I saw the President talk about it seriously. That was when I started quoting the President. I also read the story on the Saturday Monitor, when they reported some details.

Honourable minister, why is it taking long for the ministry to come up with massive public awareness campaigns on various radio stations in different languages? We need them so that we can communicate to them about this disease. Otherwise, there is already a rumour that this disease will not attack black people and that when you are an alcoholic, you will not get infected. These are some of the rumours that should be dispelled by you, the people who hold the technical know-how.

The minister articulated clearly the risky group. You and I are in a very risky group. What arrangements have you put in place for members of Parliament who are constantly with the masses? For goodness sake, what are we going to do now? Do you have any programmes and plans for us to safeguard our lives?

Finally, what about the imports from these risky countries, like China? Imports keep on coming every day. Which import should we avoid especially from countries like China, Italy and America? Otherwise, we depend very much on imports from China. What do we do about them? Are they risky? Thank you.

4.29
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem?

MR OBOTH: The “General” may need help. The way he sneezed here is not normal. (Laughter) When I tried to ask him, he said that is why he is going out; he is not okay. He might need help. Madam Speaker, this is not a matter we should joke about. That is why he is getting out.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether our medical team is in the vicinity.

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for the statement. Like the medical practitioners always say, “prevention is better than cure”.

Among the recommendations that were mentioned, I did not hear anything to do with the ban on Ugandans going to these high risk countries that have been named; neither banning those nationals coming to Uganda as a preventive measure. I would have loved   that the ministry does that so that we are secure.

Madam Speaker, when you made your address, you said that the Commission on the Status of Women Conference that was supposed to take place in New York in a week’s time has been called off. If countries that have facilities and human resource to prevent such a disease can call off such conferences, what about Uganda, which does not have these facilities? Why wouldn’t we be preventive? Why don’t we emphasise more of preventive measures by borrowing a leaf from countries that have put a ban on people traveling in for conferences and a ban on flights or massive gatherings? Otherwise, since they are saying that –(Interruption)

MR OGUZU: Thank you, honourable colleague. There is a report that was issued by the WHO, Africa Region, highlighting Uganda as not being adequately prepared to handle this virus. Same was said of Kenya.

I advise the minister to institute a multi-sectoral approach for handling this issue. There is work for Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Health but all we get is a report from Ministry of Health alone, which does not mention what the other sectors are doing to contain the problem.

We are not adequately prepared to handle this and this is stated in the WHO report, which Uganda has not responded to. Thank you. 

MS AKURUT: Thank you, honourable member, for this information. We need to take keen interest for the good of our people. It is quite scary and unless we prepare ourselves by using some of these precautionary measures, we are at a high risk. (Member timed out.)

4.32
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I have a few things that I would like the minister to clarify on. My source of information is the media.

The media have reported that this virus can go up to 14 days before showing symptoms. It has also been reported that even someone without any symptoms can transmit the virus. Why are you guaranteeing only 14 days? 

The other issue is self-quarantine. I am well aware that you have just given a majority of the people a number and told them to go home and quarantine themselves, which in many cases is not very practical. How many people are quarantined in medical facilities?

There is also the issue of congestion in our hospitals. Last weekend, I was at Nsambya Hospital; it is very packed. Could you, please, in your guidelines, give people specific places to go to in case they have symptoms? Otherwise, they will be deadly to the rest of the patients.

I am aware that nationals and other people have continued to arrive from China yet, developed countries have put a lockdown on anybody from mainland China. Can’t our country come up with guidelines beyond the WHO recommendations? You are using it as a benchmark? They have not put a total ban. Can’t we come out with our own guidelines?

Lastly, the business people are very worried that they are making losses. Can a specific message that is multi-sectoral come out clearly for them.

You seem to use the Ebola experience as the yard stick, yet, the Coronavirus is being presented as more lethal and airborne than Ebola.

Countries are finding isolated places away from the main hospitals and preparing them before receiving coronavirus suspects. Thank you.

4.35
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her well detailed report though there are some areas, which I think should be improved. 

First of all, when you talk about entry points, you realise that most of them now do not have enough protective gear for those working there to help them combat transmission of this outbreak.

When you talked about quarantining those who have checked, you forgot to take an example of what happened in Japan, when the ship arrived and they only tested and quarantined the occupants. Those who were not positive were left to go but after a few days, all those left to walk out, were discovered to be sick.

That means whoever enters Uganda must be quarantined for some time. Even when you are on the plane, this virus spreads like bushfire. The only way is to quarantine the entire flight and watch the occupants for some time before releasing them to go.

Another concern is about those members of Parliament who have just returned from far East; they should not come to Parliament till a certain period has passed because they are bound to contaminate us.

There is a group, which came from South Korea last week and they are here. How safe are we? I would like to request Government to put a ban on the two categories of people, members of Parliament, Executive and the business community trading in those high risk countries for the time being.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. If a container is loaded in China, are we safe offloading it here in Uganda? Some consignments take three weeks to six months maximum. If they are loaded from China and offloaded here, are we safe?

MR MBABAALI: Thank you for that information. I request the Government to temporarily ban public gatherings in the interest of health. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Revenue Authority should be prepared because this situation is likely to cause a shortfall in revenue collection. That is about to be experienced because people are not trading as regularly as before.

MR KOLUO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister should clarify; yesterday, I came back from Toroma, my constituency. The majority of the people are now preparing for the rains. Their main activity as of now is drinking alcohol and sharing tubes using calabashes. The minister should give some information on what such people should do. Thank you.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister has already constituted a committee of different ministers and ministries. The committee is chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, deputised by the Minister of Health and other relevant ministries like Trade and others.

This committee is going to meet and discuss, especially on the upcoming events that are to be held in this country like the conferences, summits and huge events that will bring people from outside the country. They will give feedback on Monday and then, the Prime Minister, in consultation with you, will communicate that position, including the travels; whether they are going to postpone the conferences, give a go ahead or reschedule.

The second area they will look at is our travels as the Executive, as Members of Parliament and as the public on minimising our travels. That will certainly affect all of us Members of Parliament and the community. So, that will be discussed, in consultation with you, Madam Speaker and a position will be taken so that we move in the same direction.

I would like to make it clear that a few questions have been asked here on the laboratory tests; we use protocols. There is protocol one and protocol two. Protocol one is basically a screening test and the scripts are from China, which screen the first protocol. 

The second protocol is confirmatory protocol; that is the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) recommended by WHO, which is a confirmatory test. The third protocol, which will be from Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), will also come in place. However, these two are what we are using most especially the confirmatory test.

Concerning the vaccine, a lot of research is ongoing and we are all hopeful that sooner or later, vaccines will come in place. We are very hopeful that many countries have put their heads together. 

On public gathering, as of now, the position is that we cannot stop the public from gathering. However, we are giving conditions for organisers of public gatherings to follow. Those are the dos and don’ts that I have mentioned, Madam Speaker.

For self-isolation, I wish to state that for now, we are isolating people who come from the high risk countries where cases of coronavirus are. Those who present with signs and symptoms are isolated in the hospital. We cannot really take the whole plane to be isolated but with time – since the committee has already been put in place - in case there are new developments, it will be communicated to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to answer, please. Let her finish first.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me complete. For the first month, this is when you are looking after a very sick patient and it takes place in a hospital. We are looking forward to procure more face masks plus sanitisers, so that it can be used.

About the border posts, right now, screening is taking place in Busia and Malaba but we are also trying to strengthen other border posts. The fact is that there are very many small border points, as we are all aware. We really need collective effort to streamline that.

On students in China, I request the minister to respond to that. The list of high risk countries has been provided here but we will still provide the 64 countries, which are affected. 

On Naguru Hospital, we are aware of the congestion but there is already an isolation centre. When we had a cholera outbreak, we took them there. When there is an outbreak, we take them there and so, the facility is already there, apart from the hospital beds. 

On the schools, most importantly, we are very mindful of our children in school. We have already discussed with the honourable minister and the responsible people on how schools can procure sanitisers to ensure that we really protect our children in terms of hygiene and sanitation. 

We cannot stop businessmen and women but what we are saying is that regarding all preventive measures, if possible, at entry points, markets, the business people in the buses, in the market and all gatherings. If we can provide sanitisers and clean environment, so that our people can really maintain prevention, which is better than cure. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item 3 (2). Do you want to talk about the schools? Let the Minister of Education and Sports tell us how he is going to manage the children.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to register our condolences to the family of the late Shafik Mbogo, family of one of our students who died from the University of Shenyang. What I would like to clear here is this young man did not die of Coronavirus. They are investigating the cause of the death and we have been assured that by the end of the week, we will know the exact cause.

Madam Speaker, we have 800 students in China. In Wuhan University alone, we have 105 students. Government is in touch with these students through our embassy in Beijing. At the beginning of the week, $60,000 was sent to the students and the students. They have an association that has tried also to help them stay together.

Government has decided not to bring back these students because it is safer and the Government of China is also helping them with most of the provisions. The studies are continuing to study online. I wanted to share that with you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item 3(2).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON A REPORT BY A TECHNICAL TEAM OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY THAT SOME MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS IN UGANDA HAVE INADEQUATE FACILITIES TO TRAIN AND GRADUATE MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS

4.48
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to seek for more time because this is a very sensitive matter. We have called meetings with stakeholders and we shall be able to conclude these meetings by the end of the week. So, next week on Tuesday, I will be able to give you a well prepared report about the whole issue. 

I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The paper has been deferred to Tuesday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WILDLIFE ACT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is absent. Please, reflect it to tomorrow’s Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF STREET LIGHTING IN KAMPALA CITY

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement on the status of street lighting in Kampala City. Currently, only eight per cent of the city is lit with a total of 5,436 lights, of which 74.8 per cent are fully functional and the rest are not functional.

Allow me to indicate how many lights we have per division. In the Central Division, we have 2,436 and the network coverage is 45 per cent. Those which are in good working condition are 1,991 and those, which are faulty are 445.

For Rubaga Division, we have a total of 477 lights and nine per cent of the network is covered. Those which are working are 271 and those which are faulty are 206.

In Nakawa Division, we have 931 lights and this coverage is 17 per cent of the division. 642 are in good working condition and 289 are faulty.

In Mankidye Division, we have 914 lights and the coverage is 17 per cent. Those which are working are 695 and 219 are faulty.

Madam Speaker, allow me to continue with Kawempe Division in that table. Kawempe has 678 lights and the coverage is 12 per cent. Those which are fully functional are 469 and 209 are faulty. As I said, the total of lights in the City is 5,436 and those which are working are 4068; the faulty ones are 1,368.

Madam Speaker, I would like to state here that the 40 lights are faulty due to the fact that we have a very thin maintenance budget and we cannot maintain all of them at ago. With funding from the non-tax revenue that we collect as an Authority, Uganda Road Fund and Government of Uganda funding, KCCA can only afford part of the existing street lighting network.

With the above mentioned sources of funding, KCCA lacks the financial capacity to meet the capital expenditure to increase street lighting coverage from the current 80 per cent to 100 per cent. Despite the increasing demands for lighting day by day, our budget remains very small. In a synopsis, if the City is to be substantially lit, then KCCA needs to seek for separate funding in form of a loan or a grant.

In view of the above and in a bid to take steps forward to the lighting up of the City, the following inputs have been pursued. KCCA has completed the street lighting master plan for the entire city and with support from French Agency for Development; local and international consultants were procured to develop a street lighting master plan for Kampala City.

Madam Speaker, the funding for the master plan development was a grant from the Cities and Climate Change in Sub-Saharan Africa Initiative Fund of the French Agency for Development. The master plan development process was designed to be conducted into two phases namely; phase one is development of the street lighting master plan for the entire city. This was supposed to run between April and November 2018.

Under this, the following was involved;

    1. Estimation of the financial requirement for investment, which was estimated at €70 million.
    2. Assessment of the technologies and options that will be adopted in Kampala City where we concluded that the best option would be usage of lithium in batteries for solar systems and LED for grid connected lights. 
    3. Identification of pilot precepts and which wins for the investment phase.
    4. Proposed mode of operation and maintenance over a period of 10 years where assessment shall be made on whether to revert the maintenance to Government or renew the contract of the contractor.

Phase two is project evolvement. This phase commenced in February 2019 and ended in November 2019. This phase involved the following;

    1. A detailed feasibility study.
    2. Detailed design and 
    3. Preparation of tender documents for selected pilot schemes and little fitting or rehabilitation of the existing network of lighting on the national grid.

Under this phase, it was also revealed that 75 per cent of the lights to be installed shall be solar powered and 25 grid connected. The solar lights will be acquired through a design build operate contract for a period of 10 years and on the other hand, Umeme will carry out the operation and maintenance of the grid connected lights.

Following the financial estimation for investment under phase one, it was revealed that the cost of implementing the street lighting master plan will be approximately €70 million.

Madam Speaker, the above mentioned budget will be utilised as follows; 

    a) Procurement of 20,000 solar lights and also cater for associated operation and maintenance cost under a design build operate model for a period of 10 years.
    b) Procurement and installation of 15,000 grid connected lights of the LED type or led time.
    c) Upgrade and little fit or rehabilitation of the existing on grid street lighting network.
    d) Part of this fund will be used to refurbish selected walkways and pedestrian crossings that are currently in bad shape prior to the installation of the lights.
    e) Installation of proper lighting in both formal and informal markets to ensure extended working hours.

The above interventions have increased the current street lighting coverage; to approximately 85 per cent by the year 2023. It is envisaged that the 15 per cent will be achieved during the implementation of projects with funding from African Development Bank.

Madam Speaker, to a large extent, implementation of street lighting master plan is pending the approval of the €70 million loan from ADB. And the additional €7 million grant from European Union by the approving authority. If the funding is approved, implementation phase can be completed in two years.

Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude by emphasising that city lighting is very important; it contributes a lot to the security of the city dwellers especially those who leave their work places late. We are committed as managers of the City to provide lighting but we continue to request that Parliament appropriates enough funds for this purpose. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Just few comments. Central Business District, it means hon. Nsereko.

4.59
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like to request for at least five minutes because of this topic and I hope the House benefits from the information that I will give them.

Whereas it is true like the honourable minister has stated that Kampala has about 5,436 lights or 5000+ lights, what is not true is that more than 40 per cent of these lights are functional. This is evident from where we all stay. 

You do not need rocket science to see that these lights are not only faulty, like she says. When you say “faulty”, it means maybe they are repairable. Probably, she is telling us that if Parliament appropriates them this amount of money, they can replace the bulbs or the wires that have been affected. They are actually not functional and they have never worked.

We have over 1,000 villages in Kampala. That means that in ratio, there are five lights per village in Kampala City. A village is occupied by an average of 7,000 to 10,000 people; those that work and those that reside within Kampala. This means that the lighting is insufficient.

Going to the cost of what is projected, for Kampala to be well lit with the LED lights that she is talking about – I know hon. D’Ujanga is here and he knows a lot about lighting. The average cost of raising a hybrid pole, which entails the following; it would have the light, a support system for the internet batteries and a camera - 

When this Government came to borrow money from StanChart for cameras, we told them; “You are making a big mistake. You are borrowing for cameras and the next thing you will be here for will be borrowing for the lights. You will have one pole for the cameras and another for the lights.” This is a duplication of work.

We told them that there is a hybrid system where the light is embedded with the camera at 360 degrees and an internet port that costs € 2,000 per pole; fully fixed with labour costs. The extra power that is derived from that light during times when it is not functioning, is taken back to the grid.

Honourable members, I hope you understand this. The solar pole that we have shall be a living organism; not only stationary. It provides these three services; it hosts the camera, has an internet hotspot connection system and the extra power that it generates is sold back to the grid. It is self-sustaining.

This was not considered. The Speaker in the Chair then, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah ruled that we even sit as the Opposition and Government and interrogate these alternative policies and plans that can help us save and also acquire the best service for this country.

The honourable minister is talking about €70 million. Technical officers have taken political leaders for granted. They think either political leaders do not understand or they do not do research. The money you are presenting to Parliament is exorbitantly high. That means that each pole that is to provide only light is costing the taxpayer an average of about €3,000. That is grossly expensive and highly unacceptable.

A hybrid pole that has a camera, an internet hotspot and can remit power back to the grid can cost us averagely € 2,000. Why should we go for what is expensive and leave out what is affordable but also productive? 

This has been done in Dar-es-Salam. Part of it has started in Kigali, Rwanda. Let us benchmark and come up with things that are affordable but also profitable.

If we have, say, 20,000 lights, like she is saying, that means that what we will have paid for, we shall even recover. We shall get an extra 20 megawatts in form of power that is being remitted back to the grid. 

During the times that it is not functional, it stores power, which is remitted back to the grid and it is functional. That is the lighting system that is being adopted in modern societies.

Currently, in Europe, they are replacing all the old fashioned lights with a new hybrid lighting system that has the camera, internet hotspot and produces extra energy that is remitted back onto the grid at a cheaper cost. 

In my view, it would be prudent for us to explore means of not only importing this energy but also empowering our aluminium producers here to produce this so that the only component we import are the LED lights and the cameras. The rest of it is produced by our Ugandans - Buy Uganda, Build Uganda. In so doing, we not only save but also help promote our economy. 

Therefore, we do not disagree with you that Kampala City needs a proper lighting system. We disagree with you on the cost that is provided to you by these technical officers who over exaggerate the cost knowing that probably, some members of Parliament do not carry out adequate research or they think we have to take their thing as what we call “rocket science” that some of us cannot read and comprehend.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that within your wisdom and if this House would like to take up this matter, we form a bi-partisan committee on matters of Kampala City and urban centres and other cities. When you talk about Kampala, it also involves Wakiso. You are talking about the airport and the airport road, which are in Wakiso. You have been talking about the lighting on the Entebbe Expressway.

Therefore, this will also affect areas within the metropolitan trading parts of Kampala to include the areas of Kira, Lugazi and Mukono. We are living in a dark environment that is a threat to the security of our people but also we would not like to be taken for granted that when someone presents something that is urgently needed, people whisk in certain things in order to make it expensive. Thank you.

The Speaker: I have to put a smile on the minister’s face. After a long time of asking, now, we have lights in my area. I live in Makindye Division. At least something is happening.

5.07
Mr asuman basalirwa (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement.

I have been a chairman of KCCA Evaluation Court. Section 37 of the Local Government Rating Act mandates KCCA to have what we call a Property Tax Fund. 75 per cent of the collections from property rates are supposed to go into that Fund. There is supposed to be a special account where those funds go. 

Part of that money is supposed to go to street lighting, among other activities. I am aware that KCCA has been collecting property rates. When the minister was making a statement, she did not make mention of the Property Tax Fund. How much of it is collected and how much goes to street lighting? 

This idea of funding constraints she mentions would greatly be addressed by the money we raise through property rates. Unfortunately, by the time I was in KCCA, there were no separate accounts for property rates. The money would be collected and spent in other activities without necessarily focusing on what the law mandates KCCA to do.

I would like to know from the minister how much of the property rates is being used for street lighting and whether as of now, KCCA has established a Property Fund as required by the law. I thank you.

5.09
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know who is concerned with universities like Makerere and Kyambogo. I have been to Kyambogo University but you cannot imagine that while it is a university in Kampala, the lighting is very poor. I know because I am a parent there. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that universities house many of our youths and so, they should be exciting places to live in. We need to ensure that our universities are well lit. 

Even the roads, like those within Kyambogo University, are very dusty. Now that we are talking about lighting in Kampala and the Minister of Works and Transport is here, we need to let him know that there are issues of dusty roads. We need to ensure these places are well catered for. 

My other concern is about lighting of the Airport Road. We should not only look at the Entebbe Express Highway but also this route. If a tourist or anybody is coming from Entebbe Airport, they should be psychologically prepared for where they are going. You cannot leave the airport and enter into darkness. You should move from the airport with the lights on the street; we have travelled to South Africa. In Johannesburg, when you leave the airport, you realise the entire route is well lit. This makes one prepared psychologically about how the City they are going to, looks like but in Uganda, the moment one leaves the airport, they immediately get onto a dark road. 

Madam Speaker, we need to treat this as one project. Thank you.   

5.12
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the minister. These days, we have very serious ministers and this particular one is bound to take action on what we shall talk about here because I trust her.

Madam Speaker, I have a concern about our tourist areas. A case in point is Namugongo. Move around it and you will see that it is clouded by darkness at night. You will fail to know whether it is really Namugongo or there is a dark cloud in the night. We would love the minister, if she is a serious minister, like I described her at the beginning, to take this seriously and take action. 

I feel that we need serious regulations on the maintenance of these lights. The people who purport to help you maintain them seem to be the very ones stealing some of them. Some of them seem to be thieves. We have seen that people who own these climbers for climbing the poles might be the ones stealing some of the lights. 

I think we need a regulation to know who owns these climbers and how they should be allowed to use them. You should not climb the pole just because you have an umeme uniform yet, you are destined to destroy everything and the next day, we do not have lights. Therefore, we need a regulation around that for all the urban centres, probably not only KCCA, though this debate is on the KCCA lighting system. 

Madam Speaker, it is also very clear that we need a serious master plan for the lighting system. Like hon. Nsereko has observed, a hybrid plan will save us. It would be good for us to have a serious utility corridor so that we do not have – I have noted that they are digging trenches for the big sewer systems but the contractors need to move a pole and the cameras. What is the country doing? It is very costly. We need a master plan.

It is also high time I put this House to notice that we are coming up with a motion soon. Government needs to get money for the other urban centres. Municipalities are suffering; we are in darkness. Our issue now is to collect money and pay taxes for the rest. There is even no loan in this House that has been passed to support the lighting of municipalities. That is a very serious observation. Come to Soroti, Mbale and Moroto; you will notice that the lighting is dead. Our issue here is always to say “aye.” We pass loans but municipalities have never been supported –(Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that this House approved loans for works in the municipalities under the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Programme. Soroti Municipality is actually one of the beneficiaries. 

If you move to Tororo - most of the towns and municipalities have been beautified and had their street lighting installed. If you have not yet received this, please, be patient because there is additional funding. It is under the most recent loans that were passed under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

5.16
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Street lighting is very critical, especially in urban areas for our voters, who may not know the habits of the urban dwellers. You may come from Butaleja after selling your rice but when you reach Kampala, somebody just comes and snatches whatever small money you may have got.  So, when we talk about street lighting, we need to treat it as a very critical matter. 

There is a tendency of Government officials hiking prices. The City Member of Parliament has just spoken here but you will find that mafias are now planning for the loan, whose motion the minister is going to bring to the House. In fact, only 30 per cent goes to the real work. I have just been calculating.  The €70 million that the minister is talking about can purchase around 28,000 lights, which should be enough to light up almost all the municipalities. If we are to pass a loan, I will agree with hon. Aogon. 

Honourable minister, you talked about street lighting in Tororo. USMID in Tororo only covered 1.3 kilometres. Phase 2 will even work on less than a kilometre. What we are saying with respect to the hybrid lights is that, where there is no tarmac road, they can put a solar light and camera. 

Recently, there is a lady who died - and she was a supporter of People Power - they tried to look for the images but they are not there because they purported that the cameras were destroyed. 

If Kampala City Member of Parliament is bringing a motion for loan request, it should not only be for Kampala. Hon. Nsereko should also accommodate other places because if we get 28,000 lights – at least, Kampala can take 8,000 lights; the other cities like Jinja and Kamuli can each get 1000 lights. 

5.18
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to expound it further. Other than us just concentrating on Kampala,  the problem of street lighting is not just in Kampala but in the entire country.

There are a lot of cases of people being murdered left and right because our streets are not lit. So, whoever intends to do any harm to anyone is able to do it because the streets are dark. We have roads being constructed within and outside the city but you find the lighting is not part of it. Is it possible for us to include the lighting as a component for all new roads that are being constructed? 

I can give an example of my own district. We have received a new road, Soroti to Moroto but I would like to assure you that part of it, a kilometre or so, they have put street lights. Although they have not started working, soon we are going to have lights within the streets in the district.

Therefore, the recommendation I wanted to make is that for whichever road either within the city here or outside the city, we should have a component of lighting on those roads. 

We should have an inter-ministerial where both Energy and Works sectors work together so that this becomes hybrid, as it has been proposed. I think if we go by this, we would have solved many problems at the same time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a known fact that Kampala is one of the darkest cities in the World; even in the region. It is also a known fact that most of Uganda at night is dark.

Madam Speaker, I have seen our debate mainly concentrating on infrastructure to deliver public lighting. However, we have not asked ourselves which electricity we are going to use.

We all know that due to lack of foresight, the NRM administration sold and liberalised the power sector. This power is not ours. That is why we are struggling with public lighting. We are struggling with providing basic utilities to Ugandans –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my honourable colleague, hon. Acidri, is he in order to insinuate and give negative public image of an able Government knowing that all our power dams are owned by Government of Uganda. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, let him substantiate.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about the ownership of power in this country, right from generation to distribution, to maintenance, we know that generation is using foreign money. We have borrowed money, which we have to pay.

We know that distribution is in the hands of a company called Umeme and Eskom. We have been trying to renegotiate the contracts with these companies because we are not able to authoritatively control the electricity generated in this country and we are not able to use it for public utilities. That is exactly why many Government institutions are chocking with bills.

We see institutions like Makerere - my honourable colleague was just complaining about Kyambogo. These are all struggling because Government cannot given them power free of charge and yet, you are under funding them. If you do not see this bigger picture, it is an element of lack of exposure- (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, until we go back to the drawing board and review some of the populist policies we pursued in the late 1980s, particularly on the liberalisation of the power sector, Government needs to regain some control so that we are able to light public facilities including roads without problems. 

We seem to be cutting corners here claiming solar will solve our problems. Indeed, in the short run, it can but I have seen countries within Africa that have been well lit because they have retained the ownership of strategic parastatals like power generation. An example of this is Namibia where I have lived. When you visit Namibia, up to rural areas, you will not compare it with what is happening here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. I support the bid for lighting Kampala City because you have to start somewhere. Even if we want lighting in the whole country, we have to start somewhere and a capital city without good lighting cannot be called a capital city.

I would like to talk about the dignity of women. I live in Bugolobi and I have heard women scream at night sometimes when passing on that street; I do not want to name it. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order. Why are the men very excited? She was talking about a street.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, I do not know how they have interpreted it. I do not know what is wrong with the minds of the men here but, mine is in regards to women whose handbags are snatched, girls coming from Makerere Business School- Annex. Someone getting out of the gate at around 7 a.m. in the morning, I mean even when it is bright, bags are snatched; even in the evening when someone is walking.

I do not know whether it is only the bags that are snatched or other things happen. But it is very frightening. Sometimes, you see even foreigners walking there and I do not know what sort of image they get about the sort of streets that we have.

Therefore, in order to protect the dignity of women, I would like to support her bid for lighting the City. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of clarification. As if I heard the minister right. She said they have a master plan and they have gone ahead to cost the master plan. She goes on to say that they will use a concept called design and build.

Now, where you are doing a design and build, that means you do not have a master plan and you have not even cost because you are still designing. These kinds of arguments when they are brought to Parliament and the money is going to be borrowed, we ought to treat them very carefully. Where the technocrats tell the minister they have the master plan already, at the same time, they are saying they are going to design and build - Those are two worlds apart and I would like the minister to clarify because these kinds of statements are normally borrowed here and they are a basis for borrowing. Where you do not have a design and you are going to build, how do you say you know the number of lights you need?

On that question, I would like the minister – whether she really agrees with that statement she read to Parliament and the full meaning of that statement and whether that statement informs a plan for borrowing. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

5.30
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just trying to check on the data. Following the figures the honourable minister gave about the street lights in Kampala City, I have just checked in 1962, at the time we got independence, Kampala City had 3,500 street lights. By 1986, Kampala City had 4,500 street lights. Today, the minister has told us that we have slightly above 5,000 street lights. Is the minister telling us that over the 34 years, we have only added 1,000 street lights? I would like the minister to confirm that.

When the minister uses the word “faulty”, this means that these lights technically had a problem. What actions have you taken on those who brought faulty lights on our streets? We have the example of this one on Entebbe road, which the former Mayor of Kampala, Nasser Ntege Sebaggala, put because those solar ones have never lit. I think that they have just remained like a decoration. For those who stay in Kisaasi or Kawempe side, I think that they have 10 per cent of the lights. How can we inject that amount of money on street lighting, yet you cannot maintain and you come and say that Parliament should appropriate?

This issue of budgeting starts from Cabinet. Have you ever put a request and you have been blocked before you start saying that Parliament should give you? We do not give money; we only appropriate what has been given to Parliament by the ministry. I think the issue of repairing and maintaining is the biggest problem and that is why we have problems. We borrowed money for CCTV cameras, now, if we cannot provide light, how shall we be able to help the security to deal with criminals in the city? I think that this is something that the Ministry of KCCA should take seriously that there is need to provide light if we want to secure Kampala and help security. 

The other day, I heard the IGP asking the police officers to ensure that all cameras are working. They could be working but if there are no night visual cameras, they cannot be able to capture anything. That is why they have not been able to get the footage of this lady who was killed.

I think the issue of maintaining should be taken as a priority to help the security people to do their work correctly. Thank you.

5.33
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to again thank the minister for seeking to improve quality of life in the city through provision of lighting on the streets. However, I have observed that the minister’s approach is very reactive and not informed by studies. I would have expected a strong linkage between what they are seeking to do and what can help them best achieve it. It would seem that they have not even got any input from the regulator in regard to what kind of street lighting infrastructure they need in the city.

Secondly, hon. Nsereko observed that streetlights are no longer just for lighting but streetlights can actually become a platform where you offer a number of other services and you have not explained in your presentation whether you dug into all those possibilities to help this House make an informed decision.

Thirdly, Kampala is supposed to become a smart city. Making Kampala a smart city also requires that we transition into low carbon technologies. For Parliament to be able to support your request, I would think that you need to require a master plan, which you have not laid here, which is going to show how this lightning will work vis-a-vis incorporation of the other services.

Therefore, Madam Minister, I would like to pray that you first go and do the preliminary work. Once those other ground works are done, we can then be able to discuss money and compare notes. Otherwise, at this particular point to begin discussing the money, we are not likely to create white elephants, which we have seen elsewhere. Thank you. 

5.33
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish my friend hon. Waluswaka was in the House –(Interjections)- oh yes, I am talking from a perspective of what we call institutional memory. I am still little, thank you. It looked like power was almost everywhere, the reason being that Uganda Electricity Board produced power for the people of this country for our consumption such that whenever a town was built, lights were there and you always saw this happening. 

I would like to reiterate the position that my friend hon. Acidri, mentioned; as long as power was privatised, we do not have control on how we spend it and we have no control on the prices of this power. We have Government institutions which should be getting power almost free of charge, after all, the dam has been built and it is has been there; the water flows through these turbines and I do not think that there is any reason why power should be as expensive as it is.

Now, with very many power dams in the country, we have more power than we can absorb and we are told these all the time and we have to pay for it. So, the best thing we could do is to provide power to light the cities because with security in the cities, I am sure you will have peace and a lot of development will go on. People will be able to deliver what they want to do. 

Our power is very expensive because we do not own it. The companies that sell it through the distribution systems charge as much as they wish because they say they are recouping what their investors injected. I would like to request that we start thinking differently about power for this country. It is a God given gift - the rivers and the sun but we cannot afford it. You go to the police barracks and they are dark; you have a centralised lighting system for the police. When the Ministry of Internal Affairs cannot load, then they go in the darkness. The same is with the army and colleges. 

So, this idea of lighting the City should go beyond just the streets. We should start thinking about how we are going to make power affordable, make it cheap and free.

The whole issue of designs, the solar systems we have in this country are all a joke. Somebody has said it; Entebbe Road has nice fans, we thought they would be generating power as the wind blows but it does not work.

I would like to appeal that whoever is in the design processes of these systems puts Uganda first and serves this country. We have the ability to have the most beautiful city and streets. When you go to Entebbe in the night, you will be impressed. However, as soon as you get on the main road, you are in the dark.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the lighting and electricity systems of this country should be for the service of the people. Thank you very much. 

5.39
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has given us about lighting the city. 

I would like to borrow a leaf from what hon. Kivumbi stated. In her closing remarks, the minister talked about appropriation of money by Parliament to this cause. However, if we do not even have the designs of what she is planning to do, what kind of money are we talking about? What the minister needs to do is to go back and make a very comprehensive master plan and design, like she has said, and then we can talk about the money.

Secondly, whereas lighting is mainly used for light, it is also a source of beauty. I am sure most of us here, including the minister herself, have used Emirates Airlines. They always fly out of Entebbe late in the evening and land slightly before midnight in Dubai. When you are landing in Dubai, you can trace the road network of Dubai because of those lights. It is long overdue for Kampala to have this kind of network. 

We should also look beyond Kampala because you cannot separate Kampala from Wakiso. We are talking about lighting all the major towns and municipalities of this country, but can we maximize the little amount of money that we are to appropriate to really work on Kampala and Wakiso first? If we want to work on the whole country, we shall end up doing nothing. They will say let us appropriate some $1000 in Iganga, some $1000 somewhere else, and you will find that in some places where these lights are being put, they may not be as effective as the lighting in the city. 

What I would like us to do is to have the minister, in collaboration with all the other relevant stakeholders, especially in Wakiso, to come up with a master plan for this area so that we know how many lights we need and how much they are going to cost. This business of coming up with figures that are imaginary will not take us anywhere. (Interruption)

MS KADOGO: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that actually, the minister is requesting for a loan strictly for street lights. I am wondering why she has left out some roads that are in the city. I would have expected the minister to talk about lighting, not strictly for streets but also avenues and lanes. You talk about street lights, what about the avenues and the lanes? Aren’t they also included in the city?

MR KALUYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. As I wind up, we also really need to look into the issue of maintenance of these lights. Putting the lights there is not enough. In her statement, the minister said that these lights are going to be put up by companies that will have won the contracts and that they will maintain them for 10 years. What happens after the 10 years? We need to look at the component of maintenance of these lights so that there is some sustainability. Thank you very much. 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have come here to clear some few distortions which were raised, especially by hon. Acidri. 

I have been in the power sector since 1994 and I know that Uganda used to produce 60 megawatts from the 10 generating plants. They were refurbished and the capacity went to 180 megawatts. That time, we had only one dam. Because of the small size of the economy, Government decided to liberalise. The liberalisation was of course after the second dam, which is Kira, producing 250 megawatts. 

Through that liberalisation, Government decided to use the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) approach and Government remained as the landlord. That is why we have Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, which is the landlord. It is not correct, therefore, for my colleague to say that Government sold, when Government is the landlord. Because of efficiency in distribution and the need to attract foreign direct investment, especially in the distribution sector, it called for that. 

I have cleared that distortion. Current generation is about –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable Minister of State for Public Service, who says that he has had a lot of experience in the power sector, has told us that the reason Government liberalised the power sector is because the economy was small and they needed foreigners to support the generation ability. Is the honourable minister in order to insinuate that the power that is being generated in this country belongs to Ugandans when we know very well that this power belongs to foreigners? 

We know, for example, that Bujagali is owned by Aga Khan, Karuma by Chinese and Isimba by Chinese. The distribution is being done by foreigners. We are trying to renegotiate the contracts so that we can bring down power rates. Our environment is suffering because we cannot afford electricity, so we are busy burning charcoal. Our cities are dark. Is this the definition of ownership? Is the honourable minister in order? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please substantiate your position, honourable minister. 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I was very clear; I said it was a BOT approach. Honourable members, on the issue of Bujagali, it is true Government admitted the tariff was high and Government has tried to renegotiate. However, the principle has been that Government wants to supply power to Ugandans, especially the industrialists, at a very low tariff. For Bujagali, which we all know was a mistake, Government has spearheaded the renegotiation of that contract. 

Madam Speaker, my colleague also said that electricity is free. Electricity has never been free for any person, even when it was purely generated by Government. Saying that institutions were getting electricity for free when the generation, transmission and distribution was entirely being done by the Government is not correct. (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the record must be made straight in this Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, we constituted a select committee headed by myself and the members were hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Nankabirwa, hon. Sseggona, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Ajedra and hon. Baryayanga. I have heard Government not acknowledging the role of this Parliament in exposing the inefficiencies and dirt in the energy sector. The findings of that committee were passed and adopted by this House. 

First, we condemned and said that one of the worst decisions this Government ever made was to liberalise the energy sector. (Applause) I have seen the President, in piecemeal, acknowledging that we were right. We condemned the issue of Bujagali. We found out that Bujagali was the most expensive dam in the whole world. Eventually, through this same Parliament, they came and asked for money to try and mitigate the Bujagali problem. It is time for us to rethink the decision about the power sector.

Public utilities like electricity in Kampala - Honourable minister for Kampala, you would not be struggling with this. One big reason at that time was that the electricity sector was not able to attract direct investments, and the minister is absolutely right about that. To sugar-coat the already bad decision is not being honest to the people of this country –(Interjection)- I have evidence. The Minister of State for Public Service is a very knowledgeable person in the energy sector. This is not his fault. 

I just wanted to put it on record that for every recommendation we make, the Government should own up and try to clean up the issue of energy. The energy sector needs an honest discussion. You should not put street-lighting in the hands of – What about when it rains throughout, where would you get solar power? 

The inefficiencies then that a public utility company – Uganda Electricity Board – was being run like –(Interjection)- Yes, where police was not paying and Government entities were not paying, now we have pre-paid services. In any case, the Yaka prepaid metre was a resolution of the committee. Umeme was just estimating; they would see the size of the house and say, “This could be having three bedrooms and I think they have a cooker” - (Laughter)– then they would estimate. This Parliament made a contribution in recommending prepaid metres. Although there could be some problems, I believe we have made strides. Government cannot take credit for that; it is this Parliament. (Applause)

I know the minister is one of the Ugandans who are knowledgeable in electricity. I have evidence. I invited him as a guest of honour to my area –(Interjection)- No, he is a power station constructor. He has been in this engineering thing for a long time. He has constructed lines, including in West Budama South, before he came to Parliament. 

Minister, it is unfortunate that you are in the Ministry of Public Service, where your knowledge is not going to be used. (Laughter) I wish you were in the energy sector. Minister of State for Kampala Capital City Authority, the truth is that street-lighting should not be a matter that we are debating at this level. Honestly, your glop outside should not be a matter that we debate at this level. It should be a matter for Kampala. We should be debating other things. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, I would also like to inform the House that the decision to unbundle – as they used to call it – Uganda Electricity Board, was done against the wishes of this House. I can tell you that we went down fighting. Let us have the minister for Kampala.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, maybe before she comes, let her just answer this. This touches on the core of the city –

THE SPEAKER: No, you have already contributed.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues for their contributions. I have listened in very well and my assessment is that all these have been said in good faith to make sure that we provide this service to the people of Kampala.

Madam Speaker, in a special way, I would like to thank hon. Nsereko for his contribution and for giving me information. I promise this House that I am going to create time, meet hon. Nsereko and we go through this –(Laughter)- I will make sure I meet hon. Nsereko where there is a street light in Kampala Central. On a serious note, Madam Speaker, I have really learnt a lot from him. He has given us a lot of revelations. As Member of Parliament who represents Kampala, we shall invite him to our meeting in the ministry and we go through this. We promise that we shall come up with the best product for the people of Uganda.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the comment about the high cost, I appreciate his input. However, I would also like to draw his attention to the comment I made that apart from providing street lighting, part of that money will go into refurbishing walkways and pedestrian crossings which are in bad shape. At a later stage, we can get a breakdown of this.

Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by the honourable Counsel Nsibambi about property rates, it is true we are collecting property tax and the money we collect is reflected under the non-tax revenue (NTR), which I showed under –(Interjection)- Okay, I am sorry, it is hon. Nsambu. I commented about that money under the NTR.

On the issue of roads and lighting in Makerere University, as a city –

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we need to correct the record. We do not have hon. Nsibambi in this House and we do not even have hon. Nsambu. The minister is talking about hon. Nsibambi and hon. Nsambu. They are not Members in this House. Can she clarify who she means when she talks about hon. Nsibambi and hon. Nsambu?

MS NAMUGWANYA: I apologised and withdrew the statement. I said “honourable member” in replacement to that.

On the issue of lighting Makerere University, raised by hon. Majegere, Madam Speaker, we light the streets and roads around the universities but the internal roads and lighting is handled by the university. Recently, when we were working on Makerere Hill Road, we took part of Makerere University’s land to expand the road. In compensation, we worked on all internal roads within the university. However, that is not our responsibility now. It is the responsibility of the university, and the same applies to Kyambogo University.

I have picked interest in this matter. We shall discuss it at another level to see how we can give support to these universities since these are our children. The girl-child in university is suffering and they need lighting. I will take this matter up and we shall discuss it at another level to see how we can support lighting at the universities.

On the issue of darkness on Entebbe Road, Madam Speaker, this is the reason we came to this House requesting to be allowed to do coordination, planning and implementation of programmes within the metropolitan areas. We want this kind of coordination but right now, we are not in charge of lighting Entebbe Road. However, we can work hand in hand with Wakiso and Entebbe Municipality and plan together to make sure that we provide lighting.

About lighting Namugongo, again, Namugongo is in Kira Municipality, Wakiso District. Madam Speaker, the statement I am presenting is about street-lighting in Kampala, not in Wakiso. Namugongo is in Wakiso, which is the reason I did not mention it. 

Regarding the issue, which was raised by –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: With due respect to the honourable minister, I raise a point of order due to failure by the minister to know her area of jurisdiction. Entebbe Road starts from Kampala. Those lights, where we had Barclays Bank, are on Entebbe Road as you move towards Queensway up to Kibuye. Is the honourable minister in order to say that she is going to work with Wakiso, which is outside Kampala, yet this is not her area of jurisdiction? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Entebbe Road starts in Kampala and ends in Wakiso. That is what the minister is saying. Please conclude, honourable minister.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to thank hon. Aogon, who gave us information that we should investigate people who are doing maintenance because they could be the ones vandalising. I take that up in good faith. I really thank you for that. We shall indeed investigate our people who are doing maintenance.

I would like to agree with hon. Akurut who suggested that street lighting should be part of road designs. As managers of the city, we have already taken this up; whenever we construct new roads, street lighting is part of the package. Maybe the Ministry of Works and Transport should also take it up.

Finally, hon. Kivumbi raised an issue about designing, building and operating, insinuating that we do not have a master plan. Madam Speaker, allow me to inform hon. Kivumbi that we have a master plan. What he is talking about are detailed designs. It is true we do not have detailed designs right now but we have a master plan, which was drawn by a consultant, and it is a very credible plan. I can now take clarification from the honourable member.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. I do appreciate the many challenges you are going through. However, honourable minister, when we talk about planning with other sectors, we say this because you sit in Cabinet where other ministers sit. 

We would get comfort if you would tell us about those meetings you have talked about. Give us timelines so that we look at the period you are going to take. Otherwise, since time immemorial, we have been talking about planning across sectors for the city but it has never yielded any result. The comfort we would receive from you is to tell us the timelines - a month, two months, a year – and we would appreciate that.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, my issue is still with Namugongo. Recently, we worked on a metropolitan city Bill. I would like to seek clarification from the minister whether that Bill allowed for the extension of services like electricity beyond Kampala. I think we need that clarity. 

Madam Speaker, I thought by now that Bill would be assented to and we would be operating under it, and it would allow us to extend services beyond the city. Namugongo is suffering yet that is a critical area, where you get a lot of money. We would like to hear something on that.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable minister.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In response to hon. Florence Namayanja, the meetings are already ongoing. We convene several meetings to harmonise our planning. Last week, we had one including all leaders from the metropolitan area. So, the meetings are ongoing. I cannot give you a timeline because they will be taking place continuously since the Act was passed.

On the issue of the KCCA (Amendment) Bill, again, I would like to thank this Parliament because it is now an Act. It was assented to by His Excellency the President in December last year and implementation has started. The coordination the Member referred to has now started and I am very sure it is going to bear very good fruits. I would like to thank you, colleagues, for all your contributions.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DECENTRALISATION OF NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA) SERVICES

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, by now I hope this statement has been uploaded on the iPads of colleagues. I have been informed by the clerk that it is there.

As I said earlier, Madam Speaker, you had asked the Prime Minister to respond to this issue of the decentralisation of the service of NIRA during his question time. Yesterday, the Prime Minister asked me to make this statement –(Interjection)– Oh, very much so – he directed me. I have been corrected by the most respected hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. I would like to thank him for the correction.

Madam Speaker, in issuing your instructions to us, you observed that although the same matter had been exhaustively considered by Parliament during the previous session of the House, it was evident that challenges still abound. I, therefore, wish to address myself to the matter as below:

Background

Madam Speaker, in 2015, the Registration of Persons Act (ROPA) 2015, was enacted and it established the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) with the mandate to register all persons in the country, assign them unique identification numbers, issue national identification cards, alien identification cards, as well -

THE SPEAKER: The ministers of Kampala and energy should come back. How can she leave just after we have done her work; no! This is not right; the minister for Kampala should come back.

MR OBIGA KANIA: As well as birth and death certificates and adoption orders. The ROPA 20l5 brought together both the national identification and civil registration processes into one unique system to ensure the country has a seamless end-to-end register of persons.

While the mass registration of persons began in 2014 before the passing of this Act, under what was known then as the National Security Information System, the ROPA, 2015 institutionalised the registration of persons under NIRA as the agency of Government mandated to identify and register persons. The National Identification and Registration Authority commenced continuous registration operations in April 2016 at 117 service centres countrywide, and these included the Kololo headquarters, district offices and the five division offices in Kampala for the registration of persons and issuance of national identity cards, with many challenges. 

It is, however, important to note that initial uptake of the registration services was slow and the calls to the public to register were often met with scepticism and dismissal of the exercise as a plaything. Many of our countrymen did not attach importance to this.

With the national ID gaining currency as a key document in accessing critical services, the demand for services has grown exponentially. This, coupled with a tendency among the public to seek services when the need is urgent, has led to a surge in the number of clients at the various NIRA service centres, where the teams are often overwhelmed. This pattern has repeated itself several times over, especially when there are major interventions by Government such as the SIM card verification exercise, in the recent past the validation of public servants by the Ministry of Public Service, and in advent of the 2020/2021 general elections.

It is, however, important to note that whenever such Government interventions have come up, they have not been accompanied with additional resources to NIRA to take care of the increased activities and demand for services.

Operational Setup of NIRA

Madam Speaker, the National Identification and Registration Authority operates out of 117 service centres countrywide, including the Kololo headquarters, five divisions of Kampala and 112 district offices in the whole country.

The districts of operation for NIRA are as per the district service areas approved by the Ministry of Public Service as at 1 July 2015. It means that administrative districts which were not there by 2015 will all not have NIRA service centres. This operational setup provides the basis for decentralisation of NIRA services. Other auxiliary service points include the Government one-stop centre at Georgian House near the Central Police Station (CPS) and at Posta Uganda which are in the Kampala central business district.

The number of offices indicated here does not include the NIRA Kololo headquarters. It is, however, prudent to note that from inception, NIRA district and division offices were housed under the Electoral Commission offices, local government premises and the President's offices, particularly in the offices of the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs).

Services Offered by NIRA

The National Identification and Registration Authority currently offers the following services:

1. 	National identification.
2. 	Alien identification and registration services, which we have not yet started. 
3. 	Birth registration, which has started to a limited extent.
4. 	Death registration, again at a limited extent.
5. 	Adoption orders registration and certification; it started but it is slow because the services of adoption are slow.
6. 	Replacement of lost cards, damaged and defaced IDs. This is one of the major activities, as we shall see later on in the statistics that I will give.
7. 	Change of particulars on national identification documents. 

It often comes when individuals at the time of registration submit new names or different names from the names which they have on their academic documents and other statutory documents which they may have. At some stage, they find that it is absolutely necessary to change those identity card particulars to rhyme with other documents. 

An example which is being experienced now is that quite many potential candidates have found that their names on the identity cards and election register do not agree with the names on their academic documents and are therefore seeking for changes. 

8. 	Confirmation of information in the register. This is mainly by institutions which want to confirm the particulars of persons.
9. 	Access and use of information in the register. 

Further details of these are contained in the table.

Decentralisation of NIRA Services

Madam Speaker, the process of decentralising NIRA services effectively began with the establishment of the district and division offices, as I already stated. To this effect, the NIRA district and division offices have been offering services routinely since 2016 when operations commenced. 

The services offered through these various NIRA offices are as follows: 

a) 	Services offered at the NIRA district and division offices 
1. 	National ID registration;
2. 	National ID card issuance;
3. 	Replacement of lost, damaged and defaced IDs. The process for replacement of national IDs can be done at any of the NIRA district and Kampala division offices, including the headquarters;
4. 	Minor changes in particulars and spelling errors;
5. 	Birth and death registration which are offered at five regional centres including Kampala, Mbarara, Mbale, Gulu and Arua, as well as the districts of Masaka, Kanungu, Isingiro, Katakwi, Moroto and Soroti. Others are Lira, Iganga and as I said earlier, the five divisions of Kampala. 

6. 	Those centres were also able to rectify minor errors on the IDs. I will explain later on why we can only rectify minor errors at those centres and the bigger errors at the moment have to be rectified in Kampala.

b) 	Services offered at the Kololo Headquarters 

1. 	Adoption orders registration and certification;
2. 	Change of particulars and correction of errors on national identity cards for core information. Here, we are talking about change of names and date of birth; 
3. 	Access and use of information in the register, again by institutions;
4. 	Legal services, particularly relating to birth, citizenship and so forth; 
5. 	Confirmation of status of application; and 
6. 	Diaspora registrations; for people who are registered, we have only been able to do these in Kampala.

Again, let me explain here. When you see a big crowd in Kololo, that crowd is not about identity cards; it is about a number of these services which essentially, because of connectivity, have to be done in Kampala. It is true they are slow but these services, for the time being, have to be done in Kampala. 

In effect, therefore, while NIRA services are largely decentralised, some remain centralised at Kololo due to a number of factors as we have outlined. The registration business process flow indicates that the various stages of registration services offered by NIRA are shared between the Kololo headquarters and district and division offices and are not wholly centralised, as seems to be the assumption. A look at the business process flow indicates this. Let me describe, especially for those colleagues who might not have this.

In process 1, if you are registering data and data capture, which takes about 15 minutes, it can be done at the district level. You can then move that data – what we call transportation of data – from the districts to the central server, what we call the big computer. At the moment, we only have one and this is for purposes of control but also because of inadequacy of resources. It is located in Kampala, so that takes time.

Under stage 2, that data has been brought to Kampala. At the moment, it is brought manually because we do not have the interface between the district offices and the Kampala headquarters. I will be talking about the issue of connectivity later. This is physically brought in computer drives.

In Kampala, there is card production. Again, we have to take this back - in another stage - to the districts, if it is to be successful. In the process of processing this data, particularly for an ID, if a mistake is found – and they are quite many – and if some of the data does not rhyme, then they are physically sent back to the district. The feedback then returns and eventually, you will reach when the card is printed in Kampala and physically transferred to the locations.

Members will have noted that in some districts, they are quite many of these cards lying there. The mistake which NIRA admits is that its communication from the districts to the recipients of these cards in the districts has been either weak or non-existent. This is what they will have to address. Within the current operational context, as I have described, this issue takes time. 

It is also true that there remain a significant number of people who routinely travel from different parts of the country to seek services at the Kololo office, often having failed to get services from the district offices due a number of reasons that I have said, including operational challenges, especially the lack of connectivity. An analysis of the trends indicates that the bulk of those seeking services at Kololo, as I have said, are getting the following services:

    a) Change of particulars on their national identity cards;
    b) Replacements of lost, damaged or defaced national identity cards;
    c) Confirmation of information letters;
    d) Diaspora registrations;
    e) Birth and death registration;
    f) Check the status of their identity cards; and 
    g) Fingerprint related issues.

In all this, the issue of fingerprints is extremely important.

As of today, through this process, the summary status of registration for national identity cards and other services is as follows:

1. 	Registration for national identity cards, including children, are 29,343,615. Applications received in total, including those of children, are in the region of 30 million, plus those who have received but they have not been printed. I am coming to the figures as we state.

2. 	The cards which have been printed – I am talking about the national identity cards - are 18,326,547. 
3. 	The cards issues are 15,227,17l.
4. 	Those who are seeking change of particulars in Kololo are 23,843.
5. 	Replacement of lost identity cards - 156,067.
6. 	Rectifications, that is, correction of errors - 205,429.
7. 	Transactions under access and use of information, including identity card verification by MDAs and private institutions – here, we are talking about some banks and so on; they insist on that – a total of 87,745,034.

The services listed above are those that are exclusively offered at Kololo and those not fully decentralised but are to be offered at district level, once the outstanding challenges are resolved. It is the applications that have been received in Kololo from the various centres - that is why I am saying “received in Kololo” - but the actual processing is done in Kololo and distributed to the districts where the service can be offered. 

The ones offered exclusively at Kololo include, as we have said - the list is there. The other services including status checks, confirmation of information, replacement of IDs and fingerprint verification have been decentralised or are to be decentralised. The major bottleneck to effective decentralisation of these services is the lack of connectivity between the district offices and Kololo headquarters. This means, NIRA district staff are unable to view clients’ information in the central system in Kampala and resolve issues at the districts because of lack of connectivity.

The National Identification and Registration Authority has, however, also noted that there has been slackness on the part of staff in communicating back to clients where there are queries regarding a client’s application. This lack of feedback hinders further progress in processing some of the applications, thus causing anxiety and distress among applicants. In order to address this challenge, NIRA has reviewed its business processes and has proposed to introduce an automatic feedback system that will update applicants about progress of their applications and any queries related to their applications. This is in addition to the Short Message Service (SMS) system. It will include establishment of call centres, which are to be operationalised. As I said, I will give you the dates when these will become operational.

Issues impacting Effective Decentralisation of Services 

The national identity card service remains a key priority for Government. There are a number of issues and challenges that need to be addressed at NIRA for effective and efficient decentralisation of services. These include:

1. 	Manual transmission of data and cards from districts to headquarters and vice versa due to lack of connectivity: Under the current operational setup, enrolment data captured at the district offices has to be manually transported on hard drives to Kololo and uploaded onto the central server for processing. This is primarily because the NIRA district and division offices are not connected; this is what I had already said. To date, only the NIRA head office and the third party systems are connected to the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI). 

I will explain this. When NIRA has captured data and stored it in the central server in Kololo, there needs to be a gadget, which somebody can feed into that machine to capture data online for each operation. If there is a bank, for example, and it wants to know about particular citizens - who is opening an account or whether that identity card is genuine - if it has that interface third-party system connected, then it can feed into NIRA’s without having necessarily to send somebody to Kololo to capture that data and bring it back physically. This can only be done when the National Backbone Infrastructure, which is the fibre network for the whole country, is available. However, it is available in Kampala and not upcountry as yet. 

This lack of connectivity implies that a lot of time is lost between capture and processing of data and the transportation of cards and data back to the districts, hence longer turnaround time. Connectivity would mean that data would be transmitted in real time between the districts and headquarters and the MDA that wants that data, hence a shorter turnaround.

2. 	The next bottleneck is staffing. To date, only 433 staff, which is only about 50 per cent, are employed. This was approved by the Ministry of Public Service and these are deployed across the 117 NIRA service centres countrywide, including the Kololo, district offices and divisions, out of the 134 districts in the country. 

This leaves a staffing gap of 432 members of staff. If we had the 865, NIRA would be able to cover the gap up to the district level – not the sub-county level. The overall effect of this staffing gap on service delivery cannot be overemphasised; for instance, according to the approved structure, each district office is expected to have on average five personnel, including two administrative staff and three technical staff. 

Madam Speaker, I remember you asking whether we have appointed registrars. These technical people we are calling the administrative staff at the district are the registrars who are appointed as by the Registration of Persons Act, 2015. Two of the technical team are Assistant Registration Officers who handle national identity cards, civil registration (birth and death) and other services. The situation at the headquarters in the data processing section reveals a similar trend. To date, only 23 of the 54 staff required to process data and card production are available. 

The staffing gap as indicated has a direct impact on output and means, for instance, that production of national identity cards is under capacity. Consequently, where right now we have the capacity to produce 10,000 national identity cards per day, the current output is 2,800 cards per day. In order to close the gap wage and related costs, NIRA requires an additional Shs 18 billion as contained in the Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2020/2021, so that we can expeditiously recruit these people.

3. 	Manual verification of persons’ information by both Government and private sector institutions. Information available indicates that a significant proportion of clients who go to NIRA Kololo offices are those seeking verification of their information for purposes of accessing services such as banking services or SIM card validation and others. This is because most agencies of Government have not developed or updated their systems to access information from the national register electronically through the Third Party Interface (TPI) capacity. Consequently, clients’ information has to be manually verified, which is time consuming both for the clients and NIRA and inconveniencing to the public. 

All institutions that require validating information in the national identification register are therefore encouraged to develop or adopt appropriate technologies to interface with the NIRA system efficiently, to obtain the data for their use.

Mitigation Measures

The Government, through the NIRA management board and staff, are keenly aware of the challenges, as were raised above, and we are therefore working to resolve them. 

The short-term measures that we have taken are the following:

1. 	Cabinet recently approved and appointed a new Board of Directors for the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). There has not been an effective board for quite some time - about a year - but now we have one, which has been approved. If you want the names, I can get them. I will ask the clerk or some staff to get in touch with my staff who are in the gallery. We should be able to read the names of those members of board.

	The board was inaugurated recently and commenced its work. It is under the able leadership of Mr Biribonwa who was the Deputy Chairperson of the Uganda Electoral Commission. The new board has been challenged specifically to expeditiously address some of the pending policy and management issues outlined above, to make the institution move swiftly.

2. 	In order to mitigate the effect of delays in movement of data and Identification cards between the districts and the head office, while we are waiting for the issue of connectivity to be resolved, NIRA has enlisted a courier company to handle the transportation of data and IDs for NIRA at a higher frequency and lower cost than before. Previously, it would involve moving the few staff physically from the headquarters to districts and vice versa. This has proven to be more efficient and effective than relying on staff who often have other responsibilities beside transportation of data and ID cards.

3. 	As of 31 January 2020, the NIRA staffing levels stood at 50 per cent of the approved staff structure. This leaves a significant gap. Therefore, the NIRA management is continuing to engage with relevant authorities in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get the necessary money in order to recruit staff. This matter has been brought to the attention of both the Presidential Committee on Budget (PACOB) and the parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

4. 	In the Financial Year 2017/2018, Government approved NIRA's request to acquire offices for itself. As I said, up to date, most of our offices are appended to the Electoral Commission, the Government office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and others. Subsequently, after that approval, funds were provided for NIRA to commence acquisition of office premises and to date, 87 offices have been acquired. The procurement process for the remaining 29 offices is ongoing and it is expected that the offices will be ready for occupation by the end of the current financial year; NIRA will therefore have adequate space to access its services and go on with the issue of establishing connectivity.

5. 	On the matter of connectivity, currently only the head office and the Third Party Systems are connected to the National Backbone Infrastructure while the district offices remain offline. Connection to the NBI is necessary. To this effect, NITA-U has promised to connect at least 67 NIRA district offices by the end of the financial year. This will significantly reduce the turnaround time for national identification cards’ production by at least two weeks.

6. 	A number of collaborative initiatives have also been instituted or are planned both as short term and long term interventions, with the aim of improving service delivery to the public. For instance, there is a collaboration between NIRA and the Ministry of Health aimed at scaling up birth and death registration in the country as part of the Government efforts to improve maternal and child health in the country. 

	In addition, discussions are underway between NIRA and the Ministry of Local Government to determine how best the local government structures can be harnessed to cascade registration services beyond the district level where currently NIRA services stop. These, and more such collaborations, should further enhance efforts at decentralising the services of NIRA.

7. 	The NIRA has also undertaken a business process review for all its services with the aim to eliminate inefficiencies and shorten turnaround time for the various services. The management process was concluded in January 2020 and the report is ready with various recommendations that once approved by the NIRA board and implemented should see a significant improvement in service delivery.

8. 	To address the challenge of manual verification of persons' information by both Government and private sector institutions, we wish to encourage those who would acquire this information to develop appropriate technologies that can interface with the system at NIRA to address this issue.

9. 	The National Identification and Registration Authority will also this year undertake a national identification cards’ issuance exercise at subcounty level, using the resources given by Government, for a period of 20 days. We are about to announce when those 20 days will start. To this effect, the process for the recruitment of the issuance assistants has commenced. This should not only take services closer to the communities but should also help in reducing the number of ready but uncollected national IDs currently in the possession of NIRA, either at Kampala or at the district level. The exercise is expected to commence in April 2020, which is a month from now. We expect to go to the subcounty and complete the issuance of those documents.

10. 	The National Identification and Registration Authority requires funding to recruit temporary staff. This will be specifically to handle the issue of backlog applications, especially those queried due to insufficient information or documentation. The human resource required to clear backlog and incoming applications in data processing includes 110 operators who will be working for three months (working days) and will be earning a gross salary of Shs 1,200,000 amounting to a total of Shs 264,000,000. The NIRA management is in discussion with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the possibility of securing additional funding for this purpose. 

The current backlog of unprocessed national identity cards is as follows: 

(i) 	Those citizenship applications, which are being queried for people who are 16 years and above, are 673,420. The importance of this figure is that we must resolve them quickly because they are already in the register of voters. If we do not, they will be inconvenienced.

(ii) 	Citizens whose cases were queried but are below 16 years are 1,462,391. 

(iii) 	Those which are in data processing - they have not been completed; they are a backlog - for 16 years and above are 14,367.

(iv) 	Those in data processing but below 16 years are 251,954.

(v) 	Those, which are being delayed in the card production machines because of the capacity of personnel to handle are 311,281.

11. Other short-term to medium-term actions by NIRA to improve access to service include the following:

a) 	Updating the mobile phone based USSD Code *216# to provide a wider range of responses to members of the public seeking to know the status of their applications and other personal information in the register, especially for those who can use telephones. This will not be for everybody but for people to be able to register; *216# is a telephone code. 

b) 	The National Identification and Registration Authority is in the final stages of establishing a call centre at Kololo for faster response and resolution of client enquiries and challenges. The infrastructure for the call centre is in place. Efforts are underway to staff the facility for it to commence operations. It is expected that the call centre will be operational by 18 March 2020. 

	Once the centre is operational, the NIRA district staff will be able obtain information on the status of clients’ applications and resolve clients’ issues more quickly, rather than waiting for feedback from operational staff in Kololo having to reach the server first.

c) 	The National Identification and Registration Authority will also immediately move to expand its communication to the public, beginning this week, and district offices to improve information flow both to the district staff and the general public. This week, we intend to use the Uganda Media Centre to start disseminating this information. 

d) 	Finally, I would like to say something about the learner’s registration. The National Identification and Registration Authority has also disaggregated the data from the registration of learners’ exercise by district and school for all those learners whose data has been processed to completion. The National Identification Numbers (NINs) are available at the NIRA district offices. An announcement was placed in the media requesting head teachers to pick the lists for their schools. A number have done so while others have not and are encouraged to do so. We are going to repeat that announcement.  

On the other hand, the national IDs for those learners whose IDs were printed because they had reached 16 years and above at the time of registration are also available at the district headquarters and division offices in the respective districts where the schools are located. These are not available in the schools and they will not be given to the schools. The reason is that when you are picking your IDs, your details need to be captured in the system. Some of your additional data needs to be captured to make sure that it is the right person whose details are being captured. 

The summary of the status of statistics of learners registered under the learners’ project is as follows: 

    1. Learners registered – 9,886,551
    2. National Identification Numbers issued to 7,241,436
    3. Cards printed (learners above 16 years) – 361,521
    4. Cards issued – 178,381
    5. Cards of learners undergoing processing – 213,938
    6. Cards with insufficient documentation/queried – 2,431,177

When we were registering the schools, we registered everybody. We tried to ask people about their citizenship and many declared that they are Ugandans. However, later on, from the background of their parents, there were queries for some of them. These are the 2,431,177. They are the biggest number of children who were registered but their citizenship was queried. This is because of documentation and citizenship query in the various schools all over the country. 

On the issue of charges, particularly for certain categories of persons, first of all, these charges were approved here. They are part of our parliamentary process. They are not an invention of NIRA but for certain categories, I have been advised - This morning, when I had a meeting with NIRA, I was advised that the minister can give a temporary waiver to certain categories of people. 

We are looking at the law, particularly for students who are registering and so forth; if those powers are within the minister’s discretion - we have asked them to study the law and give us the details – then we shall sign a waiver. We shall wait for the time being. This is in the pipeline; by the end of the week, we should have come out with a position on that matter.

The names of the Board of Directors of NIRA, who have taken over office, are: 

    1. Mr Joseph Biribonwa - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Ruth Kavuma -  Vice-Chairperson
    3. Dr Chris Mukiza – Representative from Uganda Bureau of Statistics 
    4. Dr Betty Kivumbi – A representative from the public. 

The law requires that we have representatives from these institutions. 

    5. Dr Paul Kintu – Representative from the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
    6. Mr Bemanya Twebaze – Representative from Uganda Registration Services Bureau 
    7. Justice Simon Byabakama – Representative from the Electoral Commission 
    8. Maj. Gen. Apollo Gowa – Representative from the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control 
    9. Mr James Saaka – Representative from NITA (U) 

Those are nine people and they were approved by Cabinet within the law. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has invested significant resources into the establishment of NIRA as a vital infrastructure for this country. Over the years, it has grown despite the many challenges. These, we believe, are the challenges which come with the process of setting up an entirely new system. 

The Uganda national identity card has also retained high integrity. People who have attempted to forge it have always been found out and we shall ensure that its integrity is secured. This is no mean achievement and we wish to reiterate our commitment to ensuring that we continue to invest in developing and refining the system so that it may serve Uganda better. 

We are aware that because of the challenges that I have raised, members of the public are facing big issues. Our appeal is that let us join hands together to solve this. We are willing to receive your comments so that we can improve in our service. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that we assign time to debate this. It is a very lengthy statement; it contains many issues. I was thinking that you should go and study it and we give it one and half hours of debate on Tuesday. Honourable members, go and study the statement; debate will ensue on Tuesday at 2 O’clock in the afternoon for one and half-hours.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: I have been keenly listening to this statement and it looks like the minister did not study the Hansard or take into account the questions and concerns that were raised by the Members.

My advice to the honourable minister is that he should get time to read the Hansards of last week and today, so that by the time he comes, we do not have to repeat the concerns that were never answered in this statement. Listening to it, Madam Speaker, without going into the details, not all the concerns raised by Members are addressed by that statement and we might go through the same story of debate again.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The minister should prepare himself. We have given you time; get a copy of the Hansard and when you come on Tuesday, you should have them handy.

MR OBIGA KANIA: I will do that and definitely, I will attach the Hansard to my statement so that I answer appropriately. Thank you –(Interjection)– Yes, I said I will attach it and answer all the questions as they were raised in the Hansard. That is why I will attach it.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please make available the Hansard of 25 February 2020.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE ANNUAL GLOBAL PARLIAMENTARY MEETINGS FROM THE WORLD BANK AND IMF HELD FROM 8– 14 APRIL AND 14 – 20 OCTOBER 2019 IN WASHINGTON DC, USA

7.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Kasilo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Chair of the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and IMF, we did lead a delegation to Washington for the Spring meetings. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to lay those reports as read out. I beg to lay on the Table the one of April 2019. I also beg to lay on the Table the report for the October meeting that was held from 14 to 20 October 2019.

Madam Speaker, important to note is that one of our own, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was elected to the Board of the World Bank and he was elected as Vice-Chairperson of the Board of the Global Parliamentary Network of the World Bank and IMF.

The delegation composed of hon. Waluswaka, hon. Mbabazi, hon. Nambeshe, hon. Pamela Nasiyo, hon. Namayanja, hon. Nandala and hon. Winnie Kiiza.

Among the issues discussed was the issue of public debt, which was a hot issue that was debated. The issue of technology and inequalities, taxation as a tool for reducing inequalities and managing debt to fight inequalities.

Madam Speaker, I want to also lay this book on the Table, which was part of the theme. I would wish to encourage Members to read it. It is entitled, “The Idiots Guide to Looting Public Procurement to get Rich Quick”. I would encourage Members to read this small booklet and maybe ask the Clerk to make it available. If the Clerk can reproduce, distribute and keep some in the library, it would be very useful information. 

There was also another one called “Anti-Corruption Challenge: The World Bank/IMF Annual Repot 2019”. This would be very useful for Members, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I initially rose on a procedural matter. I do not have objection to the book that my colleague, hon. Okupa, seems to be in love with. It may have great information that is relevant to the Parliament and to many other Ugandans.

However, the procedural matter I would like to raise is that this book is not part of the report that the colleague is laying on the Table, yet to him the book is relevant. Would it be procedurally right, as he has laid the report on the Table, for him to lay the book on the Table, or would he lay the report on the Table and then advise us to get the book from anywhere it is available for our reading other than officially laying it on Table of Parliament? Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when you send us out there as a delegation, when we find something useful in the debate – The World Bank did distribute these books. Part of the topics discussed included corruption and I felt that in the areas of procurement this would be something useful. Therefore, we used it as an attachment to the report to enable Members, when they go through the report, to get this. 

If you want to reduce the zone of ignorance regarding these matters, the book is available for Members to do that. That is why I attached it as an annex to the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is just for information. Those who are interested can follow it up.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE HALF-YEAR MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 	Finance, Planning and Economic DEE DE development, I beg to THE HALF YEAR MACRO ECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT Financial Year 2019/2020

Development, I beg to lay on the Table the half-year macroeconomic and fiscal performance report for financial year 2019/2020.

THE SEMI-ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the Minister of State for Public Service who is carrying documents from finance. However, looking at the documents he is laying on the Table, which he is calling reports, they look like coursework for children and he says these are reports for Parliament to consider.

So, the procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, I thought Parliament must be respected and I have seen reports from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development performance that have been laid before. The procedural issue I am raising is whether someone can pick any working notes and then they constitute reports that are actually supposed to be laid before Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can I look at the – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if you look at the ones they laid last year, their complaint is different from this. So, I don’t know whether the ministry has run broke. You can see the one you are about to lay, this is what we have been used to because they are going to be in the library. If you are just bringing it for sessional committee that can be accepted but something that goes on record – Madam Speaker, if you look at the one, which he is about to lay, that is how these books have been produced and these ones are for the sessional committees, you just wait and see what he is going to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked our officers to pick up the copies for last year and see how they were presented. So, we will defer this for now and you can lay what is ready.

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FY 2019/20

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2019/2020.    

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (USMID) PROGRAM IMPLEMENTED BY 14 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN THE FY 2015/16

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) on the value for money audit on Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Programme implemented by 14 municipal councils in the financial year 2015/16. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Supplementary Schedule is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back and the treasury memorandum is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) for perusal and report back.  

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS [AMENDMENT] BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had completed debate on all the Bills and we are just due to go to the committee stage. So, let us do the committee stage. 

Clause 1

7.13
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Veronica ERAGU): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 1 the committee suggested the following amendments. Amendments to Section 17 of the Principal Act 

Clause 1 of the Bill is amended by redrafting the proposed (5) as follows:
“(5) Where a new district or constituency is created after the general parliamentary elections, the elections to fill the vacant elective position for the district or constituency Member of Parliament shall be held at the next general parliamentary elections.”

The justification is:

    1. For clarity. 
    2. In order to comply with Article 1, 78(1)(a)and(b)and Article 63 of the Constitution to ensure that the district or constituency does not commence immediately it is formed.
    3. To specify the general election being referred to in the provision.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, we accept the proposed amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is clause 9(a) where a new local government or administrative unit is created after – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with Parliamentary Elections Act.  

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 of the Bill is –(Interjection)– you are the one who killed it. Madam Chairperson, clause 2 of the Bill is amended as follows:

    (a) By substituting for the proposed section 10A the following:

“Section 10A eligibility to stand as independent candidate
(1) 	A person is eligible to stand for election as an independent candidate if that person is not a member of a registered political party or organisation-
(a) 	having ceased to be a member of a political party or organisation before nomination day;
(b) 	having had his or her membership of a political party or organisation terminated before the nomination day; or 
(c) 	having never been registered as a member of a political party or organisation. 

(2) 	A person shall be taken to have ceased to be a member of a political party or organisation under subsection (1)(a) and (b) if that person has complied with the law enacted, pursuant to Article 83(2b) of the Constitution prescribing the grounds and procedures to be followed before terminating a person’s membership to a political party or organisation. 

b) 	In the proposed section 10B, amend the proposed sub-section (2)(a) by deleting the words ‘foreign government’.” 

The justification here is to remove matters that infringe on the Constitution, specifically Article 1, 7 – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: The procedural issue, Madam Chair, is that when we were handling the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, the argument this House adopted was that when the member comes to that clause, to only give that report and we adopt, unless the House decides to the contrary. 

I think the issue is that we are not listening to one another. You can imagine the member who is stressing me, from West Budama North – we are saying that it would not be necessary for her to go into the justification. We would only adopt the position that was in the Presidential Elections Bill and then we move. If that is agreeable – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, unless the position has changed, in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, the principles were majorly the same and we agreed to delete the provision. I am not aware that anything has changed. Has anything changed?

I put the question that clause 2 be deleted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 deleted.

Clause 3

MS ERAGU: Amendment of Section 27 of the Principal Act –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, notice had been given that hon. Komakech was going to move an amendment to section 18

MR KOMAKECH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Insertion of a new clause in the Bill immediately after Clause 4; amendment of Section 18 of the principal Act. Section 18 of the principal Act is amended by deleting Section 2. 

The justification is that section 18(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act prescribes a period of “forty five days” from the nomination date as the campaign period. 

This period is impractical since it does not afford the Electoral Commission adequate time to undertake all the processes that accrue after nomination, including determining and printing the relevant ballot papers since before nomination, the candidates participating in a particular election cannot be ascertained, making the design and content of the ballot paper unascertainable. 

The provision is not aligned with the amendment made to Article 61(2) of the Constitution where in the period within which to hold presidential, parliamentary and local government council elections was expanded from the first 30 days of the last 90 days to the first 30 days of the last 122 days. 

The provision does not afford persons participating in a parliamentary election adequate opportunity to campaign all over their respective constituencies, thereby making the time prescribed in the provision inadequate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you may recall that in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, a similar proposal was made and we adopted it for the convenience of the process. 

So I put the process that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 18, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I had also moved an amendment of wanting political parties to pay nomination fees for their candidates. Since it was not agreed on and members want to study it, I would like to move this amendment under Section 11(3) of the principal Act. 

To reinstate the original amount which was originally in the principal law that the nomination fee shall be 10 currency points accompanying the nomination papers. 

The justification I am putting up is that since we have agreed that everybody is free to contest, then we should not use high fees. 

I would therefore like to propose that we reinstate the 10 currency points, which was in the principal Act of 2005, as the nomination fee. 

MR AOGAN: Madam Chair, I have listened to the contribution from hon. Nandala Mafabi. Ten currency points is nearly Shs 200,000. In the previous elections, candidates were paying up to Shs 3,000,000. Is it proper for us to move backwards from the standpoint we have been at? I thought it is always good for us to either stay where we are or progress but not to retard. That is my view. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chair, actually some of us had a more radical proposal. We are only meeting midway with hon. Nandala Mafabi’s proposal. 

Let us be real. Democracy is about enabling everyone to participate. If you are to enable everyone to participate in a poorer country where most of Ugandans are youth and most people who are going to vote in the next elections are going to be young people who have not had the opportunity to have gainful employment – it is proper that we give them access to nomination. 

Those who have the financial capacity and can run better campaigns naturally stand an advantage. To disenable people at entry point by putting a fee that bars people from entering the race because they are poor – and in a country where poverty is widespread – is absolutely unfair and it will depict us in bad light. Just because we are privileged – we are in Parliament and we have the money – and can, therefore, afford the Shs 3 million, does not mean that we go out of the way to block other people! 

Madam Chairperson, that is why I stand here to support the amendment moved by hon. Nandala that in the interest of protecting the poorest of the poor and for us to deepen and widen democracy and enable the majority to participate in the process, let us lower the fee to Shs 200,000. It is only fair and proper. (Applause) I think that is a very patriotic position.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I also second the motion by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The nomination fees for parliamentary elections have kept changing. The public thinks that Members of Parliament want to make it very difficult for people to be nominated. I remember the controversial constitutional amendment that actually said an 18-year-old can contest for president. The moment you say an 18-year-old can contest for president, you must make it possible for that 18-year-old to contest. At 18 years, people are even still in schools. 

Therefore, the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi to reduce on the currency points is to actually enable 18-year-old people – as we amended the Constitution to make them participants – to be able to seek nomination. It would be a contradiction by this Parliament to give one justification that you are opening for everybody including an 18-year-old and at the time of nomination you hike it.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, my opinion is that the proposal by hon. Nandala is good. However, I first want a clarification from the Government side. When we budget in this House, we also budget for some non-tax revenues. I would like the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to first help us know whether when the Electoral Commission was presenting the budget framework paper they also captured figures or estimates from nomination fees.

If they had captured it as a source of funding, then it becomes very difficult at this time to make a pronouncement on it. This proposal should probably have come much earlier. If it was not captured as a source of funding, then we can actually entertain that proposal and do away with nomination fees or reduce it –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs could be of assistance. The budget of the Electoral Commission is over Shs 500 billion. It is fair that all of us seeking to participate in the process, as leaders, contribute to that budget. (Applause) It is just fair.

Secondly, those of us who even succeed actually get jobs. We get jobs and are paid. For us to say that everything is now being loaded on the common man – the taxpayer – yet at the end of the day some of us are beneficiaries, is unfair –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, there are many people who apply for Government jobs – to the Public Service Commission, the Health Service Commission, Education Service Commission and others. Never, has this country put it as a condition that, to apply for a job, you first pay any amount of money. Is hon. Katuntu in order to contradict the principle of access to jobs in Uganda and propose that for some jobs you first pay?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him substantiate.

MR KATUNTU: You should have asked for a clarification and I would have answered you. I yield back the Floor.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson –(Interjection)- the Floor is back to me but I will take the information from you later. What can guide us in this circumstance is for the Government to clarify. If, in the estimates, you had captured nomination fees as a source of income to finance the budget, it becomes difficult for us at the moment to do anything.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How can you speculate on financing the budget? Really! No! Honourable members, let us be focused and let us also not only consider ourselves. Ever since this fee was raised to Shs 3 million, there have been persistent complaints from the public about the quantum of money we pay for nominations. In this very House, the young people have come and debated that issue. They asked us to address it, not by adding but reducing it.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I am here to give my testimony on how I could have missed representing the people of Maracha because of the Shs 3 million, which the Electoral Commission required all aspirants to pay –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: The honourable member is debating, yet we closed the debate. He is going to give a testimony.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mawanda, I do not know why you are panicking. (Laughter)

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, thank you for that ruling. I could see that there is need for hearing aids for some members so that they can be able to know when you have okayed members to speak and that when they have the opportunity to speak, they can raise useful issues.

The issue I wanted to raise is that the Shs 3 million is a lot of money for some individuals –(Interruption)- who may have good credentials to run for the office of MP. 

Secondly, the laws we pass in this country enhance competition. If we are going to advance that someone must first pay Shs 3,000,000, I think that is quite uncompetitive. It would be proper that people who promote such uncompetitive laws must be known to the country such that Ugandans can know, if they come here to pursue their own interest, or the interest of the majority of people, who may be stuck in poverty and yet, they have the credentials to offer leadership in this country.

The information I would like to give you is that the country would have missed on a Member of Parliament like me because I could not afford Shs 3,000,000.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I will begin where my honourable colleague stopped.

As colleagues, we normally interact amongst ourselves. Members, including the honourable member on the Floor, made mention of the money he had before he started campaigning. The information I got from him is that he had a lot of money – more than Shs 50,000,000. Madam Chairperson, when we are submitting, it is prudent that we submit facts, not just to win arguments.

During the last elections, we had many candidates who registered   and nominated with Shs 3,000,000. If we are going to reduce – Imagine we were paying Shs 3,000,000 and we had many candidates who were nominated, what will happen if we reduce this time?

The point I would like to make is that the ballot papers will be overcrowded and this will cause a hard task for the Electoral Commission to – We are talking about the money that the Electoral Commission requires to give us free and fair elections. If we have many candidates, it will have a very big implication on the Electoral Commission. 

Having many candidates on the ballot paper means that the Electoral Commission will have to increase its budget since a lot of money will be needed for each and every candidate who appears on the ballot paper – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have no right to create barriers. In this very House and my office, I have seen petitions about the cost of nomination.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, in the last elections in West Budama North County, we paid Shs 2,000,000 to NRM for primaries and we were seven people. When it came to the general elections, the figure was raised to Shs 3,000,000 and we were 10 candidates. Madam Chairperson, Shs 3,000,000 did not deter people from competing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It did. 

MR OTHIENO: Besides, since last election, this country has not experienced recession. We have not had any recession. The economy has continued to grow positively. Even the cost of inflation has kept on rising. It has not reduced. It keeps rising at an average of three per cent. Three percent of the last five years is something like 15 percent. I am of the opinion that we cannot go backward to Shs 200,000. I, therefore, do not support the position given by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we reduce nomination fee to Shs 200,000. In any case – I do not need information. (Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, in life, you can never be 100 per cent fair since life itself is not fair. We only attempt to be fair and in attempting to be fair, we go for equity.

The information I would like to give is that the nomination fee is not the only deterrence in an election. We have already been unfair by putting academic qualifications. Madam Chairperson, senior six or its equivalent closes out many people who would be able to come and sit in this Parliament and debate.

Already, the use of English and Kiswahili alone is a deterrent. If we want to be fair, we should use a local language that people would understand and use it to debate. Yes, we may have a point to manage the nomination fees but in attempting to be fair, it would not be possible to include everyone on board. Somehow, we can attempt to be fair but it will not be possible. Thank you, honourable colleague.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, as I conclude, when we talk about the budget presented by the Electoral Commission, the assumption they made was that either the nomination fee would be Shs 3,000,000 as it was before or go up. If we lower the nomination fee to Shs 200,000, it means that the Electoral Commission will revise its budget for conducting the elections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How can they budget basing on candidates? That is nonsense.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I stand to oppose the amendment.  Even Shs 200,000 is a deterrent because there are people who cannot raise Shs 200,000. If it was the issue of the Shs 3,000,000 that would deter people from contesting – I do not remember any constituency, where we failed to get candidates. We did not have any. In fact, they were a minimum of five contestants in each constituency. Though I had a different school of thought on increasing this amount from Shs 3,000,000 to a higher figure, now due to the debate, we cannot go by Shs 3,000,000. Otherwise, I was thinking of Shs 10,000,000. (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, since members are contesting Shs 3,000,000, I think we should maintain Shs 3,000,000 as we did last time since we did not fail to get candidates –(Interjections)

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to refer to the remarks by hon. Odur whether the Electoral Commission had made a provision for this, as part of their budget. I agree with you that it would not be feasible for them to have made it part of their budget, for purposes of running the elections.

Having said that, in our view, there are two considerations. One is that it is non-tax revenue that goes into the Consolidated Fund. The second is the question about the reasonableness of the Shs 200,000 vis-à-vis Shs 3,000,000 vis-à-vis the ability or the possible influx of people seeking nomination.

Madam Chairperson, we must be honest to ourselves and the election that we want to run. At Shs 200,000, it is not unreasonable for one to say that there would be a major influx. As a matter of fact, when there is a major influx, you are going to have a problem of the election being run yet you want the election to be run. You do not want the election to be bogged down by the fact that where there would have been - and we are not saying to have no contestants but to have people who seriously want to contest.

Therefore, my quarrel with hon. Nandala’s proposition of Shs 200,000 is that it is too low a number to justify the fact that people are not there so instead of going above Shs 3,000,000 we respectively propose that we retain the Shs 3,000,000.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The problem is that we are looking at ourselves as Members of Parliament. We are not considering a fresh graduate from the university who can make the best leader than some of us.

Let us not attach leadership unto money the moment we do that we are finished. I concur that we reduce to Shs 200,000 –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, very much. First, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for the clarification and I state that it is true; if he had come and said that it was part of the budget I had got figures and was going to dispute.

The Constitution says that everyone is free to contest for any post and it has gone ahead to prescribe qualification for specific offices but it has not prescribed that for you to contest you must pay money.

Article 66 says that the expenses of the commission will be the money appropriated here. The Electoral Commission does not need money outside.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, as I wind up let us be realistic, the truth is that the community is not happy about the Shs 3,000,000. Let us not block someone who is capable of making one of the best leaders in this country. I beg to move.

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support the status quo because as we discuss now we are focusing on the Ugandans that we think can come to contest as candidates.

We are forgetting that there are so many Ugandans that complained the time when we discussed about OTT and the MPs were offered free data; they complained about it.

Think about the people who will not contest as candidates; when they hear that MPs have reduced money to Shs 200,000 they will say that we want to pay less because we have a lot of money. It is better we maintain the status quo and everyone who wants to join can come even if it is Shs 4,000,000 or more.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it would appear that the proposal to amend that part of the law is not getting any favour so we maintain the status quo.

Clause 3

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee suggested that we delete clause 3 because it is exactly the same as what was processed under the Presidential Elections Act so I propose that we delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We deleted it in the Presidential Elections law so similarly I put the question that clause 3 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 deleted.

Clause 4

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 of the Bill is amended in paragraph (c)by substituting for the word “five” the word “ten” and again this was processed under the Presidential Elections Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for the same reasons in the Presidential Elections Act that we needed at least 10 voters to be present at the polling station. I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put an agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we also amended the phrase on the ink. It says, “Marked” but we said that we should “dip” in the Presidential Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us adopt the principles we passed under the Presidential Elections Act to be the same here. So section 4 is amended as such. I put the question that clause 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question out an agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, clause 5 is also exactly the same except that I received amendment from hon. Waira Majegere on 58. For clause 5 is substituted the following amendment of section 38 of the principal Act and in sub section (1) by inserting immediately after the word “persons” in the fourth line the words “employed in institutions engaged in the administration of elections” and then ”gazette” the words “and in a newspaper of wide circulation the special provision” –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, we handled this same issue and we deleted it. I do not know what the chairperson intends to achieve because I thought we would be guided in the same way we would have been handling other clauses. Elections will be on the same day and the polling station will be the same.  So, why is the chairperson labouring to introduce new ideas and yet we should be handling it in the same way?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there was an addition of “newspaper of wide national circulation”. That one was there; it was added.

MS ERAGU: It is “in a newspaper of wide national circulation”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, let us import what we passed under the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. Honourable members, clause 5 is amended exactly as we did in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. I put the question that clause 5, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended to, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since we have Independents I think clause 6 should be –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you addressing? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before you go there, hon. Majegere had a proposal. Do you have it?

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson -    

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, the committee was served with an amendment by hon. Waira Majegere. I have a copy; it was delivered to us.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, hon. Majegere did not only give us the notice here but he made a presentation of his proposal to the committee. Our committee was very persuaded by that proposal. He proposes that as we go and use technology - at the tally centre, when you punch in here that Oboth 558 votes, you will say my loser 10 votes. It is also captured there. 

So, that was the small proposal and we thought that for the sake of transparency – and I believe we shared the information with Government – they should not have a problem with it, if we can allow hon. Majegere to bring it out clearly.

Government’s concern has been - unless they have changed now – that they would not go up to the grassroots. They would go for presidential, parliamentary and district council chairperson elections but the sub-county elections and all would not be able to use the same.

Unless Government objects but we have the three able - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us allow him to present it first. Hon. Majegere, present.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the chairperson and the committee for being foresighted on this particular model of displaying the results. What we are suggesting, Madam Chairperson – just like the chairperson has said - is that when they are tallying, the public is normally outside. They wait until the returning officer comes out to say that this is the winner.

What we are suggesting is that the Electoral Commission is going to move together with the public. As they tally here inside, whatever they say that Oboth Oboth has got 64 in this polling station, it is displayed immediately to the public when the entire public is following with EC.

Honourable colleagues, if you have votes on the ground, I think this is the best way to remove all funny ways of rigging the votes. I pray that you support this –(Applause)– and I believe so many countries will come to study this model. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you appear to have something under clause 5. Was there something new from the committee after clause 5?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, hon. Majegere has just told me now when he read out that he has two amendments. What we were talking about is the amendment in the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill. We did not process this particular one so the record should reflect that. The one we processed is with the digital empowering of the Electoral Commission and not this one under the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. So, it can be subjected to thorough handling.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read your amendment? Please, read your amendment for the sake of the House.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, I had two amendments. The one he has mentioned –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, it seems this one is for the Electoral Commission Act, not for the Parliamentary Elections Act. 

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, I was waiting for the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill to come but I have one for the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is the heading of your proposed amendments to the Parliamentary Elections Act. That is the heading.
 
MR MAJEGERE: I have it, Madam Chairperson. What happened –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I know you have it but this is what you gave to me.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, let me support my colleague. He has the amendment here for Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. The other one will come later but we want to deal with this one before it goes off road.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the one for the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill? The other one can be handled under the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson is the one who introduced this one for the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill but I have mine which is for Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. It is submitted and even uploaded on the IPads. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have your document. Read what is relevant for the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, I beg that immediately after clause 6, insert the following new clauses: 
(1) Amendment of section 58 of the principal Act
Section 58 is amended by inserting the following immediately after subsection (2a)
“(2b) A returning officer may create an electronic communication platform, comprising of candidates participating in an election and all presiding officers in charge of polling stations in the constituency onto which returns from each polling station shall be submitted.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me see. Where is the principal Act? Who has section 58? Honourable members, this amendment relates to declaration of candidates. It is about the final process; the returns, tallying and so on.

MR MAJEGERE: The members were shouting; let me repeat. Section “(2b) a returning officer shall create an electronic communication platform comprising of candidates participating in an election and all presiding officers in charge of polling stations in the constituency, which returns from each polling station shall be submitted.”

Section “2(c) A returning officer shall submit a copy of the documents referred to in subsection (2b) to participating political parties and organisations, a candidate or a candidate’s official agent.”

Justification: Honourable colleagues, this is as simple as the normal platform we use like on WhatsApp. The clause suggests that at a constituency level, there should be a platform for all the candidates and the presiding officer from each polling station. This platform is going to have all the candidates, let us say five candidates, the returning officer and one presiding officer at every polling station.

That immediately after counting the votes, you receive these results in the group of all the candidates then you wait to go to the tally centre for the hard copy; but when you have these results already in your group with all the candidates on one platform.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, in your proposal, you say the returning officer “may” but now when you are submitting you said “shall”. Will the returning officers in all circumstances be in position to do this?

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, the drafter of my amendment put “may” but the suitable word should be mandatory such that a returning officer will administer a group of candidates at a constituency level; such that all those candidates five or six may know what is going on.

And after counting the votes at a polling station, the results are submitted on the group as you wait for a hard copy; as simple as that. Thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. While I believe it may be desirable to have the word “shall” and make it mandatory, we need to consider the practicability and the circumstances of every polling area. In some areas, you may not have electricity or network; some of us have rural constituencies and if we make it mandatory, it becomes a problem. Therefore, I would rather we make it optional by using the word “may”.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I would like to believe that the amendment is in good spirit. Secondly, we only have to be a little careful. Recently, you saw what happened in the elections in US, the democrats had their primaries and in Iowa they used some technology, which failed; it boomeranged and there was a lot of confusion. 

For that reason, maybe I would accept and go with proposal of the Attorney-General to use the word “may” because just in case of anything, that alone can set a lot of confusion beyond what you would even ever think of. We might have to be so careful in considering this amendment most especially in the use of the words “shall” and “may”.  Thank you.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, much as I may reluctantly concur with my brother hon. Majegere, you know that when we are making these laws, we must be very sensitive to the actual grounds that give rise to these petitions in court.

Much as we also tend to admit that we are in the digital era, we must appreciate that we are far from that era in terms of existence. Therefore, let us not merely enact a law that we are going to subject it to tests because first of all, look at other jurisdictions other than Kampala and the central region and Busoga; we actually do not have networks in certain areas.

Then if we look at this proposal, we must go deep and create even exceptions under which you may admit a forum and under what circumstances you may not admit a forum when tallying the results. Therefore, in my honest opinion, we should disregard this proposal and go by what we have in the Bill.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that we entertain hon. Majegere’s amendment but go with what the Attorney-General said. The word “may” gives room for things. I will not go with what hon. Mugoya is saying, but we go with the word “may” to accommodate both sides.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I would like to appreciate the amendment hon. Majegere is moving. However, I would like to be realistic on what we have at the moment as a ministry; specifically as ICT. It is phase five which will be able to connect the entire country including all the sub counties to the national backbone infrastructure, which I would like to confirm now that we are not yet there.

We are actually still struggling to connect the rest of the country of which I can confirm here that Karamoja and Moroto Municipality have just got connected. West Nile, I would like to be honest that the last time I was in Koboko, it got connected.

Therefore, there are other parts of this country in which we still have a challenge in terms of internet access. When we talk about it here making a law, which entirely is going to command Government to compel us here to make connectivity in every part of the country, is unrealistic.

I would like to note that this amendment might bring a lot of challenges in terms of election petitions and in terms of challenges in how we are going to handle elections. 

For purposes of my sector, I would like to appeal to you that we are processing a loan. We shall come here, ask the whole House to support us to ensure that we have internet in the rest of the country. Thank you.

Mr ssemujju: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General made a proposal that instead of saying “shall”, we can use the word, “may”. That means that in the areas where there is no connection, it is justifiable. However, in the areas where there is connection, they may create a platform and give results to everybody. 

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I think we cannot make a law that is partially operational in one area and does not work in the other. 

Ms nantaba: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to say that hon. Majegere’s amendment is very dangerous in a way that if you want to send the results on a platform that is already integrating all the candidates, what if your opponent prepared declaration forms and before even results are declared at the polling station, they are already sending the false declaration forms? By the time you get the right ones, you will have already received forms that are already declaring you a loser.

Therefore, that is very dangerous. I would discourage and not support it.

Mr byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I agree with you that we cannot pass a law that is only partially applicable. That is a recipe for disaster. 

Then, on what the honourable member there said; look at where we are technologically and where the US, which is presumed to be the number one or two in the world is; the disaster that the Democratic Party had the other day for two or three days. This will be a recipe for disaster. As far as the Government is concerned, we reject the proposal.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, let us get to clause 6. There is a new clause after clause 5.

Ms eragu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is a new clause after clause 5.

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 83 the following:

“83A Involvement of public officers in political campaigns
    (1) A public officer who –
    a) campaigns, solicits for votes or gives public support for a candidate;
    b) uses or permits another person to use public resources for purposes of campaigning, soliciting for votes or support for a candidate, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or both.”

Madam Chairperson, this matter was discussed so we import the resolution we made under the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill.

Mr Byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, the Government accepts the proposal.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the matter was canvassed in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. We therefore adopt the same for this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Mr MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, I have a new clause to insert on “Official Agents.”  It states:

“An official agent who-

    a) without reasonable cause acts or omits to act in breach of his or her appointment as official agent; or
    b) makes in any record, return or other document which he or she is required to keep or make under this Act, any entry which he or she knows or has reason to believe to be false, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or to both fine and imprisonment.”

The justification is to create offences against official agents for refusal or fail to execute the duties of their appointment as official agents.

The Chairperson: Hon. Majegere, you know that my official agent is my choice. It is my business who I tell to go to the returning officer and make my timetable. It is personal.

Mr katuntu: Madam Chairperson, I think there will be a problem. Once we start criminalising the activities of agents, you will find problems getting them. For an agent to think that when you make a slight mistake, it will be criminal and you end up in jail, where would you get them to volunteer? You do not pay some of them; you have to plead with them. In fact, the first official agent is yourself. 

Therefore, the relationship between the principal, who is a candidate, and the agent, we should leave it at that for themselves. If your agent fails in his duties, it is your obligation to choose proper agents.

Mr ssemujju: The trouble with the proposal by hon. Majegere, in my own understanding, makes it mandatory that someone must have an agent the moment you begin putting them in the law yet to have them is voluntary. 

Hon. Abdu Katuntu has made a point that you deal with them. I remember one of the contestants called Mr Singh Katongole in Rubaga, after elections he locked them in a room and started whipping them. (Laughter)

The Chairperson: An official agent is your personal appointment. It is not under the law. That person is only there to coordinate dates of meetings. That is all.
 
Mr waluswaka: Madam Chairperson, what you are saying is true. When we have agents, those are our private things. There are people who may not even have candidates at polling stations. What will happen? We have big women in political parties but if you come to Butaleja, you may find no agent even for presidential candidates; so we should leave that.

The Chairperson: This official agent does not sit at the polling station. He is the one who goes on your behalf. He works like, “My candidate will be in Kitgum on Monday and on Tuesday, he will be in Kapchorwa.” That is all they do. 

Mr byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, the Government’s position is that we reject the proposal but we applaud the enthusiasm of hon. Majegere. (Laughter)

The Chairperson: Do we still have to go to clause 6? It is no longer applicable. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, it must be deleted. They must propose a motion for deletion of clause 6.

The Chairperson: Clause 6 is no longer applicable so let us delete it. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, deleted.

Motion for the House to resume

8.26
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.27
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and passed the following clauses: clause 1 is passed with amendments, clause 2 was deleted, there was a new insertion of clause (2)(a) amending sections, proposal to amend clause 81 was rejected, clause 3 was deleted, clauses 4 and 5 were passed with amendments, proposed insertion to amend Section 58 of the principal Act was rejected, the new insertion immediately after clause 5 was passed and clause 6 was deleted. 

I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.29
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

Question put and agreed to.

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

8.30 
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Clerk, I think we will resume tomorrow. 

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. We need to allow the Hansard team to also take a break so the House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow. Tomorrow, we shall entirely concentrate on the Bills. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 March 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
