Wednesday, 13 March 2013

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by apologising for our late start; it was due to the budget conference which took away the entire Cabinet and several of the chairpersons of our committees.

Secondly, on Tuesday hon. Fungaroo requested Government to explain to the country the issues about security around Kampala. The Minister of Defence is ready with a response today. I shall be adjusting the Order Paper to allow him answer the concerns of hon. Fungaroo and other members of the House.

I also want to inform you that tomorrow we are planning to hold a brief meeting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which is now before Parliament, so that Members can get the rationale and the genesis of the Bill. We will also be able to get a briefing on court cases that have impacted on the process of the Bill. The meeting will take place in the conference hall starting at 9 O’clock in the morning up to 1 O’clock in the afternoon. You will be free to ask any questions on which you need clarification and input. I would really advise anyone who is not comfortable with the Bill to attend that meeting tomorrow morning.

In the gallery, we have LC III councillors from Makindye Division represented by hon. Ssimbwa, hon. Kyanjo and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. There is another group on this side; I do not know yet who they are but when I am informed I will let you know.

3.00
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman representative Kibuku): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 5 March 2013 Kibuku District got a problem of hailstones which were accompanied by bad winds and bad rains. This is the second time this area is facing such problems. The first time this area faced the problem of those hailstorms and bad wind, it destroyed crops and people’s houses. At that time we wrote letters to the district disaster team, which is chaired by the LC V, and to several ministries but there was no response. This time, Madam Speaker, the same thing has happened in the same district.

It was on Wednesday when the hailstorms hit the subcounties of Kasasira and Buseta in the parish of Nankodo. Around 30 families were displaced, their houses were destroyed - most of the houses are on the ground and the roofs were taken off. In Nankodo Primary School, which is a UPE school, the entire roofs of two buildings that were being used by the pupils were blown off by the winds. As I speak now, that school, which had more than 1000 pupils, has only less than 200 pupils; so, there is no teaching taking place. 

The winds went ahead to uproot the gardens of cassava and destroy gardens of groundnuts and banana plantations. Houses have also been destroyed in that area. Some people are still undergoing treatment in that area. There is one old woman who is in a coma and we do not think she will survive because the bricks hit her head and tore it apart and all her limbs are broken. She was taken to Kibuku Hospital and later referred to Mulago Hospital for further administration. Most pupils lost their scholastic materials and the district disaster team has written to the Minister for Education and also to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

I visited the place as the area Member of Parliament and I was overwhelmed by the destruction. The children started running after me thinking I had taken some food to them. While at the scene, I took some photos which I can lay on the Table with your permission, Madam Speaker.

I have another matter of national importance to raise. This is about the Nalubale Dam, which is the Owen Falls Dam. When we were travelling to Kibuku, it had rained and the dam had flooded badly. This dam has a bad bridge. I remember in the Eighth Parliament we talked about it. The lifespan of the bridge expired long time ago but this is a bridge which has bad traffic, including heavy trailers. When we talked about this bridge in the Eighth Parliament, we were promised that after one year -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwebaza, you asked me to let you raise the matter of the hailstorm. You never brought to my attention the second matter you are raising. I think it needs notice and proper answers. I do not know whether the Minister of Education has any answers for the schools in Kibuku.

MS MWEBAZA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the pictures which I took from the scene. I pray that the ministries which are concerned come urgently to the rescue of the people of Kibuku.

3.07
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, I feel sorry for what happened. I would like to request the honourable member to give a bit of time and I go out of the Chamber because the minister, hon. Musa Ecweru, was with me a while ago. Since he is not here and the other honourable minister is also not around, we can link with our people in the ministry and see what to do by way of action. So, if the honourable member could join me out here in the gallery.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj.(Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to sympathise with the people of Kibuku District and some other districts which are affected by those disasters like Ibanda. We have a case of some schools that were vandalised by a hailstorm there. I would like to appreciate hon. Mwebaza because she brought this issue to our knowledge last week. We in the ministry committed to work with the local Government of Kibuku to try to find temporary measures to help the children continue learning and the teachers continue teaching.

Madam Speaker, you know that we normally plan for activities in the ministry and it is very difficult for us to find money in the ministry to quickly divert for emergencies like that one. We are planning and we will always plan that we should have some provision in our budget that should take care of measures like that one. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter is not for debate now; let us wait for the Minister in charge of General Duties to tell us what he is doing about this. 

Hon. Kawuma, come and present your petition. Just read the heading and the prayers

In the public Gallery, we have students from Bugema University; they are from Bamunanika County in Luweero District, represented by hon. Muyingo and hon. Nabukenya.

3.55
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to present this petition under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. It is a petition by the traders or occupants of Plot 28, Kampala Road, Entebbe under the name African Trade Development Tenancy Group. A number of issues are raised about the history and the challenges encountered therein.

Your petitioners pray that: 

(i) 	The Parliament of Uganda intervenes in the plight of your petitioners and immediately addresses their grievances and ensures that their business interests are protected.

(ii) 	Parliament causes the issues surrounding the attempt to deprive your petitioners to be investigated and a proper and conclusive finding be made to protect the business interests of your petitioners.

(ii) 	Parliament intervenes to cause the matter to be handled in such a way as to preserve the interests of your petitioners until a logical and constitutional right to property is established and attained.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

Madam Speaker, their names and signatures are herein appended. I lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The petition is sent to the Committee on Trade to peruse and advise the House.

3.57
MR GEOFREY EKANYA( FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking for your indulgence to move a motion tomorrow that a company called Dott Services be banned from further contracts in Uganda until they prove that they have the capacity and ability. (Applause)

I am speaking with a heavy heart and pain; I have lost more than 10 people in my constituency because of poor working standards and ethics of Dott services. I have consulted my colleagues; this company has got contracts in many parts of Uganda and their work is only to do dots but not to do work. Therefore, with your permission and with the permission of the House, I beg that tomorrow you afford me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you can draft and I read it in the morning.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.59
MR YOKASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonzo East, Kasese): Madam Speaker, before I lay the report on the Table, I want to first make some corrections on the Order Paper. The Order Paper says hon. Bwambale Bihande was the leader of the delegation. The leader of the delegation was the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. Two, I represent Bukonzo East not Bukonjo East; when you pronounce it as Bukonjo, it is derogatory. The right pronunciation is Bukonzo and the right spelling ends with “nzo” and not “njo”.  I think my brother from Bukonzo West agrees with me. 
I beg to lay on the Table, in compliance with rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure, a report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the 24th Session of the African Caribbean Pacific-European Union Parliamentary Assembly and the 30th African Caribbean Pacific Parliamentary Assembly held in Paramaribo, Suriname. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report will be debated at a time appointed by the House.

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As directed by rules 30 and 31 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay the following documents on the Table: 

    • Budaka District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 
    • Lira District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
    • Ntungamo District Local Government accounts for the year ended 2011. I beg lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The reports are sent to the Committee on the Local Government to peruse and report back to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.03
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make this statement. Copies of this statement are being distributed to honourable members.

Yesterday, I was not in the House when hon. Fungaroo made a request that we should make a statement or explain the security situation around the city. However, by coincidence I had sought permission from the Leader of Government Business to make a statement to this House regarding mainly the sad incident that took place in Bombo Town Council, but in addition say something about what happened in Mbuya about a week ago. So my statement may not exactly answer the demands of hon. Fungaroo but I am also told that yesterday information was given that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would come back with a comprehensive statement on security.

Honourable colleagues, MPs, I have six objectives for making this statement. Number one is to publicly convey condolences to the bereaved family of the brothers and sisters that were killed in the sad and tragic incident that took place in Bombo on the 9th of this month.
The second objective is to also publically apologise to the families and the country at large on account of a UPDF soldier who was responsible for this highly regrettable event. Therefore, on behalf of the UPDF in particular and generally on behalf of Government, I say sorry for the sad and uncalled for event that led to the shooting and killing of 10 people and injuring of two others.

The third objective is to give to Parliament and through Parliament to the public, an account of the chronology of events that took place both in Bombo Town Council and the incident at Mbuya Barracks on 4 March 2013.

The fourth objective is to highlight lessons learnt from these situations. The fifth objective combined with the sixth objective is to reassure honourable colleagues, MPs, and the country that the country is safe, the defence and security system of the country is secure, and there is no rebel activity, to the best of our knowledge, in the country.

On this sad event of 7th of March, where our brothers and sisters got killed, the offender in this incident is one Private Okot Patrick Odoch. On that day, the 7th of March, Odoch attempted to rape a minor, a daughter of late Sgt Adule Onesmus also of Bombo Barracks. Sergeant Adule and his wife, having learnt of this criminal act, reported this matter to the Police in Bombo. 

In the evening of that same day, this criminal, Pte Okot, moved out of his place where he was on duty and went into Bombo town where Sgt Adule and his wife and other people had gone earlier to have a drink. When he got there, the matter was already known by the people who were in this drinking place, so they disallowed him to sit with them because of what he had done earlier in the day. So, he left the place and went back to his station of duty only to come back with his gun and then started shooting randomly and thus killing these 10 brothers and sisters. Two other people were also injured in the event. After doing that, he took off and there is a search going on for him. We hope soon or later we will catch up with him.

Our brothers and sisters who were killed are the following:

1. 	Aselo Amina aged 34 years from Arua District
2. 	Oriba Wilfred aged 46 years from Zombo District.
3. 	Akullo Florence aged 24 years from Alebtong District; this was the wife to Sergeant Adule Onesmus.
4. 	Akol Sarah aged 44 from Ngora District.
5. 	Okecho David aged 30 years from Ngora District.
6. 	RA 102813 WO II Musana Francis aged 38 years and born in Kumi District.
7. 	RA 084769 Sergeant Adule Onesmus aged 42 born in Arua.
8. 	RA 094459 Staff Sergeant Obote Joel aged 49 years born in Apac District.
9. 	RA 137287 Corporal Osele Isaac aged 35 years and born in Bukedea.
10. 	RA 209207 Private Teddy Namatovu aged 30 years born in Masaka District.

As I said, two other people were injured and these were Asio Joky who is being treated at Bombo Military Hospital. He has improved and we think he will soon be discharged. The second one is Akbar Zule who was admitted only for one day and did well and was discharged and he is at home.

Following this very tragic and sad event, the following main actions have been taken: 

    • We are launching a pursuit to look for this killer soldier.

    • The commander under whom this soldier was working that evening, who therefore should have been supervising him, has been apprehended; he should have noticed that this brother moved from his station of duty and went with a gun.
    • The Commander of Land Forces, Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala, visited and consoled each individual family affected by this tragedy.

    • The same Commander of Land Forces and the camp commandant of Bombo Barracks also addressed the community to console them, to apologise and explain the circumstances that had led to this tragedy.

    • All the 10 bodies have been transported to their home areas for burial. A total modest sum of Shs 2,420,000 has been provided for each body to assist with the burial expenses on top of transportation.

    • The one still admitted at the General Military Hospital Bombo is being looked after well and as I said, he will soon be discharged.

    • A board of inquiry led by Brigadier David Muhoozi, Air Defence Commander, has been instituted and an inquiry had already begun. 
 
    • We are considering, in the meantime, instituting additional tight controls on fire arms. 

In summary, that covers the sad and tragic incident that took place in Bombo for which, on behalf of Government, I have offered our unqualified apology.

I will now turn to the incident that took place at Mbuya Barracks on the 4th of this same month. I am sure that honourable colleagues read about this incident in the press where it was said that a group of people attacked Mbuya Barracks to get arms out of there. I want to put it on record, Madam Speaker, that the following are our findings so far:

1. 	Nine people, including six civilians, have been apprehended in connection to this matter and one person was killed during this attempted attack on the barracks. 

2. 	Investigations so far point to one Lt Augustine Moro who had deserted the Army some time back. Lt Moro, while in desertion, peddled a story that there was a rebel group planning to make attacks within Kampala with the intention to take over Government. He therefore requested some money from some officers so that he can infiltrate and lead to the arrest of the people he claimed were involved in this plan. 

3. 	In order to cover his lie, he organised some people to launch an attack on Mbuya. He organised the following groups of people who have now been apprehended:

    • Civilian youth from mainly Acholi Quarters in Kireka Zone B of Kampala
    • One solider from Mbuya Barracks, RA 195079 Pte Okello Kenneth Karikwera.
    • One person from Damocles private security organisation called Ebong Ivan who came with one gun whose details I have given there.
    • One other person who was formerly an employee of Saracen private security organisation. This is the person that got killed when this attempt was made on the barracks.

This brief narration I have given demonstrates three main points:

1. 	There are daring people in the population that can be duped into taking very risky and criminal actions. 

2. 	Nevertheless, the military is on the guard to deal with any criminal element that may attempt to destabilise the country.

3. 	I appeal to colleagues that we should all remain vigilant and assist in apprehending any soldier who one may have reason to believe has deserted their station of duty - (Interjections)- Assist in apprehending; you may not yourself be the arresting person but you can report so that the appropriate people take action.

Briefly, in conclusion, Madam Speaker, I state as follows:

1. 	The death of our 10 brothers and sisters in Bombo Town Council at the hands of a UPDF solider is highly regretted. 

2. 	Our hearts go out to the bereaved families and we stand side by side with them during this difficult time. 

3. 	While we must ensure that soldiers remain vigilant at all times to guard the country, I wish to take this opportunity to assure Parliament that we are taking appropriate steps to ensure that there is a clear balance between vigilance and even more strict application of these disciplinary measures and control of guns.

4. 	In this respect, each security agency has been called upon to review discipline and control measures. Through the National Security Committee, synergy and coordination will be heightened.

5. 	For both criminal actions that I have referred to, perpetrators shall be tried at points where crimes have been committed for all to witness. I thank you, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, under our rules we may comment on the statement for not exceeding one hour. I do not see hon. Fungaroo.

4.21
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to register my appreciation to the Minister for Defence, the honourable Dr Crispus Kiyonga, for timely responding to the issue which was raised by our shadow minister for defence. 

Madam Speaker, once there is a gun out there in the hands of one person, that person cannot be underrated. Ever since we started hearing of these incidents in this country, which first started with Mbuya, from Mbuya to Bombo, from Bombo - according to the press - to Entebbe and according to this morning, it went to Jinja, I think these are things for which we, as citizens of this country, should worry. 

Whereas the honourable minister is saying that it is deserters and people from private security firms, according to the information that was contained in one of the daily newspapers today, the people who attacked security guards in Jinja were carrying AK-47 rifles, and these rifles are the preserve of the UPDF. So, how secure are we in terms of ensuring that our armouries are safe? How sure are we that the welfare of the UPDF, who are quite many in number, is provided for? It is this type of situation which breeds dissatisfaction from within that brings us to this insecurity.

I remember when Mbuya was attacked, the newspapers went ahead to say that one of the people suspected to be behind this ring of attacks on military institutions is a four-star general. This was contained in the newspaper and the honourable Minister of Defence has kept quiet about this speculation which was published in a newspaper.  I thought this would have been the time for the honourable minister to give us that assurance that we are safe, that we can afford to come to Parliament, do our work and be able to get back home safely knowing very well that we are in a secure environment. Can we hear from the minister?

There is speculation that there is a four-star general involved in this and is said to be coordinating these attacks, and that this four-star general is in active service of the UPDF – (Interjections) - Yes, at least the paper talks of a one four-star general. We will be very grateful if the honourable minister can tell us how they have investigated to ensure that they reach some of this in-house discontent that is coming from some of the UPDF officers.

Madam Speaker, this may just be the beginning of issues. I am happy that we have a large contingent in Somalia because in terms of political science, if you want to be stable, keep the army engaged. The moment you have the army idle, there will be occasions when they rise up to register their discontent. Assuming that these people who are in Garamba and Mogadishu were all in this country, how many of these attacks would we have had on our barracks causing innocent lives to be lost – (Interruption)-

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, honourable, for giving way. Madam Speaker and colleagues, talking about rebels, today’s Bukedde newspaper quotes the Inspector General of Police as saying that there are rebels in Buganda and that they have a name called Munansi. Bombo and Mbuya are in Buganda but Jinja is fairly outside Buganda. This is not the first time we see soldiers moving out of the barracks and conducting attacks on civilians.

The information that I further want to give to my colleague is that in the minister’s statement, he says that the man called a deserter went, in a bid to get money from officers, and created a story. Now, two questions emerge: are these officers individuals or Government? Secondly, is this how you spend our money? –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you giving information or you are submitting? (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: The information is that this is how this Government spends our money. Somebody goes and says that there are rebels here and then he gets money. So, definitely we are going to see more. That is the information. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: I also want to question the timing of these attacks on our military institutions. It is not long ago - I think that it was in the month of January - when the Minister for Defence, who has just issued a statement, came out in the papers and on the radio to support the idea of an eminent coup in this country.  (Member timed out)

MR WADRI: Just a second, Madam Speaker. It was not only the Minister for Defence but also the Chief of Defence Forces, who also happens to be a Member of this Parliament who also talked about the possibility of the Army taking over, let alone the Commander-in-Chief who is not a Member of Parliament but he is the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF. These three persons did talk about the possibility of UPDF taking over if Parliament did not toe their line. Could we then, therefore, be assured that this is yet not an opportunity for them to implement what I would call “wild dreams” (Laughter) - (Member timed out_)

4.28
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to take this opportunity to thank the minister for bringing this report but I also want to make my comment on this issue, especially on the one in Bombo.

Madam Speaker, I represent Luweero District and Bombo is one of the town councils where all these people were killed. First of all, the private was a drug addict. It was very clear and it was known by the management of the barracks that Private Okot was on drugs, but they went ahead and gave him a gun. It was very clear that such a situation could happen. He went ahead and killed 10 people. 

When I reached Bombo, the place where these 10 people were killed is just 150 metres from the police station and also 200 metres from the army barracks. These people were killed at midnight but the Police reached the scene at 6.00 a.m. in the morning. We would have managed to save at least four people because some died in the morning. I want to ask the minister, who is in charge of the security of Ugandans if nine people can die in front of a police station and also next to a barracks? – (Ms Ssinabulya rose_) - Madam Speaker, I shall take the information later. 

I think that this Government has failed to give security to her people, if nine people can die in front of a police station. I met the officer in charge yesterday who told me that the truck had left and that they could not access any mobile means to take these people to the hospital, when actually in the barracks there is a very big hospital. These people would not have died if anyone cared. 

Madam Speaker, Bombo is a very cosmopolitan place. We have so many people who come from different areas to do business and some are wives to these army people. I want to inform you that most of these people had come to work and they died while they were on duty trying to find a life. When I talked to the people in Bombo, they told me that they are living in fear. Young people are being raped and they keep silent because in our culture, they do not talk about it. This barracks is a source of insecurity to our people. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute about the young women.

MS NABUKENYA: Madam Speaker, I was still talking about the insecurity that the barracks has brought to our place. We have so many deserters and they are now living with the people in our society. Crime has increased and there is no strict rule on how these people are handled. The people in the barracks can move out with weapons and they mingle with our people and it is really affecting the whole place.

We need strict guidelines, rules, demarcations, a strict housing policy so that these people can be enclosed within the barracks because crime has increased. If these deserters were relocated from where they came from and if these people in the barracks could even be housed within the barracks, we would not see all these problems. They wake up in the morning and take alcohol – (Member timed out)

4.32
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. We are aware that in the UPDF Act, desertion is an offence. How terrible it is to learn from a Minister for Defence that a deserter, Lt Augustine Moro, could co-operate with officers, whom the minister declined to name, that the officers of the UPDF would hobnob with a deserter and give him money instead of arresting him. 

We would like to task the Minister for Defence; since now he knows that some officers in the UPDF co-operated with that deserter and even gave the criminal money, we want the names of those officers and action to be taken against those officers who facilitated Moro. Just like you went ahead to arrest the commander under whom Odoch, the errant soldier in Bombo, was, I think the net should not just be limited to that particular commander under whom Odoch was working. We need action. 

Madam Speaker, a member has just alluded to the fact that Odoch was a renowned drug addict. Yesterday, we talked about these issues. There is madness out there. It may not only be limited to the UPDF. I think there is need for us to have a deliberate programme to test some of these security officers who are handling dangerous weapons. They could be drug addicts. I think there is need for us to ascertain the drug level of a number of these security personnel. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister called upon members to be vigilant and arrest deserters from the Army. While the UPDF in Mbuya were co-operating with a deserter, we are being told to arrest deserters. We have to do it with a lot of caution.

In the fourth bullet on page 4, the minister named one person formerly working as a guard under the Saracen private security organisation, the one who was killed. Since you went ahead to name the origin and names of all those who were affected, I think it would also be fair if you could tell us where this one came from.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is fear that most of our gallant sons and daughters who have been deployed out of the country in Somalia, Garamba and wherever are actually frustrated because most of their allowances are being chewed by the officers or the commanders back in Uganda. So, whenever they come back, such is recipe for disaster. We would like the UPDF, not only the UPDF but also the Uganda Police – (Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, may I inform the one holding the Floor that it appears at times we subject our security forces to temptations - the UPDF, the Police and Prisons. As I speak, our personnel in the Uganda Police Force have not been paid their salary for the last month and these people hold guns. They are supposed to survive like you and me. What do you expect them to do? Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, a frustrated person can do anything. They are not only frustrated and broke but hungry, and a hungry person can mean to be very angry. (Member timed out)

4.37
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I do sympathise with the families of the deceased. 

As the previous holder of the Floor has indicated and from information given by hon. Obua, it is true that the Army and policemen are desperate. Their facilitation and their conditions of service are very poor. We know that many Ugandans are living in abject poverty and this does not rule out the Army and the Police officers. The ministers should ensure that these people are taken care of because they have the same needs that we do have. They cannot take care of a country where they are needy and yet they have to take care of members of a community or society which has amassed a lot of wealth in this country, especially taking care of big people who have even swindled government money.

Madam Speaker, the misuse of the Army uniform - nowadays it is very difficult to tell who is an officer of the Army and who is not. Even the people seated here have combat uniforms in their homes. Why are they holding them? What service do they offer to this nation in terms of security? I think this is one of the ways through which people have mismanaged and misused these offices. 

On the issue of those who died, I appreciate the help of valuing these people but most of these people have been working throughout their life and have been fending for families. What is going to happen to their families? Who is going to be the breadwinner? How is the minister going to help these people to at least educate their children because I know they have children? 

The other issue is about Lt Moro. This person was a deserter, he appeared and was soliciting for bribes but he was never arrested. If they can arrest an MP for making just one statement and he sleeps in the police cells as they investigate, why didn’t the officers arrest this person and investigate him? Maybe this would not have happened. 

I also want to ask the minister; he has mentioned that Moro had organised youth and he mentioned civilian youth but he does not mention their names and the number of these youth. We want to know who these youth are; or is it a matter of implicating young people.

I want to emphasise the point of misusing Army uniform and the Police uniform. Every civilian who has this combat uniform should return it. It should be those officers who are suitable to wear these uniforms but not our MPs here. Today I will be threatened by a mere MP in combat thinking he is an Army officer. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to give information concerning this man called Moro Augustine. When they mentioned his name, I had not yet seen his photo on the newspaper of today. I was with this man at university. He did IT and right now, the man works in Bombo Barracks in the records department. 

Madam Speaker, we would like the honourable minister to come out clearly and tell the House when this man deserted the Army. I talked to this man recently and I am still convinced he still works in Bombo in the records department. I know him so well. We are neighbours from Gulu and I have ever been with him. Let the honourable minister tell us when exactly he deserted the Army and let him produce the last payroll for the honourable members to see. I thank you.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Olanya, for the information. I would like to conclude by saying that indeed most of our Army officers are abusing drugs. As recommended by hon. Epetait, we need to test our Army officers and the Police officers to know who is really in the right mind to keep order in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.43
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the minister what therapy the Army has in dealing with serious trauma especially with our soldiers who have been at war. You know very well that the majority of the UPDF have actually not rested. They have moved from one war to another - from internal wars to Congo, from Congo to Somalia; so, how do you treat them when they return? 

In other armies, even in the United States, when troops are returned back home, there is a process. There are stages they go through until they are eventually settled back with the other armies back home. They are isolated and they are given special treatment. It looks like ours here, like the Somali group, are brought from Somalia, taken to Mubende and you know what is in Mubende; these are casualty units. I have about seven relatives in Mubende. They are taken there simply because they were shot at. I have got very many constituents in Mubende and if only those people can access guns, they can be a disaster in that barracks. The issue here is about how you treat the soldiers who return from combat areas.

Honourable minister, in your findings under 5.3, you have listed three issues. One is that you established that there are daring people in the population that can be duped into taking very risky and criminal actions. What plan does Government have to deal with such people who are now mixed with these traumatized soldiers who may want to venture into such activities? This is not the first case. There are other cases. If you follow what is written in the newspapers, soldiers either keep shooting their wives or girlfriends in barracks when they return from abroad. Let me take information from hon. Alice Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Reagan Okumu. You asked how soldiers returning from combat areas are treated. I just want to give you a case of a private soldier. I know him and he has gone to Somalia twice. I know him very well because he is my relative. 

When they land at Entebbe Airport, they are taken to their respective barracks for two days before they are given leave to visit their homes for one week. After that one week, they are recalled for deployment. This means there is no counselling programme for those soldiers who return from combat and harsh environments.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, I think this statement that there are daring people in the population that can be duped into taking very risky and criminal actions, the Minister of Defence must be very aware that that is how they started. I think that is the example that was set long time ago. (Laughter) So, many of our youth, if we do not really handle them very carefully, are going to be a problem to this country.

MR OKUMU: I thank my two colleagues for giving that very vital information. I know that actually the minister does not have any programme for proper therapy to soldiers returning from combat areas. (Member timed out)

4.47
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, allow me to also thank hon. Crispus Kiyonga for presenting this report. 

When you refer to the objectives of the report, you realise that he has addressed only one, which is objective (c), about the narrative. When it comes to objective (d) on the lessons learnt, you realise the minister has only given us information in paragraph 5.3, which talks about daring people in society.

Like hon. Reagan Okumu has said, there is need to look at the debriefing of the Army, their welfare, the disgruntlement and settling them. When it comes to interacting with the population, I still wonder what happened to the army shop. What plans does this Government or even the Ministry of Defence have about revamping the army shop and putting up a recreational centre where soldiers can go to move freely? 

What criteria do they use? This is not the first time. You will recall that Sheik Ssentamu was recently gunned down in a place near a police post. Sheik Kiweewa was also gunned down and another one from Iganga and many others. There was also a white man gunned down in Entebbe. So, how easy is it for one to quarrel here and then he goes into the barracks, picks a gun and comes and shoots people down? There was an incident here in Kampala where a soldier quarrelled with a bouncer who had refused him entry at some club in the city and the soldier went and picked a gun. How easy is it really? 

The reports in respect of these sheiks are not yet out. So, I wonder what we are trying to address in this statement. I am saying this because some of these issues would have come out clearly. You may have heard of cases where some people have gone out to the streets in the US and killed children, but the government has always come out to produce a real report. Why is this very necessary? Such a report can be used in the future to curb a repeat of such sad occurrences. 

What I see in this narrative is only the minister giving us a story and you know that anybody can do this. We should be getting detailed scientific reports on how we can address issues in that context or issues to do with debriefing, the way hon. Reagan Okumu has put it, settlement, their packages, payments for policemen and so forth. What we are doing here is just to talk about the outcome but we are not addressing the context. There is need to revamp their shops and recreation centres where they can go to enjoy life because they also have families. 

As I wind up, the other time I saw policemen’s wives being given chicken. Yes, but how about other things because not all of them do that business? Some of them run brewing businesses. We need to work out something for our security personnel.

4.51
MR PATRICK NAKABAALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister and the government at large for coming out with this statement. Going through this statement, one would largely appreciate that the minister has, in most of the points, talked about the external environment. However, I notice that he has hidden some information perhaps about the work environment within the barracks that could be a source of frustration and cause for all this mess.

I appreciate the issue on the wellbeing of the soldiers ranging from salaries to promotions. However, one would be interested to know when this soldier joined the Army. Perhaps he had issues to do with promotions, salaries, training and others. 

I also would like to hear from the minister – as we talk, we are now in a generation of software other than human resource. Largely speaking, when you hear about our soldiers moving out of town with AK-47 rifles, that is a scare. We keep talking about tourism and how to market and promote our country, but when we hear that soldiers still hung around with AK-47 rifles, that is scary and it is something the minister’s statement has not talked about.

On the issue of rebels, I want to say that whereas I appreciate the statement of the minister, I would like to remind him about a story that appeared in one of the daily newspapers saying that Buganda youth wanted to topple Government. That has also been mentioned by hon. Medard Seggona. When you read the Bukedde newspaper of today, you realise that there is a story to the effect that there are some rebel factions around the country. In the circumstances, I would like to appeal to the minister not to be shy by insisting that there are no rebels in Uganda when some other security circles, for example, the Police, have come out to say there are rebels in Uganda. Mr Minister, I think there is need to correlate what your office has with what other security offices have.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to say to the minister that as a representative of young people, when you mention that there are some civilian youth being ganged around and you rightly say that you have observed that in the nation there are some sort of daring people who can easily be deceived, it puts me at pains as a youth representative. If you do not now help us and answer some of the issues surrounding the youth here, it is like you are telling these young people, “Look at the other side of the story; it can help you reach here and there”- (Member timed out)

4.54
DR EDWARD KHIDDU MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I am the MP for Katikamu South where Bombo Town Council is, one of the areas I represent here in Parliament. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for this statement but I would like this Parliament to regret the wanton killing of 10 innocent people and the inflicting of gunshot wounds on two innocent citizens. This is a serious matter and Parliament should really regret it.

When I heard of this incident, I immediately went to Bombo town, I went to the Police, I went to Bombo central where the incident took place, I went to Bombo village where one of the victims comes from and I also went to Gogonya. On the ground, there are those allegations that the killer was known to be a drug user. This statement says nothing about that, and I think if we have such a problem we need to face it squarely rather than not mention it.

I appreciate these other things which the Army has done. I appreciate the camp commandant, Mr Hussein Ada, and I appreciate the efforts of Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala because they have tried to console our community. On page 3, point 4.8, it says, “We are considering instituting additional tight controls on the firearms”. Point 2.6 says that the killer took off; he is on the run and every effort possible is being made to arrest him for prosecution. Yes, but on the ground in Bombo central, in Bembe village, in Gogonya village, there is a lot of scare. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: One minute; he is the area MP.

DR MAKUBUYA: Yes, thank you Madam Speaker. I have to assure the people of Bombo that measures are being taken to protect them and that they will not be hurt as gravely as happened on 8th March. So, you need to take more immediate steps and to work with the community leaders so that these people can sleep in their houses. At the moment, they are scared. 

Point (d) was to highlight the lessons learnt. Madam Speaker, the Minister should highlight the – (Member timed out)

5.00
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for this statement. However, I would like to request, through you, that the Minister comes up with a more comprehensive report on this matter. It is a matter of national importance because of the amount of robberies and thefts taking place in my constituency and very many other constituencies using guns. This misuse of guns has within the last one month been consistent and systematic. We should not run away from that.

The other thing is in 5.3(a) where he says, “There are daring people in the population…” I would like to highlight that many of these daring people are laid off UPDF soldiers, the so called veterans, who are doing most of these things. We should not hide away from the fact that they are part of the UPDF Reserve Force. 

Madam Speaker, while I have said that, and I am urging the Minister of Defence, as a member of this House I am urging that the strictest measures be taken to defer such things from happening again. In the same breath, I would like to recognise that the UPDF as a force has come a long way in terms of discipline from where they were to where they are today. I would like to categorically state that they have come a long way but as a member of this House, I definitely expect more and better.

Madam Speaker, if we compare, like hon. Sebuliba said, the misuse of the gun in the USA, the misuse of the gun in Europe where a gunman walks in a classroom and mauls down children, it happens all over the world. What happened in Bombo is not unique to Uganda but the way we deal with such scenarios, the response times we have to those injured, the trauma treatment given to the survivors, the support given to the relatives of those that have passed away, leaves a lot to be desired in our scenario. This misuse of the gun happens and will continue to happen. 

I disagree with some honourable colleagues that the gentleman took drugs; don’t we have civilians who take drugs? We do. Now really for us to sit here in this House and pass judgement that the man was drugged is totally wrong because if they knew, why didn’t they report before? (Member timed out)

5.03
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Toroma, I want to associate myself with the grieved families of fellow Ugandans who have lost very great people. Madam Speaker, I am going to concentrate on one issue, and that is 5.0. I would like to inform the Government –(Interjections)- Some Members are whispering, Madam Speaker, that I am a deserter. Protect me, I am not. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I know that he officially retired.

MR AMODOI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I retired officially without any anomaly. 

I have two points to make. The first is that I always want to speak the truth. In most cases, we Ugandans and maybe Africans try to avoid realities. It is very good for us to always realise and identify ourselves with the problem and then we find a way of addressing this problem amicably. In the minister’s statement, he talks of a minor’s rape but there are scenarios indicating that it was something beyond that. So, it is good for us to always accept reality and then from there, we address the problem.

The point is that Government must develop a policy on retirement for security forces, and in this particular case I am talking about the Army. Some of these policies are very silent, Madam Speaker and honourable members. It says that when you join the military force, you must serve for 13 years if you are a non-commissioned officer and if you are a commissioned officer, nine years. But as we speak, some of these scenarios happen the way they do because the policy on retirement is not clear. So many people in the armed forces want to retire but the Government is very adamant about this and that is why they resort to desertion. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute since you had an important point. 

MR AMODOI: I thank you for giving me half a minute and so I want to summarise. It is very important for the Government to work on a policy of retirement so that when these people want to retire, they should be given the opportunity other than somebody grounding one in the military force when he or she wants to retire. This policy must come up and it must not be silent the way it is. I thank you very much.

5.07
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to send condolences to the bereaved families.

Secondly, I want to thank the minister for this statement that has enabled us to bring out the issues that are now a matter of national insecurity. However, it is important for us to go to the roots of the current situation – the causes of the current insecurity in this country. You have heard of Bombo, Mbuya, Entebbe, and today in Red Pepper we are seeing Jinja and tomorrow I do not know, honourable minister, which other place - (Interjection) - Somebody has whispered, Kasese. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the status quo of the armed forces beginning with the police right from here in this building or institution, and you move to CPS, Wandegeya and Kasangati, the police in their thousands are being accommodated in tents. The police are being accommodated outside barracks. 

Go to the Army; in Arua, the soldiers of the 409 Brigade have now resorted to building for themselves. It is no longer Government. Somebody was talking about the former popular officers messes. Recently, when we lost Capt. Letti in the helicopter crash, we were there condoling with the family during the vigil; one of the officers messes’ had been turned into an accommodation unit housing over 10 families separated using plywood.

The point that I am trying to bring out is that there is apathy in the system. Ever since this Government took over, they have never put up any single unit, leave alone renovating the existing ones. Our soldiers are in Central African Republic – 

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I have recently been to Gulu Barracks and I am not new there. There are very many new structures or buildings that have been put up. The soldiers used to live in mama ingiya pole - that is how they call them - but now there are new structures. Is it in order for a member to say that there are no new structures that have been put by this Government? Is it in order for him to insinuate and yet we see that there used to be asbestos roofs but they replaced them with iron sheets. Is he in order?

THE SEPAKER: Honourable member, unless you can prove that there has been no development at all, you should withdraw.

MR ATIKU: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I referred to the 409 Brigade and I invite you to visit that barracks. It is one of the biggest barracks in West Nile. When I talk of 409 Brigade, you know what I mean. But we appreciate if there is some development that is taking place in Gulu. Thank you, but we are asking the minister to do that across the country because the accommodation plight of our sons and daughters is not good.

Secondly, we have got soldiers serving outside this country and recently I interacted with – (Member timed out)

5.15
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas the minister and the Government say that these are not rebels and that there are no rebels in this country, the newspapers have continuously moved around writing every time that these are rebels. For almost one week now, they have been writing that these are rebels. Now, if these are not rebels, you know that to win or take over the Government, the war of propaganda is even worse. If they tell us now that they have taken over Kampala, it will be bad for people and people will start running. So, why should the Government leave the newspapers to continue with the propaganda that these are not rebels if at all these are not rebels? If they are not rebels, what has the Government done to stop that propaganda because that is what is really causing a lot of panic outside there. 

Two, I want to also request the Government to sincerely listen to what the Members have suggested about the situation of the soldiers outside there. Also to the Members, I appeal to you that matters of security are very sensitive and every statement that you make, you must really be careful because it might either worsen the situation or improve the situation outside there. Like now, we are talking about the killings in Bombo. The minister has told us that it was a man who wanted to rape a minor, so it would be better for us not to associate this to the problem of the suffering of the soldiers or something like that because they were talking about her rape. However, generally it is true –(Interruption)

MRS OSSEGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. While I appreciate the presentation of my colleague, the colleagues who have expressed the plight of the men and women in uniform in this country should not be undermined. I think if we expect good service from them, it is only proper that we consider their standards of living and their conditions of living that can influence anyone of us, including Members of Parliament. So, if you do not want us to mention that that can be a cause of the errant behaviour, then I think we are deceiving ourselves. 

Is the Member in order to think that it is wrong for Members to refer to the plight of our men and women in uniform and request that this be addressed so that Uganda can get a better and honest service from these people? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the minister told us that the matter is under investigation. At this stage, I do not know whether I can really conclusively determine what actually happened. So, let us leave the investigation issue; just address the problem.

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the members for raising the problems that the soldiers are going through. 

The other issue that I want to bring out is the discipline in the UPDF. The UPDF is one of the most disciplined armies in Africa. This was because of the measures that they used to put in place. I remember when the NRA had just come, there were issues of firing squad; you misuse a gun, you are fired. I remember in Moroto, a soldier shot a woman because the woman had refused to give him some beer to taste. He shot the woman dead and that man was shot dead in the Boma grounds of Moroto. This alone brings a lot of discipline. So, why don’t we go for these measures in order to control the misbehaviour of some people in our society? 

5.15
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for giving us part of the information which we required. 

First and foremost, I have three questions to the minister. How did the officers in the Army deal with the deserter because if a person leaves the Army, again what relationship do you have to consider him as your spy especially in the case of the attack on Mbuya Barracks? Another question to the minister is: how much money did these people who sat with the deserter give the deserter for his actions? The next question is: what actions have you taken against these officers who entertained the deserter who incidentally caused commotion? 

Madam Speaker and Members, the minister has ably brought a statement today but we had several questions for the Minister of Defence in the last two weeks; majorly, these were concerning the plight of our officers in the Army, in the Police and in defence in general. I happen to have worked at Jinja Police Station but the conditions of the police stations like those in Jinja, Iganga, Entebbe and Nsambya - I even have the pictures - are really appalling. We would like to know what measures have you endeavoured to put in place, as Minister of Defence, to enable some of our areas improve. 

Honourable minister, we also had a question about how many uniforms the Army officers have. That question has not been answered. Also, I appreciate the fact that some barracks have been renovated but I happen to pass Gaddafi when I am going to Iganga – (Interjections) - I do not stay there but I pass there. So, if we are doing renovations, it should not be selective.

Another concern is about the workplace of our officers and remuneration. You will find that for some of these officers, like the one who shot the three people in Kireka, it is partly because his money had been taken by the people who had taken him to Somalia. When he came back – (Member timed out)

5.19
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I wish to thank the minister for the statement. Also, allow me convey my condolences to the families of the deceased. I have a few issues I want the minister to clarify. 

On page 3, bullet 4.2, he says that the commander under whom the errant soldier worked has been arrested. I want also to find out from the minister what happened to the Police officers where the defilement or the rape case was reported. If the Police had acted on this case, you never know this officer would have been in cells by that time. So, these people could have survived if the Police had acted - (Interruption)

MS SSINABULYA: Thank you very much, hon. Muwuma, for giving way. The information I want to give is that the minister reported that the attempted rape took place on 7th March and between 7th and midnight of 9th March, the Police did not take any action. If they had taken action and arrested this person who was a threat to the security of the population and the children, we would have avoided this unfortunate incident.  

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, honourable member, for the information. If this officer had been arrested, this incident would have been avoided. So, we need more explanations regarding this matter. 

Madam Speaker, in bullet 4.7, they say that a board of inquiry led by Brig. David Muhoozi, Air Defence Commander, has been set up. Why not use intelligence services? I think we need to begin respecting institutions. We have institutions like ISO and CID. Why not deploy them to investigate such matters instead of bringing in somebody from Air Defence who may not be available at this particular time to investigate this matter? Madam Speaker, we need additional information in this matter.

Colleagues, as we are in the budgeting process, I want to kindly appeal to you that we translate the sentiments and the passion that we are sharing here into the Budget that we are about to consider, so that the welfare of the soldiers or the Police force is squarely addressed. This is an appeal that I am raising to you. In the next few months, we shall be considering the Budget, so let us handle it the way we handled the issue of the teachers and nurses such that the soldiers also feel that this Parliament is really there for them. (Member timed out)

5.23
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. First of all, I thank the minister for bringing this statement to inform the country. Let me take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the bereaved families and I wish those who were injured and are still alive a quick recovery. 

This is a very sad moment but what gives hope is that the minister has apologised; what gives hope is that officers in our Army have talked to the bereaved families to show care and that they value Ugandans. I thank Government for that and I thank Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala for talking to the people. I must thank him again because at one time I was concerned about the people who come from missions and he assured me that they talk to them on how to behave. So, I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for having done that.

The people who were killed in Luweero, part of which I am the area MP, I want to say that as leaders we have taken the responsibility to comfort them. We have explained that this was an incident that had not been planned. We have further explained that it is not Government policy that things are done that way. We have tried to give them the confidence that Government is still there to assist them all the time and that they should stop panicking. We have appealed to them to remain calm.

About the inquiry, I would like to say that I am confident. I happen to know Brig. David Muhoozi. He is a very responsible officer. To my colleagues with doubts, I want comfort you that you can be sure that this is a very sober officer who I am sure will do a good job.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this should be a lesson for all of us as leaders. Let us go and talk to our people to remain calm. We need to talk to them to behave – (Interruptions)

DR LULUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. Mr Minister, you have said that you know a one Brig. David Muhoozi very well. Where is he working, Sir? (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Brig. David Muhoozi is stationed at Nakasongola –(Interjections)– Yes, I am very sure about that. You can check with the Ministry of Defence record to confirm what I have said. As I conclude, I would like to appeal to all of you to pray that such incidents do not occur again. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister comes in, I ask you to join me in welcoming Mr Ignatius Byaruhanga, the Chairperson LC V for Isingiro District. You are welcome.

5.27
MAJ (RTD) JESSCA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister of Defence for coming to share that valid information with Members of Parliament and the public at large – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, may I ask for some protection; hon. Medard Sseggona is here saying that I am deserter. (Laughter)

What I was saying is that I am glad that the Minister of Defence has been able to share that information with us and the public at large. What I know is that he has a record for bringing the truth and nothing but the truth to this House, and he has done that this afternoon. I am actually convinced that his report is loaded with facts. That is why I support it.

Secondly, I also would like to convey my condolences to the bereaved families and sympathy to patients who are still in hospital nursing injuries that arose from the incident that took place in Bombo Town Council. 

Let me share some information with the House on the fact that whereas there are isolated incidents like the ones we are debating now it is our common view that the Minister of Defence, with the help of colleagues in the armed forces, have been able to ensure that there is total peace across the country. I am saying this because it is now a belief that Ugandans are now used to this peace. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Defence to go and tell his colleagues that we have taken note of his report, which is very regrettable, according to him and all of us, but that we have encouraged him and his colleagues, amidst all the challenges, to undertake to provide peace and security by continuing to do what they have always done for Ugandans.

The minister talked about a deserter who interacted with officers in the Army. My thinking is that probably the deserter did this in disguise, but I hope that the minister will clarify on that. I also would like to add my voice to what hon. Byandala –(Member timed out)

5.30
MR RICHARD OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of the Members in thanking the minister for giving this explanation to the House. However, when I read page 3 under item 4.2, the minister reports that the commander under whom the errant soldier worked has been arrested. I would be interested in knowing how much this commander put in, in abetting the crime committed by the soldier.

The minister adds that the Commander of Land Forces, Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala, visited and counselled each individual family affected. He also said that the Chief of Defence Forces and the camp commandant addressed the community. Today in this House he has presented an explanation of what happened. Is that the level of responsibility those categories of people are taking over this matter? I would be interested in knowing from the honourable minister when he will take responsibility and resign, since he has arrested someone already. Is he taking responsibility by just explaining or there should be some other action for him to take?

Madam Speaker, this incident involved gunshots, which were heard. Who else can be taken to account for inaction when they hear gunshots near a barracks? The area Woman Member of Parliament has said the gunshots were just 200 metres away. Are there some people who can be held responsible for such inaction? 

Madam Speaker, at what point does a deserter become a security risk, if such a person can still remain in liaison with serving soldiers? Who takes responsibility for offences committed by such deserters when they have been in touch with serving soldiers? So, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out)

5.32
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting this statement. Further, I send condolences to the families that lost their dear ones. I condemn the killings because the people who were shot to death were innocent.

Like some Members have said, there have been incidences reported in the media about attacks in Jinja and Entebbe, which the report does not talk about. So, I do not know whether the minister will just come back to update the House on those. Outside, there is discussion to the effect that this could be the work of internal forces within the armed forces. Therefore, it may be important to undertake a wide assessment and investigations to establish the truth. In that regard, you may need to look at the policies on retirement as it has been raised, issues of deployment, promotions and other aspects of welfare of the uniformed serving soldiers. 

The issue of blaming everything on drug abuse now seems to be a common explanation whenever something happens. Madam Speaker, early this year when I was released from police cells and charged in court, my constituents decided to receive me in Kanungu. They were met with a big force of the Police and the UPDF who shot live bullets. One UPDF officer, whom I saw, because he shot in front of the vehicle in which I was travelling and even damaged the vehicle I was travelling in, shot two young men – (Interjections)- Yes, Mucunguzi Dan and Twinamasiko Gerevase - and bullets were removed from their lower ribs. 

When I asked the DPC who was commanding the forces about that incident, he also told me, “That UPDF soldier uses drugs”, and you know the same debate had been here. Then I said, “But if you know he uses drugs, why do you give him a gun? Why do you deploy him?” Let alone, even that deployment was not necessary because I was just returning home. I reported this matter but it was received with indifference. I think issues which involve loss of life must be taken extremely seriously and we expect the Minister to do a thorough investigation and tell the country what exactly is happening.

Secondly, there is a problem of veterans in the wider country. Many soldiers who have retired and left the forces, their welfare is not properly handled. If they got access to guns, they could probably kill all of us – (Mr Sseggona rose_) - Okay. I hope I will be compensated, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi, for giving way. I actually want to inform you that these people, once they retire, they go with guns and uniforms and they are very useful to this Government during elections. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give is that during the times of campaigns and elections, there was a very wide campaign in the whole country of veterans opening accounts, giving their details and expecting to get money in banks. I think everybody here experienced that. Some of us had relatives who opened accounts, and I want to assure you that these are now two years and a half and all these accounts were even closed yet these people used Shs 20,000 from their meagre resources to open accounts. 

It is not only about this one. Madam Speaker, as I give this information, let me inform the Minister that even policemen will very soon be shooting in the same form. As we talk, most of the police posts in Uganda, in our villages, are in a sorry state; Ministry of Internal Affairs is not paying money for the buildings where policemen are staying. Landlords are demanding for money and threatening to evict them.

On the issue of drinking or drugs, as I give this information, in the Military Police where I taught for 10 years, any soldier who would enter drunk would be held at the quarter guard and he would sleep there. Such matters do not arise anymore. Honourable minister, you have a high role of research to find out what is happening in the UPDF. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for that long and useful information. Madam Speaker, it is a very serious matter. A few years back, a UPDF veteran almost died in my house. He was chasing his entitlements and actually later on he died before he was paid. So, honourable minister, it is a very serious issue. These veterans and retired soldiers could also be a very big threat to our security. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. Hon. Ssemmuli.

5.38
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to register my condolences with the bereaved families and at the same time to thank the honourable minister for this statement. 

I would like to set the record straight. I am the Member of Parliament representing Buwekula, and Mubende Barracks is within my area of jurisdiction. My honourable colleague did mention that the soldiers from the Somalia mission are being integrated with the casualties within Mubende Barracks. The information I would like to give to this august House is that the casualties in Mubende Barracks live in separate apartments from the soldiers from Somalia. Actually, the soldiers from Somalia live about four kilometres from Mubende Barracks. That is the information.

Secondly, those soldiers have been undergoing some rehabilitation programmes to engage them into the society. To be honest, we in Mubende are benefitting a lot in terms of their performance within the economy. 

Thirdly, even though what I am saying seems to be positive, Mubende Barracks is one of the barracks that is experiencing poor accommodation facilities. These are casualties; some of them – (Interjections) – Please, let me talk. Madam Speaker, these are casualties who are unable even to walk. Most of the time I go and inspect them but to be honest, a lot needs to be done. Mothers are really struggling, especially the wives because they have children. In fact, when you go to Mubende Barracks more than 1000 children are in the barracks itself. 

At the same time, I would like to thank the government because definitely, there are some positive attributes. We have at least a primary school that accommodates the children, we have a secondary school and we have a technical institute. We also have an association called Children and Wives of Disabled Soldiers Association (CAWADISA). It is doing very well. 

I would like again to emphasise the issue of the veterans. In Buwekula, I have more than 1000 veterans and I remember last year I did table a petition whereby most of them claimed not to have been compensated. They have never been resettled. (Member timed out)

5.41
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to the previous speakers to thank the minister for this report. Also, on behalf of the people of Kabarole District I convey my condolences to the bereaved families and in a special way to the children, especially the children of the late couple, Mr and Mrs Adule, where the victims must be going through a lot of trauma. Having survived a rape and both parents are now dead, I do not know the fate of these children’s education. 

I was a DEO for eight years and we have army schools at least in every district. In Kabarole, we have Mountains of the Moon Primary School. We need to put in effort and put up a policy which gives these schools special consideration for boarding sections. I do not know where these children are going to go having lost both parents. With the transfers these people get, these children keep roving up and down and it is very difficult for them to have quality education because of the changes - moving from one place to another, experiencing different languages, especially the young ones, and the policy is that they must learn in the mother tongue.

I thank Government for the contribution that transported the bodies and for the funerals, but I would wish to appeal, genuinely as a mother and teacher, that something be done for the education of the children of the late Adule. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.44
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Kamara John Nizeyimana, Bufumbira County North bordering Congo.

Madam Speaker, I will first thank the UPDF because there has been war in Congo but not a single bullet has ever crossed into my constituency. For this, I thank you, honourable minister. However, there are some few cases; for instance in December 2011, one  person called Bizimana Evarest from Gahiza village, Busanza in Kisoro District was shot dead and we tried to follow up this case but we do not know exactly how this person died. In the same month, two Congolese were shot dead near the same Gahiza village in Nyarubuye but we found out who exactly did it and we do not know – 

MR KAWUMA: I thank you. I clearly listened to my colleague in his preamble that there has never been a bullet shot in his constituency. Shortly later, he said that they killed two people in the village. Is the honourable member in order to confuse and misguide this House by saying that no bullet has been shot and yet people were killed with bullets? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Where they in your constituency or in the neighbouring village? (Laughter)

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, these villages are far from Congo and I want to repeat what I said that no bullet has ever crossed from Congo into Uganda. We suspect that these people who were killed were either killed by Ugandans or by people who sneaked from Congo. Why I said that is because I represent people who border Congo and there is no tight security at the border. However, when we go to other countries like Rwanda, you will find that every person will be checked even more than once to know where he or she is going. 

Here when we consider an area like Busanza, we have a border that is not protected. I wanted to mention this issue when the Minister for Trade was still here so that she knows that these areas must be controlled because goods are being smuggled. Areas like Busanza need to be protected – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exceeded the one hour that we allotted for this.

5.48
MR HOOD KAURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join colleagues to thank the Ministry of Defence for this report and at the same time thank the Army leadership in Bombo Barracks for the support that they have given the bereaved families who lost their loved ones. 

That said, I want to talk about the aftermath of this incident and what lessons we are learning as a country. The discipline of the UPDF and the conduct of our soldiers is highly commendable because it has been a persistent policy that the UPDF leadership does not condone any errant or indisciplined soldier. This is highly commendable. However, what lessons are we learning from this? 

We are aware that because of the high discipline we have had with our soldiers, our soldiers have been given assignments in Somalia and other countries. Upon their return, however, it has been proved that some soldiers lack some counselling and guidance services. Therefore, I implore the Minister for Defence that this is a service that we should look at keenly so that those soldiers who need counselling and guidance services are identified and helped.

Secondly, I think that soldiers need good recreational and sports facilities in the barracks. I propose, honourable Minister, that this is another area you should look into that would make our soldiers relax when they do not have serious duties. I believe sports would play a big role in improving the conduct of our soldiers. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Members who have not contributed on this one will contribute on the next one. Also when the Prime Minister returns with a comprehensive answer to the Leader of the Opposition, you will be given an opportunity.  

5.50
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (DP, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you. I want to join my colleagues in conveying condolence messages to the families of those who died in the incident.

Notwithstanding that incident, I want to applaud UPDF as an institution. For the last 27 years, it has exhibited discipline notwithstanding these nasty incidents that have happened. As an institution, it has been a disciplined army different from the other armies that we have seen.

I want to talk around three issues. The first is that the minister is reassuring us that there is no rebel activity but the head of Police, who is a senior army officer, the person overseeing the Criminal Investigation and Intelligence Department of Police and everybody is telling the committee of Parliament that there are rebel activities in this country and more so in Buganda.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): I thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information that I want to give is that the quotation of the IGP referring to these activities as rebel activities was quoted from a local newspaper whose verification we have not yet got. So, how can we take it to be gospel truth? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker and members, one of our colleagues, hon. Kipoi, has been in Luzira for some time and one of his crimes is recruitment of rebels. Is the honourable minister in order to attempt to paint a rosy picture in this statement when actually Government is holding some people, including one of our own, for rebel recruitment? Is he in order, therefore, to imagine that the member is being wrongfully detained? Are you in order to mislead us?

THE SPEAKER: I did not understand your objection, honourable minister.  

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I am challenging the reference to Bukedde as being an authoritative statement from the IGP. That is my point - [Hon. Members: “That is a Government paper”]- It is not a Government paper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where Bukedde gets their information. Please conclude.

MR SSIMBWA: Rt Hon. Speaker, this takes me to the second point - the issue of army officers coming out with different statements and moreover contradicting statements. Early this year, there were statements made by different senior army officers about a coup attempt and here, we are seeing the same; a minister is saying that there are no rebels but a senior army officer is saying that there are rebels. So, Madam Speaker, I request the Army leadership to have one channel of communication so that the statements which are made by the senior officers do not become insecurity to the people. We need to have one channel of communication. 

I want to call upon my colleagues to accept the board of inquiry because in a board of inquiry, we are even able to establish the issues raised by this House; whether the killing was because of welfare or whether it was because of the counselling. In a board of inquiry, all this can be established other than having an investigation that is only targeting the criminal part of the incident. 

Lastly, the minister talks about daring people. Honourable minister, it is not about daring. It is about the conditions outside there. How do the veterans live? What about the people who have retired from the Army? What about their pension? It is not about daring; it is about the conditions these people live in. We are yet to see more if we do not handle the issues of the youth – (Member timed out.)

5.56
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the House by thanking the UPDF for being a disciplined force. At least, I managed to experience a bit of the former force that was in 1985 when I was still a child and I survived being raped by those other soldiers –(Interjections)– protect me, Madam Speaker. I was making my point.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Please, allow the honourable member to speak. 

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, however these isolated cases seen to be systematic attacks on security forces not only on the UPDF but on the Police. The attacks on the stations that the media have given us makes me worried and I think as members of Parliament, we have reason to worry. I urge the Ministry of Defence and all security organs not to relax. 

I also want to ask the Minister of Defence; of what help is a deserter to the UPDF? What are the penalties supposed to be given to deserters? Each year, we pass budgets here for ISO and ESO. If ISO and ESO are in operation, why do we need to use deserters as informants? We need some information. They should give us justification as to why we should keep on funding them if the country is still being attacked and we still go to the civilian population to give us information. And we even use criminals like deserters. 

Madam Speaker, the minister in bullet 5.3(a) said that there are daring people in the population that can be duped into taking very risky and criminal actions. It is true they are so many, particularly, in our area. It is unfortunate that most of the people who committed these crimes, particularly, the attack on Mbuya Barracks, are being linked to the people from Acholi quarters in Kireka Zone B and we should all know that most of these youth that have been brought to work as security guards are ex-LRA combatants. Has their plight been considered? The PRDP fund which was meant to resettle these ex-combatants has all been swindled -[Honourable Members: “By who?”]- by the people concerned. It could also be you, not necessarily those in Government. This leaves us with a population of the youth who came back from the bush and they have been traumatised; they have no work to do, they are just redundant. They end up being recruited into security forces and they come here to guard our homes. 

Not only that; we have many veterans, particularly, in my district. I have about 1,000 veterans who were asked to open accounts as honourable colleagues said. Others left widows and these widows paid a lot of money to get letters of administration to open accounts and manage the estates of their late husbands but up to now, they have not received any payment and they are traumatised. They cannot educate their children and imagine the trauma they go through. So, they can easily be duped.

Lastly, my worry is compounded by the fact that still, the security organisations or security agencies in the country have left our security to the hands of private guards. There is a place that I do not want to mention. Each time you enter from the other side, you are checked in a funny way – (Member timed out.)

6.00
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I thank my colleague, the Minister for Defence, for responding to the call. The question that brought this here was raised by me, as Shadow Minister for Defence and Security. I thank you for responding promptly.

I also thank the Government, partially, for responding to the problem in Bombo by giving burial support to the victims of that tragedy. However, Government needs to do more and go to the extent of compensating or supporting the families after the burial because there are children, as mentioned by many speakers here, who need to be taken care of. Government should take care of the orphans. 

On that note, I express my condolences and on behalf of the people of Obongi that I represent here, to the families of the bereaved. I wish those who got injured a quick recovery. 

Madam Speaker, if we want to find a solution to this problem, we need to be honest. In my view, the solution to the problem of security in this country cannot be solved sufficiently by this debate alone. What we can do from here is only to get things to progress to another level of talking, investigation and proposals so that we can get the real solutions and on that basis, I would like to proceed as follows:
The examples of these problems can be divided into three; soldiers returning from the frontline and killing their family members or people within their vicinity. We had an example in Moyo where a soldier who returned from Garamba, the Central African Republic, killed his family members at a place called Afogi. We have the incident in Luzira and so on. 

We also have cases of soldiers who have never gone to strenuous frontlines like the case of Odoch. We do not have a history of him being deployed anywhere or having operated in this hostile environment but they also take this action and act like that. People kill, like in this case. 

There is also scenario number three of soldiers having the potential of collaborating with wrong doers - those who have been previously serving. These three situations need to be separately evaluated. Therefore, we should go as follows to the solution:

This is a governance problem. Governance within the security forces where we look at issues of welfare, salaries, allowances, issues of promotion and deployment. We should not bury our heads in the sand. The Army you are praising for the good deeds of yesterday is not the same Army you are seeing today. It is not going to be the same Army you want us to have tomorrow. There are complaints within the armed forces. My colleague from Toroma gave you something about veterans or deserters –(Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I am a shadow minister, kindly give a full minute. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The shadow minister arrived late. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, there are soldiers who have been put on something called “Katebe”; I mean people who are grumbling because they are not deployed. That is the biggest threat within the Army.

But also, there are issues of governance in general. If you have people in the population who have the likelihood of being recruited into rebellion, it means you have to examine the entire society to establish the social, economic and political factors which predispose young people to be recruited into rebellion.

We also have a warning from the Army that there can be a coup. But remember that a coup cannot just occur without society facing problems. You need to also understand that a coup cannot be executed by only army officers. That is why in most cases, while some people will support it, others will not. So, you have the duty to address the governance problems of the Army institution and Uganda as a whole. Otherwise, you might be waiting for a bigger problem than this.

6.05
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the bereaved families. Secondly, allow me to thank the minister for presenting this report.

I have three questions to the minister. The first is about the minors whose parents died. Both the minors’ father and mother died. So, what plans do you have, as a ministry, to save these minors?

Two, from the minister’s statement, it is indicated that the errant soldier must have been looking for sex. But after failing to get it – (Interjections) – yes, he wanted to have sex, but after failing, he got annoyed and ended up killing all those people. As a ministry, what plans do you have to assist all soldiers who are not married so that such a thing is not repeated? (Laughter)

Three, Mr Minister, you are aware of soldiers who have not been paid their gratuity as ex-combatants. What plans do you have to ensure all those soldiers, including those who have been partially paid, are handled before they become a problem to this country? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank all colleagues who have been able to speak to this matter. Because of time constraints, I may not be able to provide answers to every question posed. But I can assure you that all the issues raised will be handled by the ministry and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

I will start with the issue of stories that we all read from the media. Yes, the media are useful because some of the time they give us correct information. However, we need to note the fact that at other times, the media also make a lot of errors. Our duty here is to always verify whatever we get from the media. For example, today, the Red Pepper carried a huge headline saying that rebels attacked Jinja and took arms.

I would like to inform the House that I got in touch with the police officer in charge of that Jinja area and he gave me a story of this nature. There were two ladies who belonged to a private security organisation who had been deployed at some point. They received visitors who were friends to one of the ladies. The suspicion is that one of these visitors on going back, stole the gun the ladies were using to guard. 

Obviously, it is bad enough that this visitor took the gun with him. But on the other hand, for a newspaper to make a big headline out of that, that there was an attack and that arms were taken, obviously, causes concerns among the population for nothing. Yes, it is good to consume media content but it is important that we do some verifications.

My second point is on discipline. I want to thank honourable members of Parliament who have clearly stated and commended the UPDF for the good discipline. When soldiers hear us commending them for doing a good job, they get motivated. It is true there is discipline, but we must not relax. Discipline must be tightened because when we relax, we can easily get into bigger problems. Otherwise, thank you for the commendations on the part of the Army and the soldiers.

The third point is on what I summarised as daring people that can be easily duped to collaborate or to commit crimes. I was happy to hear colleagues give different aspects to this problem.

We have veterans out there whom we have not fully paid. That is correct. There are also soldiers and policemen who are not getting paid enough salaries. That is also correct. But I think that at this point in our history, the biggest problem we have among the youth is unemployment. It is a serious problem that causes desperation and can indeed make people collaborate with criminals in the hope that they will get something to live on. This is a problem all of us must appreciate and where we can do something - let us do it. The question of high level of unemployment is a security risk in itself.

My fourth point relates to the welfare of the Army and I heard honourable colleagues argue that there is need to improve the housing system and salary levels of our soldiers. They have also alluded to the fact that we need to ensure soldiers access such facilities as duty free shops. And as the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs said, let us walk the talk. When the budget comes and we can find some money –(Dr Lulume rose_)– kindly, just a moment. I will yield the Floor at some point with the permission of the Speaker.

My next point is about counselling soldiers; not just those who are returning from operations but also those deployed elsewhere in the country. It is a very important component and I must admit that we are not doing very well on this. 

There is need to do more because it requires qualified people and resources. However, I would like to assure Members that we are conscious of this and doing it on progressive basis. As you heard from the colleague from Buwekula, when soldiers return from Somalia, for example, we keep them almost the whole month in Mubende to try and counsel them so that they can be reintegrated into the population. That is a point very well made and we are going to follow it up.

Hon. Khiddu Makubuya expressed fear that in the area where this tragic incident took place, people are not living in their houses fearing that this criminal can come back and shoot other people. I would like to assure him and also honourable colleagues that we are taking every step possible to ensure that these people are reassured and protected.

I have one last point, -(Dr Bayigga rose_) Madam Speaker, with your permission, my brother across the Floor can give me some information. 

THE SPEAKER: That is reopening the debate.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for giving way. I am seeking clarification from the Minister for Defence. This clarification arises from the facts which have been averred from the honourable member here about Lt Moro, who in your report you claim is a deserter. According to the information that our friend here has, this man is a serving officer in the records department in the Barracks of Bombo and he had spoken to him just a few days before. What does desertion mean? After how long does somebody qualify to have deserted? Where did he desert from? (Dr Epetait rose_)

THE SPEAKER: One final clarification, hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: In the event that the honourable minister’s allegation that Lt Augustine Moro is actually a deserter - can he put records straight and tell Parliament the names of those officers who financed him? (Interjections) No. we demanded that, now you have gone into - we want to know the names of those officers who gave money to a deserter who ordinarily ought to have been tried and how much money it was. 

DR KIYONGA: Okay, Dr Lulume. I think the question you have asked and which has been supplemented by Dr Epetait falls in my concluding remarks that there is a board of inquiry established and this matter is going to be followed up very carefully and deeply. 

What I would request hon. Olanya is to cooperate with us or at least, with me because he has indicated that according to the information he got from this soldier, although he is recorded as deserted, the soldier is actually working somewhere. So, I just- (Interjections) – yes, I just want us – (Interjections) - because that is something we cannot conclude here. I am just requesting for your cooperation that as we continue with the board of inquiry, work with us so that we can establish the facts. 

Now, in my statement, I said this soldier went to certain officers and made allegations and asked for money. I did not state in my statement that this officer was given money. I did not say so. We have a Hansard. But that is not to say that he may not have been given money. That is why we have a board of inquiry to get to the bottom of this matter. 

So, I think trust us. We have given you what happened and we have undertaken that this matter is going to be followed up so that if there is a deep-seated issue, we can solve it conclusively. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you should ask a specific question. Let us move to the next item. 

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I think procedurally, it would be right because in the course of the debate, there was an issue on the payment of salaries to Uganda Police Force and I see the Minister of Internal Affairs here - because we have information to the effect that our men and women from the Uganda Police Force have not been paid their salaries for the last month up to now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that would come in any event in the next debate because we are dealing with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, we shall want an answer why the Police have not been paid.  

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): But I can give some response to this, Madam Speaker. I have checked with Police headquarters. The information I got is that because of the change in the payment system, under IPPS, there has been some delay. Some police officers have got their salaries while others have not got them yet but they will be paid by Friday this week. That is the information I got - (Interjections) - I have finished. 

THE SPEAKER:  Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER AND MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE SPEAKER: It is debate. The report was presented. Hon. Kiyingi.

6.21
MR JOSEPH KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the subject matter of the Public Order and Management Bill. Similarly, I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report and for the effort that you put in. 

Bearing in mind the harsh penalties and sanctions in the Bill in as far as the people who breach the provisions are concerned, I would wish to - (Hon. Ekanya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule? What rule has he offended?

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: I would wish to – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I stand up on a point of procedure. This Parliament is a member of IPU; we are members of the Commonwealth; the Government of Uganda has ratified the African Charter on Peoples’ Rights and the UN. Madam Speaker, we are under the obligation to adhere to those principles.

The Bill before us is a replica of the Apartheid Act which was condemned at the UN and in the AU. Therefore, is it procedurally right for this Parliament sitting here to reproduce a Bill that was condemned by the United Nations and by the African Union; to bring it here in Uganda in the 21st Century under the Constitution of 1995?

This violates all the charters and the principles to which this republic adheres and that we are signatory to. Is it procedurally correct?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what is in the Bill. Let us first debate it and then we shall decide whether it is constitutional or not. But now, you cannot pre-empt the debate. Hon. Kiyingi let us hear what it is.

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was saying - (Interjections) - I beg colleagues to lend me their ears in this regard -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a general debate, please. Hon. Kiyingi, you have the Floor.  (Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) Hon. Lukyamuzi, do not interfere with Mawokota. Please, sit down. You wait for your turn. You will get your turn. Do not argue with the Speaker. (Laughter)

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point I was driving at is when you look at the penalties and sanctions in the Bill, in line with those that stand out to breach the provisions as provided for in the Bill, I believe that if there are no remedies or benefits provided for those that comply with them, maybe there is a gap somewhere. When I did consult the people of Mawokota South that I dearly serve, they asked what would happen to those who would come out to follow the guidelines. They asked if there would be anything provided for them. So, I would like the minister and the chairperson to look into that.

Secondly, I further seek clarification from the committee chairperson and minister on whether there are provisions in the Bill that protect the human rights and other fundamental freedoms like of association, speech, conscience and assembly as enshrined in Article 29 of the Constitution noting that in a number of cases, there are innocent Ugandans that are caught up in demonstrations, some knowingly and others unknowingly. Some do not even know what is going on and they end up finding their way in the prisons of Uganda and unfortunately, some have even lost their lives there. 

I would like the honourable minister to clarify whether their rights are protected by this Bill. I beg to submit. I thank you.

6.25
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important chapter of discussion in the history of Uganda. I am surprised that after 50 years of political independence, in a situation where Uganda has experienced a turbulent history related to lack of democracy and suppression of people’s rights, we could have such a Bill in our sight.

I would like to begin by mentioning the contents of Article 2 (2) of the Constitution. This Bill that we are discussing is deemed to be unconstitutional pursuant to Article 2 (2) of the Constitution that states and I beg to quote, “If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail, and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.”

It is on record that pursuant to a high profile case, Kivumbi Muwanga Vs The Attorney-General where the Constitutional Court pronounced that under the Constitution’s provisions namely; 29 (d) and 20 (1) and several others – that provision that reads as Section 32 (2) of the Police Act is in open contradiction with the provision of the Constitution that I have just quoted. We do not see any reason why we should pass in a different channel and bring back the same enemy that the Constitutional Court condemned. It would be a shame of perhaps the highest order for a country highly respected and is a member of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the African Union and the East African Community to be passing a law of this nature. It is a shame and we must discern and condemn this kind of law. (Laughter) 

I have been looking at this Bill and even by drafting standards, I am surprised that the introduction to the Bill is so low and it meanders here and there trying to spot what is wrong, trying to release this and that without success. 

I would like to propose that from now onwards, Parliament should desist from passing laws of this kind because the first time you pass such a law, John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the Man, will be one of those people that will take this law to the Constitutional Court seeking interpretation because the law, as it is, cannot pass the litmus test. 

You are talking about the Police, for example, in clause 13 when I organise a public rally in Rubaga South, I am not supposed –[Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali: “Information.”]

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Deputy Prime Minister.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I just wanted to remind my colleague that the rally that he is actually talking about was called at the Natete Play Grounds where, as he was trying to talk to the people, a thief was also being chased from the other side through the ground - only for him to think that they were coming to arrest him and so, he jumped and left these people in the crowd –(Laughter)- and he ran away. (Laughter)   

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I thought that the General had something to talk about. (Mr Wadri rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Wadri.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I stand here to give information, which should correct the information being given by Gen. Moses Ali. This was in the Seventh Parliament and I was one of those MPs who were invited as guests in Natete Play Grounds, not far away from the Police station. There was no thief being chased. 

It is true that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, who was supposed to be our host on seeing a police vehicle, abandoned us and took off but there was no thief being chased. (Laughter) That is the information that I want to give you. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the submission in front of us should not move us from the issues that I am raising. I am raising pertinent issues and ignore Natete and the “Mayuni” but talk about democracy. 

About three days ago, the people of Ndeeba – I had just learnt that fire gutted the people’s timber area and I felt a responsibility to go to that area and sympathise with them. What is very funny is that when I gave notice to Police that I would be going to Ndeeba, they allowed me to go and see them but I should not talk. So, I said, “What are you talking about? I am the Member of Parliament for Rubaga South. My people have got trouble. There are many people in numbers and I cannot reach each and everybody. The only summary talk of combination with them would be to use a microphone and talk to them publicly.” The commander of the Police said, “My friend, you are not going to talk.” I risked and said, “You are joking. I am going to talk.” 

Is this the kind of situation that you want to see? Why did the NRM go to the bush? One of the reasons that the NRM went to the bush was to bring democracy so that people are free to speak to everybody. This is not a monopoly of the NRM. I am talking for everybody in this Parliament, whether you are NRM or not, whether you are Independent or not; you must have the responsibility to address your people, know and hear from them. Why are you running away from such a – (Member timed out.)(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait and then hon. Ruhunda. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Can I conclude in one minute? 

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Epetait. 

6.33
DR FRANCIS EPETIAT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

Dear colleagues, we are politicians. A politician should have time to talk to the people he or she leads. This Bill, as it is, is a very dangerous cake. I do not know whether it is intended to gag not only Members of Parliament, district councillors, chairpersons of districts or sub-county councillors including the LC 1 chairmen. The Bill is curtailing a meeting or a gathering of more than three people without notice to the Police. How can we pass such a law, which will literally make us guests of Police stations every time? When moving along the road, perhaps three of four constituents may want to join their MP. If you are going for a funeral on foot, you have to notify the Police because that can be misconstrued as a demonstration. For any gathering or a group of more than three people moving, you need – (Interjections) - they have decreed the public meeting. They have defined it that it means a gathering, assembly, a conclave, a professional demonstration of three or more persons in any public road as defined in the Traffic Act and it continues. 

You need the permission of the Police. You and I will be sent to work - we shall be fully demanding for permission to almost do everything that we are required to do –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that actually, the Bill contravenes the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It contravenes Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which guarantees the right to movement and the right to association and actually, as a result of this, when we allow to pass it the way it is, it even takes away the rights which accrue to you by virtue of being born, which rights are inherent, which are not granted to you, which are not donated to you by the State but which the State must only regulate. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for that useful information. Dear colleagues, moreover a number of the provisions put in this Bill have actually been catered for in the Police Act. We wonder why Government all of a sudden has decided to come up with such a Bill which will actually cause more confusion because, unfortunately, we have very few prisons. 

I want to put Government on notice that you will be engaged in arresting everybody; not only politicians because we will need Police permission and I do not know where the Police will get stationery to keep printing forms for notices to be – (Member timed out.)

6.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the committee. The committee has brought a very comprehensive report and this report has done proper surgery to this Bill. While in consultation with the people of Fort Portal, they sent me to come and say “No” to these draconian measures – (Applause) – and I will represent them. But I was a little bit worried that perhaps the committee did not see the issues, which the people of Fort Portal were able to highlight but when I read this report, all the worries that I had and which the people of Fort Portal had have been well catered for by this report, including the issues which the Members here are raising. In fact, Madam Speaker, when you read this entire report, right from the first page, they are quoting the case of Muwanga Kivumbi Vs Attorney-General and they are in agreement with that. 

They have gone ahead to say that prohibiting public meetings and public rallies or demonstrations which are highlighted in clause 8(1) of the Bill, proposing to re-enact in terms of what section 32(2) of the Police Act did, will be in effect, not only be a violation of Article 29(1) (d) of the Constitution as declared by the Constitutional Court but also a contravention of Article 92. They have clearly highlighted that. 

Moving ahead, because of all these contentious issues, the committee has done a fantastic job. They have gone ahead on issues of restriction to say that these will present unreasonable restrictions on the enjoyment of the freedom of association and expression in a way that is beyond what is acceptable and the most justifiable in a free and democratic society. The committee has observed that.

I was really moved when it came to the issues of rights because I really love my rights and freedom. I love rights for African people. We also need to enjoy part of our God-given rights and nobody can take that away from us. When it comes to these issues of rights, the right to assemble is the aggregate of the individual liberty of the person and individual liberty of speech and that is the liberty to express this opinion. It is the aim of the right to assemble under principle II and X of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. In fact, I urge the committee members that if we go ahead and pass the Bill with these amendments, then this Bill will be much more in line with the conditional obligations. Let us not delay. We should go ahead with these serious amendments and pass the Bill that will cater for the interests of our society, putting into consideration our rights. We cannot touch our rights and nobody should play around with them. 

6.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chair and the committee for a very good report and actually, they have done very good work particularly, to apply surgery to the Bill. The Bill as it appears, offends very many provisions of the Constitution and even offends the Police Act under which the Uganda Police works and I have also done consultations with the people in my constituency and they do not feel comfortable with the way the Bill has been drafted. 

Madam Speaker, we are a young democracy in Uganda and we are trying to make progress but I do not think this progress will be realised through drafting repressive and draconian legislations. What we need is to put right our politics so that we can have constructive engagements between the various stakeholders but not to curtail the freedoms and rights of those we think do not agree with us, using repressive laws. So, I will take special exceptions to those provisions, which curtail freedoms and rights of individuals even when we do not agree politically.

Currently, the Police think that they must give permission for anybody to organise an assembly and yet, Government is bringing a Bill asking us to allow the Police and the State to do that, meaning that the actions of the Police today are outside the law. I think Government must address itself to this fact.
 
To me, that abuses authority and sometimes, there is a tendency to persecute those who do not seem to be on your side. So, I want to appeal to my colleagues on the NRM side that this may not only be intended to affect those in the Opposition because some of us have already tested it. (Applause)

In the earlier debate, Madam Speaker, I made reference to an occurrence in Kanungu where people had gathered to receive me in happiness. It was not a demonstration and they had worked with the Police because they thought they had to get permission from them. So, they wrote to the DPC who granted them permission by stamping their letter. 

At the time I arrived at the place, there was no security at all. However, when I was about to arrive at the gathering, I was confronted by a joint team of police and the UPDF officers. Some of the officers shot at people with live bullets, injuring some. When I asked the DPC where he had got the authority to do that, he said, “I got instructions from above to do this.”

So, there is abuse of authority by the Police and the Army. It is on the basis of this that I urge fellow Members to pick interest in this law and support a number of provisions that were looked at by the committee. I believe they have done wide research to champion the guarantee of freedoms and rights of Ugandans.

I agree with the fact that we must regulate assemblies and we must ensure that assemblies do not collide. However, this should not be done to the detriment of the freedoms and rights of individuals, irrespective of their political affiliation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.46
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a submission on this Bill. I had the opportunity to read this Bill and internalise it. So, I would like to thank the committee for doing wide consultations. I notice that they consulted with ministries, commissions, authorities, UN bodies, the Christian fraternity, political parties and individuals. It was because of those wide consultations that there was no minority report produced.

This Bill had generated a lot of debate. Actually, what went around the first time it was tabled was that it was intended to violate people’s rights. However, after reading it, I realised that it is intended to protect people’s rights. In that regard, I want to thank Government for coming up with this Bill.

I would like to point out the fact that laws are formulated and not made. That means laws are a reaction to a challenge in society. When a challenge in society demands to be regulated, some set of rules and regulations have to be formulated. Society will always have the dos and don’ts and sanctions to keep itself at peace. Failure for society to sanction itself will lead to anarchy.

When the US was recently challenged with terrorism, they had to formulate laws that had not been heard of in that country. In fact, they almost went to the borders of violating human rights.

I am not calling on Members to make draconian laws, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that formulation of laws is a reaction to a given challenge in society. And the challenge that Uganda is now faced with is on how to manage our public order. 

The impact of the trip to Kayunga is still fresh in our minds. The killing of police officers; the walk-to-work; the burning of tyres on our roads – all those ugly incidents that happened are regrettable and call for the regulation of our public order. However, we should do that in a way that does not violate human rights. And the only way to do that is through this Bill. I thank you.

6.49
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. However, I am most concerned about the public domain and good. Members have made citations from the UN Charter and the one on the Organisation for African Unity. 

However, we should not forget the fact that even in this House, we operate under some rules. For example, as one Member contributes, the rest should listen in silence. We have decorum of Parliament. Even churches follow some order.

My opinion is that this Bill will enable us, as leaders, to respect the rights of those who might not be with us as we demonstrate or portray our emotions. So, it is very important that we support a Bill that is good in nature to help those that are eager to understand and be patient enough to listen – (Mr Wadri rose_) – Madam Speaker, as I continue, well informed – (Members rose_) I will give you room later.

We have seen situations where demonstrations are intentionally taken to market places to disrupt public order. We have seen demonstrations cutting across the city and blocking schools. We have also seen demonstrations go to hospitals.

So, it is only imperative that as leaders, we respect such areas that are gazetted for other members of the public to use. The Bill does not stop anyone from carrying out demonstrations or portray emotions. It only emphasises the fact that this should be done in an orderly manner. Thank you. 

6.51
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to commend the committee for the good job done. I socialise and on Sunday, I played golf with some of the diplomats who contributed to these amendments. They expressed the fact that the committee consulted them and took their views wholesale.
 
So, I want to commend the committee for consulting widely on this Bill. I think it is the first time to have a report of a committee signed by all members. This is the first time because even those we think are critical of Government, for example, hon. Medard Sseggona –(Applause)– appended his signature to this report. That shows good surgery was done to this Bill.

Madam Speaker, we live in a dynamic world. That means we should put rules and regulations in place to be followed. I am not saying we should not respect our constitutional rights because soon after you are born, you are entitled to these rights. But we should not step on the toes of others at the same time.
 
Usually, when these rallies are held, who are the people affected? One may try to protect their rights as individuals but while hurting the majority and the economy, burning tyres on the roads and so, we keep appropriating money to go and repair those roads that have been destroyed.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we should take this Bill in good faith. It is a Bill whose report has been signed by members from all sides including those from the Opposition, including the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu, an indication that surgery to this Bill was done very well. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.54
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much has been said about this Bill and about this report. Of course, when you look at how the Bill was and how it is now in the report, there is a difference. 

When you look at the object of the Bill, number one; it is to provide for regulation of public meetings, the duties and responsibilities of the Police, the organisers and participants in relation to public meetings to prescribe measures for safeguarding public order without compromising the principles of democracy, freedom of association and freedom of speech. We are yet to find out whether this Bill is not going to violate object of the Bill number one.

On this side, as the Opposition, I do not think that this is our Bill. It is not our law. This is because we have been harassed and denied access to our constituencies without this Bill. So, whether it is there or not, for us we are orphans and the way we are being treated leaves a lot to be desired.

Therefore, we want to make a Bill, which is going to handle our colleagues on the other side, although others have started to come this side. With or without this Bill, the way the Police are handling us leaves a lot to be desired.

We are trying to make sure that our colleagues on the other side do not suffer severely the way we are suffering; that is the intention of this Bill and honourable members, I think that if we scrutinise this Bill, you will find out that indeed, there are many provisions that are violating our Constitution.

I believe that today, we may be using all that we have to pass this Bill but we know that in future, you are the ones who are going to complain and I believe that you are going to be the first victims of this Bill.

I support the passing of the Bill so that these people of NRM and others who have not been suffering the way we have been suffering - with or without a Bill - (Laughter) - if we are to pass this Bill, it is going to target you. (Member timed out.)

6.57
DR MICHALE LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Bill has generally changed according to the report of the committee. A number of provisions, which were obnoxious, have been dealt with but that one is not to make it a good law at all.

To begin with, a number of provisions in this Bill are adequately provided in the Police Act. There was an attempt to import what had been dealt with in the Constitutional Court back into it. That tells us the spirit in which this Bill was introduced. 

I want to agree with those who say that the Bill has undergone significant metamorphosis positively. I want to look at section 8, which is an import of the obnoxious provisions that were dealt with, particularly, clause 8(b) where the authorising officer would like to be given authority to determine the suitability of the venue where a public meeting should be held. Those of us who have been in this kind of situation as poor cousins in this country, we know that once you allow any police officer to determine subjectively, then you have already lost the suitability of the Police even if you have chance to hold a rally wherever you want to hold it. That must change in consonance with the spirit of changing this Bill.

When you look at part three of the same section where you are donating your right to the authorising officer to allow or disallow a public meeting; that is another area that needs to be looked at and changed.

In the same spirit, when we look at clause 15, gazetted area donates all the rights to an individual in a minister to determine certain spaces and gazette them as no-go areas where you cannot make any public gathering, which is an impossibility in the laws of Uganda. Where certain areas have been defined as Central Business District in town councils or townships, you wonder where a district comes from. That is also an import where rights of individuals to gather, assemble and do their political activities would want to be curtailed. 

The other areas where the same imports are coming from are in respect of restricted areas. Such restricted areas are a real opposite of what we see in outside democracies –(Member timed out.)

7.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to start by thanking the committee for the surgery that has been done to this Bill.

I would like to start by addressing myself to the definition of “public meeting”. “Public meeting” means a gathering or assembly. I will stop there for purposes of my submission.

I wonder whether this Bill is going ahead to involve all political leaders starting from the MPs, district chairmen, councillors, LCs up to the lower units. I am saying this because if by the nature of our work, we are supposed to do consultations and we are saying that, for example, we have a very hot issue before us, marriage and divorce. We are now saying that as an MP, before you consult with your constituencies, you must first get clearance from Police. You are the Chairman LC III, you have a very hot issue, you must first consult the – (Interruption)

MS OSSEGGE: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is that this is just going to be sanctioning what has already been happening. Last week, I was in my constituency and the public raised a problem with health centre services. I went there to address the people with the staff of the health centre, with the LC chairman and our leaders in the community but the Police came and wanted to arrest me and said that I was holding an illegal assembly.

This law is only a disguise to cover up for what has already been implemented. So, I want to warn colleagues to be very careful.
 
MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. In other words, I was asking; is this law going to grant permission to Members of Parliament and other political leaders when they are going for consultation and those urgent matters or we are just going to be taken omnibus?

Secondly, I want to address myself to the issue of the Police. I wonder if you are making this law only for now or it will go throughout even during the campaign period; because this is a time that we are going to gather people. And, for example, in my district alone, we have very many contestants for Member of Parliament. We have many contestants for chairman. We have many contestants for all those positions. Do we have enough manpower to be accorded to each and every political leader who is looking for votes? I wonder whether we have done enough research; whether we have even taken into account the issue of resources and finance. 

Otherwise, maybe this law will stop before we go in for serious campaigns because according to the definition and according to what this law will talk about, even during our campaigns, each one of us must be accorded a police officer so that – because after all, they are regulating our public meetings. So, maybe at an appropriate time, I want the minister to come clear and really clarify on this - (Member timed out.)

7.05
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for trying to panel beat the original Bill to try and suit - maybe given the environment - but I want to say that it is the duty of every citizen to respect the rights and freedoms of others; that one is certainly a constitutional matter. But at the same time, a Ugandan must be given his civic right to make sure that he participates in the governance of this country, particularly when we are deepening democracy in his country - individually or through the organisation he belongs to. 

This Bill, in my opinion, is just a cover up to make sure that you, Members of Parliament, who have independent minds and want to serve your people, do not do it independently. This is how I read this Bill, particularly you Members of Parliament. Members of Parliament, as you know, other than legislation, you have other functions to do in your constituencies. You must have meetings in your constituencies, during the day and even during the night. You cannot determine numbers; you cannot determine the time you are going to be having these meetings. If really you can accept to be constrained, you as Members of Parliament, during work in your constituencies and you pass this law, then God forbid. 

We are members of the Commonwealth; we are members of the African Union; we are deepening democracy. I am requesting all Members of this Parliament, not from this side alone, but every Member of Parliament who knows he is going to do his job - do it well, do it properly - to know that the intention of this Bill is to curtail our rights; to curtail our civic duties to do our job. This is a message I am giving to all of you, Members of Parliament - further examine this law. If you just continue and you do it the way you do it because of votes, that is your problem. But tomorrow -

I will give an example. In the past, on this same Floor of Parliament, a law was passed by a minister, an Attorney-General - Grace Ibingira and the next day, he found himself in Luzira. I - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I think you should not give the impression that the Bill is as is because the committee has done a lot of surgery. Members are contributing as if nothing has changed. Acknowledge the work of the committee.

7.09
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the Chairman of the committee for a very good report. I am sure the Executive will concede when we go to Committee Stage to all the amendments that have been proposed by the committee. 

Madam Speaker, your wise counsel, as you have given is that Members should feel that the amendments so proposed by the committee will create a law, which is good. I am sure the concern which has been raised by Members is they are looking at the Bill as it were; possibly somebody on the front bench, at one time or another, could come out and say they could have done it out of oversight. Once that one is done, then Members will not feel that it was done with ulterior motives. To me, that is what it should be. Not that the committee has done a good job but the intention - whoever wrote the Bill, that was the intention of that person. And so, at one time or another, someone can say maybe, it was an oversight; maybe somebody was overzealous. 

Because we have moved for a long period where people would talk- and you know we had even got to a situation where someone would say, “In our Government, however much someone talks about the head of state, he goes home and sleeps.” Now, these years have gone and we have been used to this type of situation. What has gone wrong for the State to put certain provisions as they were in the Bill? Maybe we need to re-examine and find out what went wrong because we still think someone can talk and talk - we are used to this thing called open methods of work, constructive criticism; you criticise and you think what you have said, if it was wrong, you would be corrected and so on. 

So, for future Bills, we should first re-examine so that we do not bring a Bill and a lot of surgery is done on it then you say, “After all, it has been made well.” What was the intention of having that type of Bill? That is the problem we have. That is why I was saying, somebody can say, “No. I think it was an oversight or somebody who wrote the Bill might have put certain provisions without thinking of the applications.” 

Otherwise, I want to thank the committee and I am sure we shall pass this Bill and create a good law because there are also people who have taken advantage of these open methods and they have gone beyond where they should have gone; because if you step on my toes, I should react. So - (Member timed out.)

7.13
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this Bill was first read, we made some few gatherings in my constituency and five people out of 10 were agreeing; five were disagreeing. (Laughter) That means it was a balanced agreement - 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Honourable members, please allow the Member to give you his experience of his consultation.

MR AMOS OKOT: I am giving you information that is vital. Of the five people who were disagreeing, they made mention of some few areas which this Bill could not cure and I now think that in our meeting, we should seek a way of getting a solution.

In a village, there is always what we call village day work chart. This means that the peasant farmer or people normally go to do work and when you call for a meeting and the meeting is supposed to start by 8 a.m., the people will turn up around 10 a.m. or sometimes past midday and when you time yourself thinking that maybe this meeting was supposed to take something like eight hours, you may not accomplish it within the specified period of time. That it is supposed to end by 6.00 p.m. 

So, now, they were saying that how could the Bill address a situation where in a village, people have a meeting and it goes even beyond 8.00 p.m. or sometimes even 10.00 p.m.? This is a common practice that normally takes place in the villages.

Therefore, we are now saying that if the Police can work 24 hours, can the Bill put a clause where either time should be looked into?

Another point that they raised is about the impromptu meetings. There are some impromptu meetings that can sometimes take place. These impromptu meetings at the end may either turn out into a riot but yet on the other hand, it may need attention immediately. For example, you may have a nearby police station or where the authorities live but you wake up in the morning and find that some people have stolen, broken into houses or may have killed somebody and people become aggrieved – immediately, they have to say, “No, we have to show that this thing is painful to the society.” In such a situation of an impromptu meeting, you will find that the Bill says that you are supposed to notify the Police seven days in advance and therefore, if you could in – (Members rose_) - I will give you an opportunity but let me conclude the point I am trying to raise. The Bill warrants the organiser to give a seven-day notification and yet if this impromptu meeting arises, it does not take care of it.

Madam Speaker, this Bill did not prohibit the church meeting and the weddings. But experience shows that even in the church meetings, sometimes they end up in demonstrations. They normally take place but the Bill did not describe that. It did not handle anything of that kind. So, those are the questions that people were trying to ask. 

In clause 12 (d), it says that the organisers should make sure that they guard against statements that the people or the public may make because such a statement may go in the media and – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR AMOS OKOT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was on the point that the organiser according to the Bill in clause 12 (d) states that the organisers should ensure that no participant makes a statement which will not be according to the law. This was an area where people were having a lot of question marks and – (Mr Olanya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Olanya.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I thank you very much, hon. Amos Okot, for giving me way. You made mention of the impromptu meetings where by a Member of Parliament may visit his area not with the intention of having a meeting with the people but you find people gathering and coming in many numbers for that particular Member of Parliament. 

The information that I want to give you is that when all Members of Parliament move to their areas, automatically you will find people gathering and in the process of meeting these groups of people, they will ask so many questions and people will keep on coming. At the end, you may find that you are having over 100 people. Therefore, if you are to seek permission from the Police, how will that be catered for?

Finally, if I am to move in Amuru District, wherever I move, people will come asking about land and the PRDP and all those - that were corrupted. Therefore, I may not be having the intention of holding such a gathering but because of the presence of people some of whom may become annoyed and actually may – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you have smuggled a contribution. (Laughter)

MR AMOS OKOT: Madam Speaker, the Bill is good to guard the public assets or any other events that we have been experiencing. However, if you could address those kinds of questions, I think it can go a long way - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to Nebbi, hon. Wangolo, hon. Okello, hon. Namagembe and then I cross this side. 

7.20
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this comprehensive report. 

Whereas I condemn gatherings and meetings that disrupt public peace and order, I do not support this Bill because in my opinion, the professionalism, integrity and capacity of our police is wanting. These are the people who are going to implement this law but right there, on the ground in our constituencies, the police handle cases in subjective and not objective ways. When somebody goes to report a case, for example, of defilement, the one who gives transport for police, the Police will be able to go and make the arrest but for another person who goes to report the same case but cannot facilitate the police with fuel, they will not be able to go and make the arrest.

So, for people who commit such offences, are they going to be subjected to different treatment because the Police lacked the capacity? As we bring this law, have we now built the capacity in the Police?

In my own opinion, our Police can be compromised. Madam Speaker, once beaten, twice careful. During the campaigns, on the last day of campaigns, the Police came for me on trumped up charges. They claimed that I was campaigning at the wrong venue and yet actually, I was at my home and I was on a talk show and everybody in Nebbi District heard me. So, our police can be compromised.

If we had a Police force that had integrity, professionalism and the right capacity, I would support this Bill. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.22
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At first, when we got this Bill, we read it clearly and when we took it to our people, they refused it and said that they did not want this law. 

But I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee that did the great work and as we talk now, we are seeing the Leader of the Opposition seated there listening to Members contributing and even hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi ended up debating and yet you said that we cannot debate. So, this means that there is some good work done and this law is going to be good. 

In fact, as I talk now, I support this Bill because of the committee work. I very well know that this report or Bill, once passed into law, will be subjected to amendments where you think you are not satisfied. (Interjections) Yes, this is very common.
I know very well that Members are not happy with what I am saying but it is right because – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When making laws, we do not have to make a law in anticipation of making amendments for allowing flaws. I think that is a weakness. Is the honourable member in order to encourage this House to make a law with a lot of flaws with the hope that we are going to amend it because by the time we amend it, it will have affected a lot of people. How many laws have we amended? Have we amended the term limits? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: That is his way of doing things. (Laughter)

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like also to inform the honourable colleague that we still have an opportunity to amend where we think the committee did not do a good job, at Committee Stage. Severally, we have seen many Ugandans losing their properties. Recently, we lost a policeman in such kind of indiscipline cases in this country. Therefore, I support this Bill to come and regulate the discipline of Ugandans – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, hon. Wangolo, for giving way. Madam Speaker, like Members have observed, this is one of the few reports that have got only one recommendation. I want to refer you to page 1, where they recommend that this Bill be adopted with those amendments therein. That shows that the committee did thorough work. As if that is not enough, this is one of the few reports whereby 85 percent of the Members signed - 16 out of 19. It shows that my senior counsel signed, the Attorney-General signed, hon. Katuntu signed and hon. Wilfred Niwagaba signed among others and that shows that they did a thorough job on this law. I have no regrets when the Member says that. 

MR WANGOLO: Finally, Madam Speaker, I call upon all honourable colleagues who think they are not contented with the committee amendments that when we go to committee stage, you can do what you think is good for this country. Thank you.   

7.27
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am one of the people who had reservations for this Bill when it was first presented to us but having got the opportunity that you gave us yesterday, to go through the report, I came back convinced that the committee is really composed of very knowledgeable Members, like all the Members of this House are and they have really presented a balanced report, as my colleagues have stated that they assented to this report including my own counsel, hon. Sseggona. That the senior lawyers we have in this House – hon. Fox Odoi - assented to this report clearly indicates that issues that my colleagues on the other side were harbouring have been carefully handled and I clearly support the report and pray that we, on the government side, own the amendments, adopt them in good faith and make a law that at one time may not catch up with us because you have to remember that at one time, you may be in Government and at another, you may be on the other side but the law lives for posterity. 

Therefore, I would like to support the report and I pray that we own it and make a good law that will protect our people, protect us and our property for posterity. Thank you very much. (Ms Namugwanya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Namagembe.

7.29
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I request first of all to put the record of my names right. I am not Namagembe; I am Namugwanya Benny Bugembe. 

I would like thank the committee for the work well done. I was among those people who had a lot of fears when I first looked at this Bill but today, all my fears have been catered for by the committee. The object of this Bill caters for public order and all of us want to enjoy the public space equally and if the Bill is to promote equal enjoyment of public space, I support it 100 percent. 

Many of our colleagues said that the Bill is inconsistent with the Constitution but I want to call your attention to Article 43(1) which gives limitations of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. I think this Bill is in the spirit of operationalising that Article. If you can allow me to read it verbatim; “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” This Bill comes to operationalise this by making sure that when enjoying your rights, you do not infringe on other people’s rights and then we shall have public order.

I would like to add that when you look at this report, all the inconsistencies that were in the Bill were addressed by the committee and – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope I was reading from the same Constitution like my colleague. The Constitution is read as a whole. You do not just pick one and end at that. When you proceed to read the same Constitution, sub-article (2) says “Public interest under this Article shall not permit – a) political persecution; b) detention without trial or c) any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed by this Chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society, or what is provided in this Constitution.” 

Therefore, is the honourable member in order to selectively read the Constitution and try to mislead this House without contextualising Article 43 as it is within this Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable member, what you have read supports her. (Laughter)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling, as usual, because even if we continue reading this, again it caters for the limitations. I want to note with a lot of concern that when you look at the signatories of this report, the best lawyers we have in this country signed that report. (Member timed out.)

7.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for this report, particularly their effort to sanitise the Bill. The reason I will labour on the spirit of the Bill is that when Bills pass through the House, we have no opportunity to comment. It is only when the report comes here that we take occasion to comment on their spirit. In that regard, I want to say that the way this Bill was brought to this House was in bad faith. 

I think there was an attempt by some overzealous people in Government to cause this House to amend the provisions of Article 29 of our Constitution. I also think that there was an attempt by overzealous politicians to cause this House to undermine the rulings of the Supreme Court of Uganda. It is on the basis of this that I now say that the committee has done a good job to try to sanitise and salvage the situation.

I would like to remind Government that owns this Bill that in 2005, we took a decision to revert to multiparty dispensation. But since that time, the way you have deliberately tried to oppress the Opposition – we have repeatedly told you that you are trying to turn Uganda into a police state. You have refused to accept the fact that we are now running the country under a multiparty dispensation. And this is a demonstration of what we have been telling you through the times that you have an agenda to freeze multiparty politics in this country.

Madam Speaker, Government is worried, in the drafting of this Bill, that parties will say things against it. But that is why we exist. Otherwise, we all would be in one party. We are supposed to tell you that you are doing well here and there. So, we need space provided by the Constitution to say exactly that. Therefore, for someone to try to stifle the core of the existence of political parties is very unacceptable.

As I wind up, let me caution Government that if you continue to narrow the space for the people to freely assemble and express their views or to gauge them - hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga, what you see could be an attempt by people running around with guns the way you guys did way back. (Applause) (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for her to complete her submission.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just advising hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga that when human beings begin to feel there is no option left for them to express their views, they will have to think the way the Movement people decided to think in the early 1980s, which I think will be dangerous for this country. That is why I urge you to allow people to assemble and talk. They do not have to ask for permission from the Police to do that. We only need the Police to protect us as we match and say things about Government. The Police should support us in doing that. Thank you.

7.37
MR ANDREW ALLEN (INDEPENDENT, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for presenting this good report. However, I have one serious worry about this whole thing. When you look at this whole situation before us, you realise that Uganda as a country in its current political setting, is not really ready for this kind of situation. We may not realise this now but in the end, the whole thing is going to suppress everyone and we will have a lot of regrets later.
 
Therefore, it is very important that we think wisely while dealing with this kind of thing. I am saying this because as I speak, there are people who naturally have followers. Wherever they go, people will follow them without necessarily being invited. Madam Speaker, you are always a victim of such circumstances. (Laughter) Yes, that is very true because wherever she goes, people follow her without being invited. So, will Government arrest you? Will they ask you to seek permission from the Police to talk to these people even when they come without any invitation?

I think it is very important that we first sort out the way we need to relate together as political parties before we think of putting this kind of situation to ourselves. Otherwise, we will be digging a grave for ourselves. At the end, we will blame ourselves not for now but also for the future. That is why I urge you all to put that in mind. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Allen, for giving way. The information I want to give is that in Uganda, we now have a very interesting television station called Bukedde I. This station does not run any political stories. Its news is usually called Agataliko Nfufu. When you watch its stories, there are gatherings everywhere every day. So, I do not know what will happen when we pass this Bill into law.

Secondly, recently, as a committee of Parliament, we went to Northern Uganda for field work. I do not know whether we are making a law for ourselves. While in Karamoja sub-region, we held meetings with witnesses to give us information on areas that had audit queries. So, I do not know whether even Parliament will be required to seek permission in order to do its work. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR ALLEN: Thank you very much. As I wind up, I want to say that there are situations that we need to consider as well. Imagine I am at my home; every time I go back to my constituency, many people come to my home to consult me on various issues. Do I need permission from the police to talk to my voters in my own home? Isn’t that interfering with my privacy?

Anyway, my worry is that the Police as an institution that is seeking all these powers is itself very indisciplined. Everywhere we go and also on television, you must have seen the way they handle both civilians and non-civilians. What will happen if this law is put in place? That is going – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have tried to write out the names of those Members who want to contribute and I will read them out later. I ask you to be patient because we will debate this matter tomorrow as well.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the procedural element I want to raise, first, notwithstanding that I am a member of the committee, I signed this report and I have no regrets and I thank all those who have praised me as a good lawyer. How I wish they could respect me whenever I speak.
 
But anyway, considering the importance of the subject we are dealing with; also considering the fact that this three-minute rule is founded within the wisdom of the Speaker and I agree to that for a good reason; isn’t it procedurally right that Members be given enough time so that we can go through this Bill the way we did for the Oil Bills? This will help us generate sufficient consensus to avoid catastrophe in the future.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know why you are interfering with my work. I had just said that I noted the names of Members who want to speak to this Bill and that today, we will end with hon. Ochola and hon. Mathius Nsubuga before we continue tomorrow. So, I do not know why you are pre-empting my work. You are disturbing hon. Ochola for nothing.

7.44
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the committee for the work well done.

When you directed us to go and read the report yesterday, I spared time and read the report and this morning I came quite comfortable. Otherwise, I was not comfortable with the Bill in the state it was.

It makes me feel that the Government was prepared to sit on our rights, which was not really good. I only want to ask the chairman of the committee and the House to look into - for example, I leave for my constituency. I need to meet with the constituents, maybe, I have two or three rallies. What time will I have to inform the Police of those meetings and then, what time will I get the permission or the acceptance from the Police? That will be making our work a bit difficult. We should look into that and see how we can handle it.

I am happy with most of the amendments the committee has made. For example, when you tell us that you must inform the Inspector General of Police or that other officer who has been given the permission, for us in the Opposition, we have gone through a lot. You will get an officer who is in charge of the police station or a DPC or a police post somewhere where you are going to have a rally and he will come and tell you, “I have no power to permit you to have a rally in this place. I am following orders from above.” That makes our work very difficult and yet, you know that as politicians, we depend solely on interacting, talking to our electorates, sensitising them. Even when you want to inform them about Government programmes, you must have meetings with them.

I thought that that was giving a lot of power to the IGP and it was going to make our work very difficult. I am happy that when I was going through the report, I noticed that the committee had handled that one. Our wish is that the owners of the Bill should accept this amendment the committee has brought in good faith. To me, I would accept the law to be passed the way it is because I know that one day, one time, it will catch up with the people who have brought it because there is no situation, which is permanent.

I would have loved it to come that way because some of us have eaten teargas, we have been stopped from having rallies even in our own constituencies. However, I know very well that it would have caught up with the framers, the ones who brought it but you must thank God that the committee had its part to save you, the people who were bringing this law. It was going to catch up with you.

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Even without this law in place, I want to tell you that when we wanted to hold a rally in Gulu, the DPC Gulu said, “If you want that one, get the permission from above.” Even without the law in place, the DPC cannot give clearance. I do not say permission because it is not right for us to get permission.

If they cannot clear us to have a rally in Kaunda Grounds, then how about if a law is in place? Are we really going to have rallies at all? That is the information I want to give, that even without a law, we have been stopped from having a rallies. It is okay. Oppressors are not free and also we the oppressed are not free. Thank you.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I just want to say that the Police should not abuse the powers in the Constitution and those from this Act - (Member timed out.)

7.50
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The spirit under which this Bill was brought to Parliament was not good.

I want to use this opportunity to give a little bit of a historical perspective of our country. In the 1960’s, there were only two political parties in this country. That was UPC and DP. Kabaka Yekka was not a political party - (Interjections) - I am talking about those parties in Parliament.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, Kabaka Yekka was a political party and even participated fully in the general elections of 1962, formed a coalition with UPC. So, I do not know what my friend is talking about.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is confusing the House. In this House, there were only two political parties, KY was not even a registered political party; it did not even have a constitution. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It is always necessary for us to talk with knowledge of history of our country. In terms of registration, until recently, parties were not registered. At that time, there was no formal registration of political parties in writing. So, knowing very well that KY fully participated in the general elections of 1962 and even contributed towards the coalition that brought Independence, is the honourable member in order to deny KY the status of being a political party? It was in Parliament well represented. What is he talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand that it was not actually in Parliament as a political party. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, let hon. Nsubuga speak.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I challenge hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to bring the Constitution of KY here tomorrow, then we shall know that it was a political party. However, as I said, there were only two political parties here.
 
On 4 February 1966, hon. Daudi Ochieng moved a motion and that motion was supported by Members, even some cabinet ministers. What followed is that the five cabinet ministers were arrested under the Detention Act, which had been passed by this House.

When that Act was being passed, Members were convinced that this was a good law; they were trying to victimise and suppress the DP. They made the Act to make sure that there is no opposition in the country. What happened is that the late Baraki Kirya, the late Grace Ibingira, the late John Magezi, Emmanuel Lumu, were detained. So, Members of Parliament, especially the ministers who are here, when you are debating to pass this Bill, you should know that one day, you are going to be caught by this very Bill. 

Secondly, in 1980, again you know, my friends hon. Amama, hon. Kiyonga and I know where we were. In 1984, the Democratic Party wanted to hold a rally at the Constitutional Square. We had guests, Christian Democrats International (CDI) were in Uganda and they wanted to go round the country. The UPC Government at that time refused the Democratic Party to hold rallies across the country. My friend is here; he can bear me witness. 

Now, today, when this House legislates on a law of this nature - Let me give you an example. In the recent elections, how many NRM members were denied the NRM ticket and they stood as Independents? (Interjections) How many? Tomorrow, you are going to contest. You never know what will happen. You will need to be on - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for hon. Nsubuga. He is a party leader. (Laughter)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a party leader. Allow me, at least, with due respect to the honourable members of this House. But those with experience should be able to tell the facts. (Interjections) The facts we are talking about. Last week, I was an observer in the Kenyan elections. I followed the Kenyan elections; I led the Uganda political parties - (Interjections) - yes I did. But what I saw in Kenya - I even have their Constitution. It is here. When you look at their rights; freedom of association; freedom of assembly enshrined in this – 

During the elections, I never saw the Army - even the Police who were at the polling stations were not holding guns. I went as far as outside Nairobi, up to Nyeri, up to Kituyi, up to Eldoret. The police officers - you see this law we are passing would have been good if the IGP was independent. In Kenya, the IGP is independent. Here the IGP is not independent. (Interjections) Here is a man who receives - (Interjections) ­- I mean he is my friend but he receives orders from above. 

So, as we debate, for example, hon. Migereko, I was with you in Ghana. We were together in Ghana - we went under the IPOD. What we saw in Ghana, we were told, “You people from Uganda…” - he is there and he will bear me witness - “You always come here to learn but we do not learn anything from your country.” (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank hon. Mathias Nsubuga for giving way. You will agree with me that many countries, including Ghana, actually admire our experience here. (Interjections) And when I appeared on TV and radio, the comments our delegation received in regard to the experience they had learnt from what I had said was very interesting.

But I also want to make one point. You and I as members of IPOD are fully aware that all the political parties in this country have met the legal committee to make their input and express their support for this Bill. And it is as a result of that that this committee has come up with such a wonderful report that is receiving a lot of support on the Floor of this House. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to give hon. Nsubuga information that if you give hon. Migereko time to speak, he can make white become black. We have known his experience. Hon. Migereko is good at turning black white. (Laughter)

I recall in Jinja, during PAFO time, hon. Migereko organising hooligans and looters and denying that he was in Jinja until we brought proof to show that hon. Migereko was there. (Laughter) Madam Speaker- (Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition in this House. But is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to create a wrong impression of me –(Interjections)- yet my track-record speaks for itself in regard to uprightness; and also to fail to tell this House that he is actually the one who started the fight in Jinja and people had a right to protect themselves? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not in Jinja, so I cannot rule on that matter. (Laughter) The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 March 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
