Tuesday, 3 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, and this being the first time I am here this year, I would like to wish you a very happy new year –(Applause)- and hope that this year will be better than the last one. Please work hard and push the agenda of the country forward as we have always been doing. We will join hands in doing exactly that.

Congratulations would be appropriate if what I saw recently is anything to go by. Those who deserve these congratulations know themselves; congratulations. (Applause)

Honourable members, the Inspector General of Government sent a letter to which was attached some forms for declaration of wealth or the lack of it, and it has a timeframe. That timeframe is important and it cannot be overemphasised because it is a constitutional matter and we all know what has happened as a result. So, please let us oblige and have those forms filled and returned within the timeframe provided. That means before the end of this month. Before the 31st March this year, that matter should have been settled by all the Members so that we do not have situations where we have to start defending something that cannot be defended. Thank you.

2.12
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja East Municipality, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I raised a matter of national importance in this House about the demolition without a Court order of a property in Jinja but in every other sitting, the Minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to make a statement and the Speaker ruled that he should make a statement today. I do not see the minister and we are going to serious business of this House. I am wondering whether that will not disadvantage the people of Jinja East Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know that but you have just noticed that the minister who should be making that statement is not here. I do not know how I can make him available, but I take note. As early as possible, we will make the minister to make that statement, which is to the benefit of those people affected.

LAYING OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, since we are seeing each other for the first time in the new year, happy New Year to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Since this is the first time, I am standing on the Floor of Parliament since my status was raised from Minister of State to full Minister in charge of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this country, I want to thank all of you for the support you have been giving me every time I have come to Floor. This may have been the reason the appointing authority did what they did. I wish to request that you continue giving me this support so that, as the Rt Hon. Speaker said, the development agenda of this country is pushed forward.

Now, I would like to lay on Table the supplementary expenditure schedule for financial year 2014/2015 schedule No.1. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle this matter and guide the House on how to proceed.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.14
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Parliamentary Commission Annual Report for the financial year 2012/2013. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

2.15
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following Sub-counties: 

    i. Kibuku Sub-county, Kibuku District
    ii. Kadama Sub-county, Kibuku District
    iii. Kirika Sub-county, Kibuku District
    iv. Busakira Sub-county, Mayuge District
    v. Bukatuube Sub-county, Mayuge District
    vi. Mpungwe Sub-county, Mayuge District
    vii. Buyanga Sub-county, Iganga District
    viii. Nawanyingi Sub-county, Iganga District
    ix. Nambale Sub-county, Iganga District
    x. Namalembe Sub-county, Iganga District
    xi. Namungalwe Sub-county, Iganga District
    xii. Igombe Sub-county, Iganga District
    xiii. Nawandala Sub-county, Iganga District
    xiv. Kotido Sub-county, Kotido District
    xv. Chelekura Sub-county, Pallisa District
    xvi. Nawanjofu Sub-county, Butaleja District
    xvii. Itirikwa Sub-county, Adjumani District
    xviii. Buyende Sub-county, Buyende District
    xix. Katira Sub-county, Budaka District
    xx. Kitayunjwa Sub-county, Kamuli District
    xxi. Kibinge Sub-county, Kalungu District
    xxii. Kitanda Sub-county, Kalungu District
    xxiii. Kaliro Sub-county, Lyantonde District
    xxiv. Purongo Sub-county, Nwoya district…
    xxv. Agoro Sub-county, Lamwo District
    xxvi. Mpeefu Sub-county, Kibaale District
    xxvii. Buwunga Sub-county, Masaka District
    xxviii. Nsambya Sub-county, Kyankwanzi District
    xxix. Koro Sub-county, Gulu District
    xxx. Mpatta Sub-county, Mukono District
    xxxi. Magada Sub-county, Namutumba District
    xxxii. Nyakinoni Sub-county, Kanungu District.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. All those reports and the opinion of the Auditor-General stand committed to the Committee on Local Governments Accounts for handling within the framework of the law and guiding this House on how to proceed with the matters raised therein.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the status of this? 

2.20
MR FOX ODOI OYELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson has instructed me to report to the House as follows:

At the last sitting of the House to consider this matter, there was a minority report and we sought leave of the House to reconcile the positions between the majority and the minority reports. We have since had a series of meetings and we are closing the gap. We probably still require a maximum of two weeks to come up with a common position.

When that is done, we shall come back to the House with a single position so that it will not be an acrimonious debate. We should be able to move fast on the Bill. We beg for your indulgence to grant us a maximum of two weeks to report to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard from the chairperson; we cannot proceed when the committee is not ready. This Bill is, therefore, deferred for two weeks. In the meantime, it goes on business to follow until it is activated after two weeks.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KABEHO LC I, KINOONI BOOMA LC I, KYATUBA B LC I AND BIGAAGA LC I IN BULONGO PARISH, NTUUSI SUB-COUNTY, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the status of this, Chairperson of physical infrastructure? Is there any member of this committee who can give us some information?

2.23
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The report was ready for debate but there was also a minority report. However, I do not know where the chairperson is and I do not have any express instructions on what is happening now. He is supposed to be here. I am one of the committee members. I do not know what is happening on the ground.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I give you the express permission now, to proceed?

MR SSEBULIBA: Yes, you can proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed if you have the report.

MR SSEBULIBA: I do not have it now. (Laughter) I think we can move to another item as we sort ourselves out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you can find it, we will be glad to receive that report and deal with it.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION 
BY THE RESIDENTS OF KASOKOSO, KIGANDA AND BANDA B1 
OVER LAND EVICTIONS AND DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the status of this?

2.25
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Mr Speaker, I am sorry I went out briefly to consult my chairman. I was chairing a committee meeting and I had no time to look at the Order Paper but I have consulted with the chairman and he is coming with the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The two reports? 

MR ALEPER: Yes, Mr Speaker.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT BY THE 
AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVES 
ON MARKET VENDORS AND SMALL BUSINESSES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chair of the Public Accounts Committee is not here? I now recognise the presence of the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Can we proceed with Item no.5?

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KABEHO LC I, KINOONI BOOMA LC I, KYATUBA B LC I AND BIGAAGA LC I IN BULONGO PARISH, NTUUSI SUB-COUNTY, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE DISTRICT

2.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report was read to the House on the 5th February -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, the matter was called earlier and so, you may need to make a statement to that effect.
 
MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, it is very well known to the House that we have a huge backlog. Until a few minute ago, I was chairing the committee handling the Mbale petition because it is almost long overdue. Therefore, we delayed in the committee until I was alerted that the House had started and I came rushing in.  

I beg to be allowed now to report, my late coming notwithstanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you apologise to the House.

MR BIRAARO: I apologise for the delayed reporting in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, this report was presented to the House on the 5 February 2015 and the House had started debating on it. However, Members wanted to have more time to analyse the report and be able to debate it.
 
In addition, when we had started to debate, the lead petitioner, hon. Ssekikubo, brought up an issue, which is well recorded on the Hansard that the committee and the chair were not working in the interest of the people because, in his words, “They were being catered for by the big men.” 

It was a disappointment to me and I wanted hon. Ssekikubo, as we continue with the debate, to clarify what he meant because it is against a bad history. When we went to Ssembabule, he also equally alleged that the one petitioned against gave the committee $ 300,000 and it went viral on FM radios. Therefore, as we debate the report even the committee is injured. 

Mr Speaker, the report is ready for debating but I request that hon. Ssekikubo should be able to explain what he meant by “Big people caring for the committee.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member in question is not in the House. Honourable members, you are aware that the debate on this matter had commenced. Therefore, debate continues. Contributions, Members? If there are no contributions, I will put the question for adoption. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-county, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION 
BY THE RESIDENTS OF KASOKOSO, KIGANDA AND BANDA B1 
OVER LAND EVICTIONS AND DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
2.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Mr Speaker, here with me, is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition by the residents of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda B1 over land evictions and destruction of property presented to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

I may not read the introduction because the report is big. I am going to be making some summaries. I am right away going to issue number two.

The Petition

The petitioners who are residents of Kasokoso in Kira Town Council and Kiganda and Banda B1 in Nakawa Division made the allegations that:

    i. They are lawful and bona fide occupants of the land in dispute.
    ii. Some of them had settled on the land since 1964.
    iii. Some of them had legally bought “bibanja” from bona fide occupants over the years.
    iv. They had erected residential and commercial premises on the same land, and
    v. The Uganda Police Force together with the National Housing and Construction Company Limited and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development tried to evict them from the land under dispute in total disregard of the law.

The petitioners, prayed that Parliament:

    i. Carries out investigations to ascertain how the land in issue changed ownership since 1964.
    ii. Investigates the use of excessive force by the Uganda Police Force in an attempt to evict the petitioners.
    iii. Renders the petition urgent attention to prevent loss of lives and to restore peace in the area, and
    iv. Give remedies it deems fit.

Mr Speaker, Members can read the methodology on their own.

Issues

While considering the petition, the committee endeavoured to examine the veracity of the allegations made by the petitioners in a bid to determine whether or not Parliament should grant their prayers. In this regard, the committee addressed the issues of whether;

    a) The petitioners were lawful and bona fide occupants of the land under dispute.
    b) The petitioners had any legitimate claim to the land in issue.
    c) There was an attempt to evict the petitioners from the land under dispute.
    d) There were any residential and commercial premises on the land under dispute.
    e) The alleged eviction was in accordance with the law.

Background

Size of the land under dispute

The land in issue measures 292.6138 acres and is comprised in LRV 665 Folio 25 (Plots 4-15, 17-28, 30, 32-42, 58-89, 91-160) and LRV 834 Folio 21 (Plots 1, 3, 6, 8-12, 17-35, 37, 39, 40-53, 55-60, 68, 69, 75, 104, 106-109) in Kireka, Wakiso District. 

While part of the land is situated in Banda B1, Nakawa Division, Kampala, it is worth noting that the land in Banda B1 is located five kilometres from Kampala City Centre, hence falling with the jurisdiction of KCCA; while the land in Kireka is under the jurisdiction of Wakiso District.

According to National Housing and Construction Company Limited, out of the 292.6138 acres of the land under dispute, only about 21 acres had not yet been encroached on by the time they appeared before the committee on 12 March 2014. Whereas the National Housing and Construction Company Limited informed the committee that the number of people who were settled on the land under dispute was about 10,000 people, the petitioners claimed that the number is between 100,000 and 150,000 people.

Ownership of the land under dispute

Mr Speaker, according to the certificate of title presented to the committee -(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Under Item No. 5, there were some utterances that hon. Ssekikubo alleged that the committee was given $300,000. He was not in the House at that time. Isn’t it procedurally right for him to first clarify before we continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the chairperson proceed. 

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the certificate of title presented to the committee, the land in issue was registered on 3 July 1930 under Crown Grant No. 8350 and No. 9282 in the names of Mengo Planters Limited of Adelaide House London. The lease agreement revealed that part of the land under dispute measuring 250 acres was leased to National Housing and Construction Company Limited by M/s Kireka Estates Limited for the period of 99 years with effect from 1 January 1966. Also, another piece of land measuring 42.6 acres was leased to National Housing and Construction Company Limited by M/s Kireka Estates Limited for a period of 49 years with effect from September 1968.

After the lease agreement between NHCCL and Kireka Estates (KEL), there were concerns that the terms of the agreement were being breached. Hence, KEL sued NHCCL for breach of the lease agreement. The elements of the breach were failure to pay ground rent, change in user for residential estates and failure to protect the land in issue from squatters. The consent judgment was made by the High Court on 5 December 2011 (Annex i).

The committee was further informed that in October 2012, after the consent judgment in the High Court, NHCCL acquired the freehold reversionary interest in the land under dispute previously held by KEL (Annex i). According to the consent judgment executed between NHCCL and KEL in respect of High Court Civil Suit No. 643 of 2003 and from the payment receipts availed to the committee, NHCCL paid KEL Shs 13 billion for the acquisition of reversionary interest in the said land.

From the review of the certificate of title submitted to the committee by NHCCL, it was established that NHCCL is the registered proprietor of the land under dispute having acquired leases from KEL vide Instrument no.171793 and Instrument no. 191631 (Annex ii)

The committee looked at a letter written on 24 April 1970 by the then Minister of Works and Communication and Housing in which he conveyed the President’s decision to the National Housing Corporation, now NHCCL stating as follows: “There is nothing to discuss. The NHC must use its legal right, enter the land and start development and see that any compensation is paid by NHC.”(Annex iii) The committee notes that this is what gave rise to the duly acknowledged compensation of 17 July 1974. (Annex iv)

Mr Speaker, according to the letter dated 14 December 2005, Mr Ali Mwandha, the chairperson of Kasokoso LC I notified NHCCL of encroachment on their land and requested for facilitation to maintain security in the area. (Annex v) During his appearance before the committee, Mr Mwandha confirmed having written the above letter. The request was granted by NHCCL through a letter dated 3 January 2006 in which they undertook to pay the guards hired by Mr Mwandha, the LC I Chairman, on a monthly basis at a daily rate of Shs 10,000 until NHCCL took over the security of the land.

The committee further noted that Mr Mwandha in a letter to NHCCL dated 5 June 2006, Ref KK006/05, on behalf of the people of Kasokoso, after consultation with the area residents, requested for a grace period of six months, to permit the various encroachers to vacate the land belonging to NHCCL, which is annex vii.

The committee noted that all the above requests served to prove that both the encroachers and the area local council leadership acknowledged the NHCCL as the owner and registered proprietor of the land in issue.

The Law

Section 29(1) of the Land Act, Cap 227 of the Laws of Uganda, 2000 edition defines “a lawful occupant” to mean:

    a) A person occupying land by virtue of the repealed-
    i) Busulu and Envujo Law of 1928
    ii) Toro Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937
    iii) Ankole Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937.

    b) A person who entered land with the consent of the registered owner and includes a purchaser or;

    c) A person who had occupied land as customary tenant but whose tenancy was not disclosed or compensated for by the registered owner at the time of acquiring the leasehold certificate of title.

Mr Speaker, that other paragraph, I think Members can read to avoid - and we go to no. 7, which are specific prayers.

How the land has changed hands since 1964

According to a certificate of title presented to the committee, the land in issue was registered on 3 July 1930 under Crown Grant No.8350 and 9282 in the names of Mengo Planters Limited of Adelaide House London. The lease agreement revealed that part of the land under dispute measuring 250 acres was leased to NHCCL by KEL for a period of 99 years with effect from 1 July 1956. 

Also, another piece of land measuring 42.6 acres was leased to NHCCL by KEL for a period of 49 years, with effect from September 1958. After the lease agreement between NHCCL and KEL, there were concerns that the terms of agreement were being breached and hence, KEL sued NHCCL for breach of the lease agreement. A consent judgment was made by the High Court on 6 December 2011 (Annex i) after which NHCCL re-acquired the freehold reversionary interest in the land under dispute previously held by KEL. 

From the certificate of title submitted to the committee, NHCCL is a registered proprietor of the land under dispute. 

Observations

    1. Throughout the period of investigation, the committee requested the petitioners to furnish proof of ownership of title in respect of the land in issue to no avail. Several reminders to this effect were sent but were never responded to. In the same breath, the petitioners failed to furnish any sale or purchase agreement for the land in issue, which left their claim to ownership unsubstantiated and as such, highly suspicious.

    2. The petitioners alleged that they customarily owned the land in issue and that the ownership claimed by NHCCL was baseless. However, a search conducted by the committee showed that the land in issue was registered in the name of NHCCL, vide Instrument numbers INST171793 and INST191631 respectively (Annex ii). This notwithstanding, none of the petitioners could prove customary ownership.

    3. The committee noted that NHCCL management exhibited negligence in regards to securing and protecting the land under dispute from heavy encroachment. In this regard, the committee observed that at the time of securing leasehold in 1967, this land was not as heavily encroached on and neither was it heavily encroached on in October 2012 when NHCCL acquired reversionary interest in the same land. 

The failure by NHCCL to assert its presence on the said land created a vacuum, which was exploited by the encroachers, some of whom were people evicted from Naguru, Nakawa Estate. Noteworthy, is the fact that while both the lease agreement and the consent judgement acknowledged the presence of tenants on the said land, there was no effort to address the interests of these occupants in accordance with the law.

    1. The committee took great exception to the impunity with which some people have continued to encroach on the land under dispute. In some instances, the vice was being perpetrated by the local leaders. For example, Kasokoso LC I Chairman, Mr Ali Mwandha, who is one of the petitioners having written to NHCCL requesting for security to protect the land in issue, in a sudden twist, authored another letter dated 5 June 2006, on behalf of the encroachers, requesting for a grace period of six months to permit the various encroachers to vacate the land under dispute. (Annex vii) 

    2. The committee notes that a section of petitioners, particularly those from Banda B1 or popularly known as Acholi Quarters had settled on the land under dispute way back in the 1970s but were compensated by NHCCL in 1974 prior to the construction of the houses, which are presently occupied by the Special Investigation Unit, formerly Rapid Response Unit (RRU). These were the first houses on the land, which had been vacated by the already compensated persons as per acknowledgement of compensation dated 17 July 1974 and payment vouchers and attendant signatures. (Annex iv)

    3. The committee was informed that during the 1980 general elections, there was a polling station in Banda B1 (Acholi Quarters), where part of the land under dispute is located. This polling station has since been maintained in the area in the subsequent national elections. The existence of a polling station in Banda B1 during the 1980 national elections is a clear testimony that some of the petitioners had lived on the land under issue for a reasonable period of time before the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution but only as occupants of the houses constructed by NHCCL.

    4. The committee, being guided by section 29(1) and (2) of the Land Act, has established that contrary to the petitioners’ claims, there are neither lawful nor bona fide occupants on the land under dispute. This is so because all residents save for the ones in the houses constructed by NHCCL, now occupied by Special Investigation Unit or the construction started in 2004.


Encroachment on the Land in issue

    1. The committee was informed that KEL sued NHCCL for breach of the terms of the lease agreement. The elements of the breach were: failure to pay ground rent, change in user for residential estate and not protecting the said land leading to a proliferation of squatters on the same land. However, the civil suit was settled through consent judgement by the High Court entered into on 5 December 2011. (Annex i) There afterwards, NHCCL acquired the reversionary interest in the land under dispute. NHCCL paid KEL Shs 13 billion for the freehold reversionary of KEL in the land under dispute measuring 250 acres together with the rights of way and drainage as mentioned in Instrument no. 171793. (Annex ii)

    2. The satellite images taken on and around the land under dispute in February 2004, provided to the committee by National Housing (Annex viii) reveals that there were no human settlements on the land under dispute save for the area now occupied by SIU, formerly RRU. These houses were constructed by the NHCCL.

    3. The committee noted that none of the commercial or residential structures erected on the land under dispute had any approved plans from any local authority as required by the law. 

    4. The committee noted that there was a substantial influx of people into the land under dispute starting around 2005. The situation was exacerbated around the year 2011, following the massive evictions of tenants from Naguru and Nakawa estates.

    5. Whereas it was evident that some settlements on the land under dispute had existed for a long time, the committee could not differentiate the long term occupants and those who were recent because of the mixed pattern of settlements and the structures.

In addition, the committee could not ascertain the exact number of occupants. Whereas NHCCL estimated the figure to be about 10,000 people, the petitioners on the other hand claimed the number to be between 100,000-150,000 people. 

Litigation effort to stop encroachment on the land in issue

    1. On 11 July 2000, the General Manager of NHCCL (then National Housing Corporation) wrote to the Inspector General of Police (IGP) seeking assistance to stop persons who were illegally extracting stone and hard core from the corporation land in Kireka. (Annex ix)

    2. On 28 July 2000, the IGP wrote to KEL lawyers (M/s Kwesigabo, Bamweine and Walubiri advocates responding to a notice that had been served on those persons engaged in stone quarrying and excavation and sale of murram to give vacant possession of land. The then IGP acknowledged, in his letter, that these persons were indeed trespassers and condemned their actions. (Annex x)

    3. On 8 April 2003, the acting General Manager, NHCCL wrote to the Executive Director National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) seeking his intervention in the “On-going environmental degradation on our land in Kireka, which was caused by stone quarrying and murram excavation.” 

    4. He copied the same letter to the IGP, KCC Town Clerk, District Council Chairperson, the Acting Commissioner, Wetland Division and the Ministry of Water And Environment. (Annex xi)

    5. On 31 October 2003, the General Manager, NHCCL wrote again to the Executive Director NEMA seeking the same intervention as earlier requested above and copied it to KCCA Town Clerk, District Council Chairperson and Acting Commissioner, Wetland Inspections Division, and Ministry of Water and Environment. (Annex xii)

    6. On 2 September 2003, the General,  NHCCL wrote to M/s Ssaawa Mutaawe and Company Advocates instructing them to take action to stop further excavation on the land. (Annex xiii)

    7. On 24 December 2003, M/s Ssaawa Mutaawe and Company Advocates on behalf of NHCCL wrote to Wakiso District Chairman, Engineer Ian Kyeyune requesting for his intervention in stopping the excavation on the land. (Annex xiv)

    8. On 6 August 2004, a meeting between NHCCL and the LC I chairperson of Kasokoso, Mr Ali Mwandha, took place. In this meeting, Mr Mwandha promised to provide security while National Housing was setting up a buffer road in its land and further agreed to inform residents in this area about the proposed development of NHCCL. He promised to request the residents to stop any activity therein including stone quarrying, brick laying and cultivation of crops. (Annex v)

Evictions 

In 2005, NHCCL successfully reopened its boundaries without any resistance from the people working in the stone quarries, murram excavators, and peasant farmers.

The LC leaders participated in the exercise, which ended in May 2006. A copy of the acknowledgement of receipt for payment for opening NHCCL boundaries by the then LC I Chairperson, Mr Mwandha, and his executive is attached. (Annex xvi)

On 14 December 2005, the LC I chairperson, Mr Mwanda, again wrote to the General Manager NHCCL reporting that, “On Sunday 11 December 2005, at around 8.00 a.m., a group of people from Acholi Quarters Kireka, others from Mutungo came and started demarcating, sharing plots on National Housing Corporation Limited land claiming that they had been given the land by the Kabaka of Buganda.” 
He added that these people maliciously damaged people’s crops in the area prompting him to call the Kabaka’s guards to save the situation. (Annex xviii)

This further confirmed that the only activities on the land before the above quoted date were peasantry, murram extraction, stone quarrying, and brick making.

However, the committee notes that the Buganda Land Board (BLB), in a letter dated 10 May 2010, formally wrote to NHCCL confirming that the land in issue did not belong to the Kabaka of Buganda as it had been claimed by the encroachers. (Annex xviii)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, would you like to move the House now so that we take recommendations? Then we take a decision to debate the matter.

MR BIRAARO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The Members can read from 11 to 17, which is the evidence. No. 7.4 is also other efforts to resolve the disputes that were taken. I think I need to read 7.5 for Members to note because it is also the basis of the recommendations. 

7.5 Kireka Slum re-development project

According to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Government of Uganda in partnership with NHCCL are set to redevelop the area under dispute, which is comprised of 292.6138 acres. It is comprised of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda B1, which are currently slum area.
The project is intended to transform the slum into a modern settlement through the Public Private Partnership (PPP) approach.

According to NHCCL, the proposed project will be a mix used for development to cater for the current population - and this is important in our recommendations - to cater for the current population in the project location namely; low, middle and high income earners. It will also include commercial, social and recreational facilities.

The committee was informed that the first priority shall be given to the residents in the project area so that they benefit from the improved structures and facilities. The committee was further informed that none of the current occupants shall be evicted.

In addition, any house that will be found to be of the required standard in terms of planning and actual construction shall not be demolished.

NHCCL confirmed that all people who choose not to be part of the project shall have their property valued and appropriate compensation provided to them. In the same breath, residents whose houses need to be rebuilt shall have their current structures valued and these values shall form part of their equity to enable them acquire better housing.

NHCCL informed the committee that the project shall be implemented in phases. In the first phase, the company will construct houses on the current vacant piece of land comprising 20 acres and this shall not require moving anyone from their current houses. Once this is completed, residents who will choose to be part of the project, and in the first group, shall be allocated houses temporarily to reside in, while the area they initially occupied is being rebuilt.

Once the houses within their original places of residence are completed, they would be moved back to occupy them, and in that way, room would be created for residents in the second phase to move to their holding area, that is houses built earlier to accommodate the residents in phase one while those people’s houses were being built. 

Mr Speaker, I think I can skip the observation for Members to properly read for themselves. I beg to move on to read the recommendations, which are at page 20, section 7.7.
 
Recommendations

Mr Speaker, in view of the above findings, the committee recommends as follows:

    1. That National Housing and Construction Company Limited, together with local authorities, should implement its re-assessment action plan, which is referred to as RAP, for the land to be used for the Kireka Slum Development Project, as pledged above in section 7.5 (1-7) or as I read them out.

    2. That government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the local leaders, should ensure that the verification exercise is undertaken within two months after the adoption of this report, with a view of identifying the exact number of occupants on this land and the development thereon, and report back to the House.

    3. That Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and National Housing and Construction Company, should continue to sensitise the public, using the mass media, about this project to enable them appreciate the benefits and have them feel that they are part and parcel of it. The engagement of the public on the issues of utilisation of private and institutional land, physical planning and other land use aspects, will prevent the re-occurrence of similar happenings in the future.

    4. That Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and local authorities, should ensure no new developments are done by either party on the land in issue, until the verification exercise and due compensations are done.

    5. Government through, the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development, should ensure that NHCCL undertakes the opening of the boundaries of the land in issue and carry out an evaluation process upon completion of the verification exercise.

    6. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, should table before Parliament a comprehensive plan including financial resources that are required to fully operationalise the provisions of the Physical Planning Act 2010, within a period of one month, after the adoption of this report and report back to the House. In addition, the Ministry should provide both the short, medium and long term plans for Government to ensure that all Ugandans have decent housing facilities.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee being guided by Section 29(1) and (2) of the Land Act, established that contrary to the petitioners’ claims, there are neither lawful nor bonafide occupants on the land under dispute. This is so because all residents, save for the ones in the houses constructed by NHCCL, now occupied by the residents of Banda B1, infringed on the rights of the persons who legally acquired the land.

Drawing from the Kasokoso scenario, all government institutions are urged to take necessary steps to safeguard their land. The Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development should have a comprehensive plan for the development of the entire country and take the lead in sensitising the masses on the proper interpretation of the terms; lawful and bona fide occupants of land.

Mr Speaker and members, I, therefore, move that the House adopts this report. 

Mr Speaker, along with this report, allow me to, lay on the Table the following documents: The consent judgment by the High Court – Mr Speaker, it is a big list - I do not know whether there is enough time for me to read what I am laying on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can just lay the document received by the committee for purposes of this investigation.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, all the documents I have referred to as appendixes are in this file and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they part of the report?

MR BIRAARO: They are part of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then lay the report.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker and Honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the whole file of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the complete records of the committee and its activities and the documents that they examined and annexed to the report. Was there any other issue that was raised in the committee that may have caused disagreement in the committee meetings? Is this, for once, a report of the whole committee?

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, as far as I know, up to this minute, this was a majority report of the commitee and there was no contention in the committee, as far as the report is concerned. So the report belongs to the entire committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I propose this motion for your debate. The motion is for the presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, on the petition by the residents of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda B1, over land evictions and destruction of property. Can the debate start now?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural question. Whereas you have inquired if in this particular report there is any dissenting opinion, and the chairperson of the committee said there isn’t any, incidentally in the previous report also presented by the same chairperson, there was a minority report presented but debate was not allowed due to time constraints. So, members were only asked to internalise both reports.

What has happened – if I were not to be late, I would have drawn your attention to the fact that actually, there exists two committee reports - one for the majority and the other representing a minority opinion. It was not brought to light that indeed there is a minority report, which I, as the petitioner, was associated to.

Mr Speaker, in the circumstances that you have asked something as to whether there was any other opinion or report, I would have thought and beg that the first minority be given opportunity to be debated by the House. 

Two, in addition to that, as I came in hon. Hatwib Katoto raised the matter that my name had been adversely affected and mentioned by the chairperson of the committee while I was away, in regard to the very committee report that has been purportedly adopted by - (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the Member holding the Floor to confuse this House, and also use unparliamentary language? At the beginning of this sitting, you called for the report about the Sembabule issues and we were refreshed by the chairperson. You asked Members if they had issues to debate and Members unanimously said they did not have issues, whereupon we adopted the report.

But for the Member to say the report “purportedly” adopted by this House - I am aware that at the time the Member was absent from this House. So, is he in order to derail the debate of this House, in regard to the issues of Kasokoso – he keeps referring to two reports but we have already adopted the report about the Lwemiyaga petition and we are now dealing with the one of Kasokoso. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when item five was called for the first time, the chairman of the committee was not present so we deferred it. It was called the second time and the chair came and reported that the debate had been carried out previously. The matter was for the House to continue with the debate. I asked the House and proposed questions for continuation of debate. I also asked Members to make their contributions to this matter and there was no Member rising to debate the subject. That is when I put the question and the motion was carried. It was not “purportedly” carried; it was properly carried under the procedures within which we operate. 

Therefore, honourable member, there was no purporting of anything. And honourable member, when you consulted with the Speaker, I said there could be a neater way of trying to resolve the issues you are attempting to raise at this moment. I wish you could stick to that guidance so we can proceed because you might be offending the indulgence of the Chair, if we proceed this way.

Is there a minority report, honourable members? The rules governing minority reports are clear. Under rule 194, a minority report has got be brought to the attention of the committee and attached to the majority report of the committee. You cannot have a minority report in your mind, fail to bring it to the attention of the committee for attachment to the main report and thereafter you claim you have a minority report. If it is not attached to the main report of the committee, it is not a minority report, according to our Rules of Procedure. Please these rules are clear; read rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure (2012). We have used it so many times. 

Okay, we are now handling item six and I have already proposed a question. I asked the chair if there is a minority report on this matter, and he said there was no minority report. Further I asked: “Is there a minority report attached to the main report of the committee?” And the answer is in the negative. Honourable members, let us follow this simple book that guides us in handling business in an orderly manner, please.

My information is based on the report of the committee. If you would like to bring out the minority opinion in the debate, it is okay; we will proceed with it. As of now, I do not see any minority report attached to the report of the committee. Therefore, there is no way I can ask a Member to present a minority report, which does not exist.

MR 	NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While you were away, the Speaker then, who was in the chair allowed the main report - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are on item number six. I have proposed the question for debate. If you have a debate on item six proceed. If you are going back to item five, I told you what we should do to deal with that issue - you came here to consult with the Chair. Let us respect the Chair on this matter and respect the agreement we have reached with you on this subject. 

Let us move on with the debate on item six. Can we use three minutes each?
 
3.14
MR	IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to be given a few more minutes. I, together with the hon. Rosemary Seninde, petitioned Parliament, on behalf of the people of Kasokoso. As you are aware, I also chaired the Committee on COSASE. This matter has also been under investigation by our committee. 

I would like to state right from the beginning that I have never appeared before the Committee on Physical Infrastructure as the report purports. When I was summoned, I went to the committee’s meeting room but they were not there. It is erroneous - and the Chair is unfair to me to state in his report as having appeared before that committee.
 
On the issues around this matter - the committee with due respect - did not give them the due attention: the issue of ownership of land there – the gravity of the problem. 

Therefore, I wish to give Parliament information, as the chair of COSASE, that Kireka Estate is a company owned by Asians.  The first directors died; their children who succeeded them died and that company did not file returns with Registrar of Companies for all that time until this matter came up. When they filed it was an omnibus for the period between 1976 and 2000, also indicating that their offices were the same offices that their lawyers Bamwine and Walubiri Company advocates occupied at Clement Hill. 

This transaction – and I am uncomfortable with the Committee of Parliament - involved Shs 13 billion. The Auditor-General, in a special report, which was ordered by hon. Patrick Amuriat, when he was chairing the Committee on COSASE, has said that what National Housing and Construction Ltd bought was air because under the Constitution, non-Ugandans cannot own freehold or mailo land. 

Whereas National Housing and Construction Ltd claims that they bought reversionary interests, the Auditor-General stated in a report we have now that they bought air. 

Anyway, the almost all the people who were involved in taking this decision fled National Housing and Construction Ltd immediately investigations by police and other agencies started. The Libyan who was the MD abandoned the official vehicle at Entebbe Airport and ran away on a Saturday. I am surprised that the committee was not interested in these facts. I wish they had called me to share this information. 

When National Housing and Construction Ltd came to survey the land, the exercise was stopped by police because it had become a security threat to the area. In fact, when police appeared before the Committee on Physical Infrastructure they said that even if there was a court order to evict people of Kasokoso, they would never go to do it; they couldn’t evict over 30,000 people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, even the report itself was overtaken by events because -(Interruption)

MR ALEPER: Mr Speaker, with due respect to my brother, the hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda, he has repeatedly said that he never appeared before the committee. I would like to set facts clear that hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda appeared before our committee. When he first came in the morning, Members were few but I was present. He went back and after a few minutes he came back and found a reasonable number of members. It was in room 203 at Second Floor and the time was 10:00 a.m. that is if he has forgotten.

After our interaction with hon. Semujju, hon. Rosemary Seninde followed and we also interacted with her. So, is he in order to lie to the House that he never appeared before our committee? We have a witnesses’ book which he signed and then he interacted with us and left a copy of his presentation. So, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to clarify that before I rule?

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, there is no dispute; I went to the committee meeting but I did not find them. It is true I appeared in the committee room but I never appeared before this Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, for giving way. Mr Speaker, hon. Ssemujju Nganda indeed appeared before the committee and I was there. Saying that he did not find anybody is not true; I was present and the attendance book can prove that record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did the honourable member make presentations before the committee?

MR ISABIRYE: He made a presentation before the committee and a copy of his presentation is even part of the minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju Nganda, you are out of order. Please, conclude your remarks.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, because I have interest in this, I will not go back to a matter upon which you have just made a ruling; history will judge us.

Mr Speaker, the committee on commissions has interacted with National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. They told the committee, in their latest response, that now their board has decided to sell their interest to people who occupy that land, like they did with the people who occupy the land in Namungoona.

I am surprised that the chairperson of the committee now speaks about a project. That project is maybe in his mind; there is no project. That is why National Housing and Construction Company Ltd have already abandoned the project that was being pushed by some officials from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

When you read the report of the committee, it is as if it was authored by the promoters of that project, who had made contact with some Chinese. National Housing and Construction Company Ltd did not have money for that project. It is a profit-making company; it cannot construct houses and distribute them. The chair of the committee will need to interact more with National Housing and Construction Company Ltd further in order to understand what they do - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude; I am giving you more time because you represent that area.

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, since National Housing and Construction Company Ltd, which was interested in the project, has decided to sell it to the occupants, I beg this Parliament to throw away or reject this report. This is because it recreates the chaos that all of us get involved in putting them off. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation led by Mr John Mugabi, “the Beast”.  (Applause) He is a boxing legend and former world boxing champion. He is here under the umbrella of Baltic Pro Box Promotions Group, the organisers of Fighter Awards, 2014, which were held at Hotel Africana on 27 February 2015. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.23
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate that for the first time I will not appreciate the work of a committee. 

From what the committee chairman presented, he has indicated that the people of Kasokoso were not there probably by the time National Housing and Construction Company acquired that land. I would like to make it clear that National Housing and Construction Company did not audit the number of people who were on the land at that time. So it is not true for the report to indicate that this place did not have occupants or that it only had people excavating stones. 

When the committee visited this area, I and my colleague, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, were there. I can confirm that the committee met the people who indicated that they were bona fide occupants of the land in question and they also confirmed that these people were bona fide occupants. So, it is very unfortunate to hear the committee saying that there are no bona fide occupants on this land.

Mr Speaker, National Housing and Construction Company Ltd, in their plan, intend to redevelop this area and transfer these people somewhere else. I would like to assure this House that when we visited the place where they intend to relocate these people, we found out that the place is less than quarter an acre. We are not talking about 1000 people; these people are over 30,000! Look at what happened in Naguru; I do appreciate the fact that National Housing and Construction Company is a government entity and the government is supposed to protect its own people. Where do we intend to relocate all these people?

Mr Speaker, the houses National Housing and Construction Company intends to construct are just going to be bought by these people. I would like this House to be empathetic. Colleagues, some of these are poor people who managed to get some little money to put up their houses. Will they be able to buy the houses that National Housing and Construction Company intends to put up? These are some of the questions we always ask ourselves. Do we know where the people who left Naguru are? Where will these people go?

Mr Speaker, we appreciate whatever is happening in the country, we appreciate that we have a land problem, but we need to consider our own people - these Ugandans. Where do we intend to take them? It is not true that all the people there are not bona fide occupants. Yes, they may not all be bona fide occupants, but there are bona fide occupants there, some of whom have sold their interests to other people. 

In my understanding, before the amendment of 2010, the people who bought the interests of the bona fide occupants are also bona fide; that is my understanding but I beg to be guided. Remember, it is our mistake as Government because we have not sensitised Ugandans on their land rights. 

Mr Speaker, I am so concerned and I feel very sad about these issues. Even the issue of the certificate of occupancy that the chairman has talked about is a new phenomenon. It is something that came on board in the amendments of 2010. So, how do we expect those people to have certificates of occupancy? 

Mr Speaker, I humbly beg this House to be sympathetic and consider the plight of the people of Kasokoso. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do we do with the report?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg to propose that when we come to the recommendations –(Member timed out.)

3.28
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report because it gives us data on which we can base our arguments.

I do appreciate that at times government policies cause more confusion than they intend to solve. When we passed the Land (Amendment) Act in 2010, we were assured that it would reduce to the minimal, if not wipe out, land evictions in this country. However, it has turned out to breed more evictions than they were before we passed the law. 

Mr Speaker, I heard the chair say that the petitioners and the people of Kasokoso were asked, several times, to provide proof of ownership. when I say proof, it is not the recent certificates of occupancy that have not even been operationalized but at least some kind of agreement that would show that either they were customary owners or they bought from the bona fide occupants. They failed to provide proof. According to the law, unless the title is cancelled, it is concrete proof of ownership. Therefore, whoever holds the title, unless it is cancelled or revoked, happens to be the owner of the land. 

Now according to the report, the majority of these people were offloaded from the Nakawa and Naguru estates, though this fact has been disputed by those who have talked before me. Definitely, those who were offloaded from these estates cannot be lawful or bona fide occupants of Kasokoso.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, much as I appreciate and I really feel sorry for the people of Kasokoso, we have to find a solution as Parliament and Government to this situation and see how to resolve these issues. Otherwise, we risk encouraging trespassers - that is the word that has been used in the report - to displace land owners, which I do not think is the intention of Government.

Can we go back to the drawing board? I still feel that the project that was talked about, which is being promoted by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, if properly handled with National Housing and Construction Company, can be implemented. Parliament should recommend that line of approach because it will be a win-win situation.

The honourable Member of Parliament from Wakiso, I appreciate your effort. I know this is your constituency and you must defend your constituents. However, to say that people are poor - yes they are – and when we chase them what will happen, that cannot be a solution. (Member timed out.)

3.32
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise with pain to talk about the issues or the problems the people of Kasokoso are likely to face if this report is carried by this House. 

Mr Speaker, the House has been told that over 30,000 people are occupying this area called Kasokoso. Whether you own the title - I heard my good friend, hon. Kabakumba Masiko, say that a title is conclusive evidence that one owns the land, and I agree with her, but land can also be owned by occupation.

In that circumstance, when evidence has been adduced, and even if we moved to that place as the whole House we would not find that place empty - We would find people testifying that they have been there for very many years. We have also had fraudulent persons moving with GPSs where there are people occupying the area and they craft land titles.

Therefore, I would like to beg for the indulgence of this House; for once, let us be patriotic. We are closing our term of office very soon; let us take a patriotic decision to save the lives of these 30,000 Ugandans who –(Member timed out.)  

3.35
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an attachment of a court document here; I saw a decree. The committee appreciated the difficulty in determining how many people had stayed there longer. 

Mr Speaker, whereas I know that under Section 56 of the Registration of Titles Act, presentation of certificate of title is finality as evidence of ownership, the question here is not about ownership as of title; it is about an entity owning this land with people on it. This matter resolved in 2011 and these people were already occupying this land. The mistake that could have been made by the defendant, the National Housing and Construction Company, is that they did not state anything in reference to the tenants or the people already occupying this land. This was maybe a procedural mistake, but we cannot ignore and wish away those who were occupying this land before.

The committee did a good job in looking at the legality but they ignored the fact that they were people occupying this land –(Interruption)
 
MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, colleague. Mr Speaker, the information I have for this House is that I grew up in the village adjacent to Kasokoso. My father owned the land and the boundaries were the Kinawataka channel and the land adjacent to Kasokoso. I remember that many times we crossed over to Kasokoso, through the channel, there were families living there. 

I remember during the war, we used to hide away from - I do not want to call them terrorists, but they used to come from Mbuya Barracks, through Mutungo to terrorise the villages of Kirinya, Namataba and others.  Whenever they would come to terrorise those villages, there were families in Kasokoso that would warn us, either by whistling or some other signal, to go and hide. I remember there was one called Maria, Kagugube and others. There were other families in Kasokoso. Yes, the committee did good work, but what happened to the bona fide occupants?

I also want to inform you that in Buganda here, there is occupancy by mailo, but all that mailo land in Kireka belonged to one of Kabaka’s chiefs before. Nobody had a title and all the people there were tenants who would pay busuulu or envuujo, according to the law of 1928.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable member. At page 12, paragraph 5 of the report, the committee demonstrated the dilemma. Mr Speaker, let us appreciate a fact that what could have misguided the committee is that if I am a bona fide purchaser or occupant and I sell land to somebody just two weeks before, I sell with that interest. The person buying it buys with that interest that goes back. 

There is no question of saying that whereas there are others who were there for a long time - This is a question of law; it is not politics here. We need to help these people just –(Member timed out.) 

3.41
MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to speak on a few points. 

First of all, as Parliament of Uganda, we have representatives from different regions. I represent Buvuma, but when I hear what hon. Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Rosemary Seninde are saying, that on that very piece of land there were legal occupants and those legal occupants were not given a hearing, - they were just chased away - as Members of Parliament from other regions, shouldn’t we be sympathetic? Shouldn’t the committee be responsible and listen to the honourable members? 

If someone has been legally occupying this land, even if we want to develop the place, these people’s interests should be considered and these people should develop along with the place. We have the bona fide occupants, just like she has said, and those people -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Janepher Egunyu for giving way. 

I have been following the debate and it appears Members need to take interest in page 17, point No. 7.5, which talks about the Kireka Slum Redevelopment Project: “2. According to National Housing and Construction Company, the proposed project will be a mixed use development project to cater for the current population in the project location namely: low, middle and high income earners. It will also include commercial, social and recreation facilities.

3. The committee was informed that the first priority shall be given to the residents in the project area so that they benefit from the improved structures and facilities. The committee was further informed that none of the current occupants shall be evicted.” I thought I needed to provide that information. I thank you. 

MRS EGUNYU: Mr Speaker, I am reliably informed by the representatives of those areas that the legal occupants were also evicted. I do not know what the minister is saying but still, what does the law say about -(Member timed out.)

3.44
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI, (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the efforts they put in this work. 

Mr Speaker, I want to say that evicting Ugandans from land, which could have been theirs maybe since 1995 when the Constitution was put in place, would not be right. Article 237 (8) of the Constitution is very clear that somebody who stayed on the land before the coming into force of this Constitution automatically owns that land. So, it is a matter of looking for the title and getting the right occupancy of that land. 

Mr Speaker, I think something has to be done to protect the rights of these people because they have a right to stay, occupy and enjoy the land. These people are very poor and we do not want them to stay in slums, but where are we going to put them? If we put up those structures for them now, do you think they will be able to pay the rent we want or the rent which is required for them to live in those houses? Which plan do you have? Have you prepared where to put them as you construct the structures on that land? Thank you.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is inquiring about the intermediate plans for these people. At page 17 of the report, point No.6, NHCCL made undertakings and we have reflected these undertakings in the recommendations at page 20.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, as leaders from that area, we interacted with National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. What they wanted was to get people off that land - they have made that very categorical – so that they can construct houses and sell them like they have done elsewhere. 

Is the chairperson of the committee, who now has turned himself into the spokesperson of National Housing and Construction Company Ltd, in order to purport that he has evidence that there was a plan to build houses and accommodate people? Is he in order, first of all, to mislead this House and turn himself into a spokesperson of National Housing and Construction Company Ltd? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this matter came before the committee. Different presentations were made before the committee, which now the chair takes over to present to this House, to guide us to make a decision. All those projects have been mentioned and it is contained in the report. I do not see how the chair, by citing the report, would be operating in an unorderly manner.

You know, honourable members, I am always reluctant to take points of guidance because I do not have it in the rules. 

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, you have wider discretion in this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have used it for you now. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in the circumstances that a Member is confused, the only arbiter is you. In this matter, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now pleading confusion? (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Certainly, I am confused and that is why I am requesting for guidance. 

Mr Speaker, an undertaking from a company should be in form of a written offer and not verbal. It could also be a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), signed between the tenants and the owner of the land. The chairperson is becoming very enthusiastic, so I would like him to tell us about the undertaking of the National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. Could he adduce to this House such an undertaking in writing for us to believe him?

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, this is exactly what we are saying under point No.6. All these things that we mention under 7.5 are part of a memorandum of understanding between National Housing and Construction Company Ltd and the residents of Kireka and Kasokoso. We have the written MoU on our table -(Interjections)- It is a draft memorandum of understanding. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do have a copy of that in the report?

MR BIRAARO: Yes, we have it. We have a copy of that memorandum of understanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it in the report? Can we have some order, Members? Where is it in the report? Do you have a copy there?

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, the memorandum of understanding is with our other documents in the file. We have it here in Parliament. It is not part of evidence adduced here. It was extracted and included here and that is why on page 20 we are referring to section 7.5. It is available.

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, vile allegations were made and continue to be made, and I find the actions of the chairperson very disturbing. A report comes with a memorandum of understanding and it just ends up in the hands of the chairperson of the committee even when the owners of the land are not aware of it. Is the chairperson in order to proceed in that way? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, if the memorandum of understanding is there, it is so vital a document that it should have had to be visibly and very openly attached to this particular report. Do we have a copy of it here? If the relationship is based on this memorandum of understanding we should have a copy of it here.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, the memorandum of understanding is with us. It is with the clerk to the committee. It was not part of the documents that were uploaded here but we have it in the precincts of Parliament and we can even produce it today.

MR WAIRA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, and this applies to hon. Majegere too, - (Laughter)- if this whole arrangement is premised on a memorandum of understanding between the residents and the National Housing and Construction Company Ltd, that document should have been here. This is because it is the premise on which we see the legality of the actions of those involved. Is it there or not? If it is, where is it?

MR BIRAARO: Somebody has gone for it from the clerk’s office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why is it not part of the report and yet you have attached so many documents?

MR BIRAARO: That was an oversight as we had so many attachments but we have it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need a copy of this memorandum of understanding so that Members can look at it and we debate in an organised way. 

The memorandum of understanding will determine the rights of the residents and also those of National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. This would have been agreed on as a framework for operations and advancing the implementation of this project. I find that it important that we have this document before we can debate this.

MR MWAIRA: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot take clarification from the Speaker. Let us handle it that way. This matter is so important as there are many people going to be affected by this. So, can we, in the meantime, stop the debate here and have the Memorandum of Understanding as signed laid on the Table and copies circulated.  We can then see how to conclude this debate. All this information that you want to give will come when we reopen this debate. Debate on item No. 6 is hereby deferred until we receive those documents. 

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT BY 
THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVE ON 
MARKET VENDORS AND SMALL BUSINESS OPERATORS’ FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the chairperson comes, a procedural point had been raised on some issue that was pending in Jinja about some eviction. The minister says that he is ready to give that report. We will give it time later after receiving this report. Is that okay? 

3.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Alice Alaso): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish to present a report of the Public Accounts Committee on the special audit by the Auditor-General of the Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Businesses Operators’ Fund.

The audit report was laid before this House and referred to the Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny. The committee duly considered the report and we now wish to report as follows:  

The scope and methodology are as detailed there. I will proceed to the background to the presidential initiative to the market vendors and small business operators. 

Background

The Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Business Operators Fund was a brain child of the Joint Steering Committee (JSC), whose membership consisted of hon. Sam Lyomoki, chairperson; Mr Godfrey Kayongo, secretary; Mr Chris Kahirita, Trustee and overall supervisor; and Ms Winnie Twine, National Coordinator and Treasurer.

The initiative had its roots in the Uganda Market Allied Employees Association (UMEA), which is a member of the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions, to which hon. Sam Lyomoki was the secretary-general. 

The JSC conceptualised the need to create a fund to help market operators, whom they observed had missed out on existing opportunities for financial support from government programmes. The concept that was presented to the President by the JSC was designed as an empowerment programme with high political returns, if well implemented. 

Mr Speaker, it was intended to generate a critical mass of supporters loyal to His Excellency the President’s political programme. With the blessing of His Excellency the President, the JSC undertook to interact and register market vendors across the 112 districts in the country. The countrywide tour involved sensitising market vendors on the need to register and form groups and informed them of the planned financial help from the presidential initiative.

Based on the number of market vendors registered, the JSC came out with four funding scenarios that were proposed to His Excellency the President as follows - I will skip the details.

In funding these scenarios, money would be given to SACCOs, which would determine the optimal amount to be advanced to their members upon application. The money lent to individual members would be paid back into a revolving fund. The JSC had envisaged implementing this initiative and had put in place an institutional framework.

This proposal was presented to His Excellency the President who forwarded it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for technical assistance. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, through consultations, considered and offered the following technical input:

    1. That the JSC did not have the technical competence to administer the fund.

    2. That the regulations governing public funds require that such funds go through the established government structures.

    3. That as per 2 above, the funds were channelled through the Microfinance Support Centre Ltd to SACCOs and eventually to intended beneficiaries.

    4. That each group of vendors and leadership would acquire membership in the SACCOs.

    5. That the JSC would be part of programme implementation.

Observations by Audit Committee and Recommendations

The Terms of Reference 

Audit established that there were no terms of reference availed to His Excellency the President on his appointment of the JSC stipulating their scope of work, reporting framework, remuneration and facilitation, neither was the JSC given any appointment letters stipulating their roles and responsibilities.

The committee observed that subsequently, the initiative was taken over by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the joint steering committee playing no further role in implementation. Arising from this observation, the committee recommends that the Executive should desist from launching ad hoc initiatives without clear terms of reference for which public funds are appropriated.

Presidential Guidance to the Joint Steering Committee 

Whereas the JSC proposed four scenarios, His Excellency the President referred them to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for guidance. The minister, however, did not provide any specific guidance upon which consideration for funding would be made in the financial year. The committee observed that the ministry instead adopted a different scenario outside the four that had been proposed.

Submission of Supplementary Budget to Parliament

Under the Budget Act, 2001, a supplementary request is submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by the respective accounting officers indicating justifications for expenditure. Under the Public Finance Accountability Act, the Secretary to the Treasury, with the approval of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, must designate an accounting officer by name in writing to each vote. 

Audit noted that the submission of Shs 14,757,000,000 was included in the supplementary schedule for the Financial Year 2010/2011, of which Shs 10 billion was allocated to the Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Business Operators. There was however no supplementary request or justification from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Shs 10 billion. 

A further sum of Shs 4.757 billion was allocated under the presidential initiative to reduce unemployment among the youth to cater for salary arrears. The Auditor-General was not provided an explanation as to why this amount was tabled for supplementary appropriation under the same expenditure and output line together with programme funds.

The committee observed that providing a supplementary budget to cater for salary arrears is an abuse of the budget process, given that salaries should be based on an approved establishment, which should have been fully budgeted for. The committee recommends that a further investigation be conducted on the utilisation of the Shs 4.757 billion meant for the presidential initiative to reduce unemployment among the youth.

The committee observed that this supplementary was irregularly initiated as there was no proof of requisition by the responsible department or accounting officer. The committee established that the amount was decided on by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba, who made the submission to Parliament without following the relevant legal provisions.

The committee however noted that the Shs 10 billion appropriated to the initiative was released to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under vote 008. The committee recommends that hon. Syda Bbumba, the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be held responsible for initiating and submitting to Parliament a supplementary, which had not been requested for by the accounting officer.

The committee further recommends that the PS/ST be held responsible for including in the supplementary schedule Shs 14.757 billion, which was not originated by any ministry or department contrary to Section 12 (1) of the Budget Act, 2001.

The committee observed that it was the responsibility of the accounting officer for this vote to ensure that the appropriated funds were properly disbursed to the Microfinance Support Centre Ltd as the implementing agency to ensure proper accountability. An MoU would have been required between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Microfinance Support Centre Ltd, indicating the purpose of the funds, the intended beneficiaries and the accountability mechanism to be put in place. More importantly, the MoU should have required establishment of a revolving fund to be managed by the SACCOs.

The committee further notes that failure to effect an MoU created mixed signals among stakeholders that the fund in question was a grant. Moreover, a request for guidelines, as shown in Annex 1, and the list of intended beneficiaries was not heeded to. This put the Microfinance Support Centre under pressure to disperse the funds as a political hand-out.

The committee recommends that the PS/ST, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, and Ms Betty Kasimbazi, the accounting officer of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Vote 008, be held responsible for ignoring the request for an MoU and transferring the money to the Microfinance Support Centre without clear guidelines.

The funds were instead disbursed to the Microfinance Support Centre upon request by the acting Executive Director, Mr Iggy Rwabukuku, who testified that he had been directed by the Microfinance Support Centre board chairperson, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, to requisition for the appropriated funds. In his testimony, Mr Rwabukuku informed the committee that the Microfinance Support Centre was a conduit to channel these funds as political hand-outs through the nearest established SACCOs for the intended beneficiaries. The SACCOs would be paid a 10 per cent management fee for distributing the money. 

Mr Rwabukuku testified that he was surprised by the letter from the accounting officer requiring that the Microfinance Support Centre Limited accounts for the funds (annex 2). He therefore wrote on 14 February 2011 to the PS/ST for the attention of Mr Henry Mbaguta, Assistant Commissioner Microfinance, asking for clear guidelines and modalities for disbursing the funds since the Microfinance Support Centre Limited had received different signals that this fund was a political grant. Mr Rwabukuku further requested for an MoU to spell out the terms and conditions of managing the funds. 

The committee observed that no memorandum of understanding was effected by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as requested by the Microfinance Support Centre Limited. Mr Rwabukuku instead informed the committee that he was reminded that the Microfinance Support Centre Limited had previously disbursed similar political funds in the 2006 elections to the tune of Shs 5 billion without a memorandum of understanding. He was therefore advised to proceed with the disbursement as before.

Subsequently, all disbursements by the Microfinance Support Centre Limited, through the SACCOs to the beneficiaries, were originated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Microfinance Support Centre Limited had no role in identifying the SACCOs.

Disagreements between the Joint Steering Committee (JSC) and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The JSC disagreed on the funds being managed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the modality of disbursing the funds through the Microfinance Support Centre for a number of reasons namely:

    • They feared that the technocrats in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were hijacking a project that they did not understand and therefore were not well placed to implement and manage.

    • The ministry was planning to have the money dished out to non-members of the SACCOs outside the conceptual framework.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development officials, on their part, also felt that the JSC was planning to disburse the funds as hand-outs instead of disbursing it as a revolving fund. The decision to have the funds channelled through the Microfinance Support Centre was premised on the need to manage it better given their mandate in managing such programmes. Additionally, management of such a fund would require an established recognised government body, which the JSC was not.

This arrangement did not go well with some members of the JSC who had hoped to directly implement the initiative, including disbursing funds to the beneficiaries. Upon this disagreement, the honourable Dr Lyomoki, the JSC chairman, and Ms Winnie Twine withdrew from implementation of the initiative while Mr Kayongo and Mr Kahirita fully co-operated. The continued cooperation of Mr Kayongo and Mr Kahirita lent credence to the inflated list of beneficiaries that were originated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that led to the abuse of the programme.

The committee recommends that the duo, Mr Kayongo and Mr Kahirita, be held responsible for abetting the inflation of the intended list of beneficiaries and causing financial loss. 

Audit further established that hon. Syda Bbumba included new beneficiaries to the tune of Shs 1.2 billion as shown in annex 3 including, among others, the following:

    • Shs 170 million for women and youth groups in Jinja District.
    • Shs 170 million for Participatory Rural Action for Development (PRAFORD) in Arua.
    • Shs 100 million for 10 mosque based SACCOs.
    • Shs 200 million for milk coolers for diary groups in Nakaseke and Kiboga districts.
    • Shs 200 million for relocation of Elgon Processors Tomato Factory.
    • Shs 130 million for the JSC.
    • Shs 100 million for SACCO administration costs for managing the revolving fund.
    • Shs 10 million for transportation and installation of milk coolers.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the disagreement sent mixed signals to the different stakeholders as to how the funds should be managed. It also enabled the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring in new beneficiaries that were outside the initiative and had not been verified by the JSC. This, in effect, was an abuse of office that led to the diversion of public funds. 

The committee further notes that including Nakaseke and Kiboga districts were self-serving as these two districts were represented in Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of State for Microfinance respectively. The committee recommends that hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa be held responsible for abuse of office, influencing diversion of public funds and subsequently leading to financial loss. 

The committee further recommends that the duo be investigated by the Inspector General of Government for violation of the Leadership Code.

Poor Planning of Workshops by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Audit observed that whereas Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development planned and carried out workshops to guide the SACCOs and beneficiaries on the purpose and use of programme funds through verification, audit observed that the planned workshops started in March 2011, a month after the disbursement of funds to SACCOs had commenced. It was noted that some SACCOs that had benefitted from the workshops had by audit time not yet given out money to beneficiaries as they were still in the process of re-organisation; these included:

    • Kirigime SACCO from Mwanjari Market, Shs 7.35 million.
    • Kigumba SACCO for Kigumba Market, Shs 11 million.
    • Masindi Town Council Cooperative SACCO for Central Market, Shs 21.483 million.

Most of the SACCOs, including but not limited to Park Yard Market Vendors SACCO, Ntinda New Market SACCO, Nakawa Market SACCO, Bugolobi Market Vendors SACCO and Wandegeya Market SACCO attended a workshop organised for central region on 8 April 2011 after programme funds had already been received and shared. 

The committee observed that whereas Shs 120 million had been earmarked by the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba, for capacity building workshops of the beneficiary SACCOs, the workshops were planned and carried out in the central region on 8 April 2011 yet the funds had been distributed to individuals more than a month before the training.

The committee further established that the workshops were organised by the Department of Microfinance at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development headed by Mr Mbaguta Henry and presided over by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the then Minister of State of Microfinance. The committee obtained testimony that the Minister of State informed the SACCOs at the workshop that this was free money to be channelled via SACCOs as conduits to intended beneficiaries.

The committee recommends that:

    i) Mr Henry Mbaguta, the Assistant Commissioner, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be held responsible for incurring nugatory expenditure, which could have been avoided, and he be made to refund the money spent on workshops after funds had already been disbursed and distributed.

    ii) The then Minister of State for Microfinance, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, be held responsible for causing financial loss by misrepresenting the purpose of the funds at the workshop.

The Absence of Clear Guidelines on the Programme by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Microfinance Support Centre Limited

In the absence of an MoU between Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Microfinance Support Centre Limited (MSCL), the acting Executive Director, Mr Iggy Rwabukuku, made a request for the release of Shs 10 billion, which was released to the Microfinance Support Centre Limited account on 9 February 2011 as shown in Annex 1. This was without clear guidelines on how the funds would be disbursed to the beneficiaries. 

In a letter dated 14 February 2011, the acting Executive Director of the Microfinance Support Centre Limited sought for guidelines and clarification on whether the programme was a grant. The PS/ST responded on the same date stating that:

    i) The purpose of the fund was to empower the market vendors and small business operators to form a critical mass of clients to on-going financial service infrastructure of SACCOs as part of government’s Prosperity for All programmes.

    ii) The SACCOs within the proximity of markets and small business operators be used to establish a revolving fund.

    iii) That Microfinance Support Centre provides overall supervisory oversight of the programme while the SACCOs directly disburse to respective economic agents.

The request for guidelines and modalities for disbursing the funds is a clear indication that the Microfinance Support Centre Limited was not wholly involved in programme planning, budgeting and was not prepared to implement the programme. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the chairperson of the board, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, was the sole participant from Microfinance Support Centre Limited in the preparatory meetings held with other stakeholders without involving the management of MSCL. Dr Wandira Kazibwe explained that she chose not to involve the technical arm of MSCL at the initial stages because the matters of discussion were of a policy nature.

The committee observed that Dr Wandira Kazibwe usurped the technical role of the MSCL management in advising the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as to the preparedness of MSCL to handle the programme. Therefore, MSCL was not prepared but was only prompted by Dr Wandira Kazibwe to requisition for funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development believing that the funds were a political grant to be distributed through the SACCOs. It was only after MSCL was notified by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to account for the funds that the Executive Director was woken up to the need for a MoU and guidelines.  

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Dr Specioza Kazibwe be held responsible for influence peddling, abuse of office and interfering with the work of the management of MSCL that led to the loss of public funds.

External Interference in the Management of the Programme

Audit noted that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba, misdirected MSCL by claiming that the programme had uncommitted savings for which she made additional commitments of Shs 1.2 billion. However, audit could not establish the savings from any records held by MSCL or by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to support the minister’s assertion. As a result of this directive, MSCL has outstanding commitments of Shs 502 million due to SACCOs with whom they had signed MoUs under the programme.  

Audit observed that whereas the project initially focused on small vendors intended to benefit an average of Shs 30,000, the programme was eventually extended to business operators outside the initial threshold. Groups outside the threshold were brought on board through the influence of ministers and highly placed government officials. As a result of external pressure, reallocations were made and new beneficiaries brought on board, for example:

    • Shs 170 million for women and youth groups in Jinja District;
    • Shs 170 million for Participatory Rural Action for Development (PRAFORD) in Arua; and
    • Shs 100 million for 10 mosque based SACCOs, and so and so forth as listed.

Audit field verifications revealed the following in regard to milk coolers supplied to the dairy groups in Nakaseke District: 

    • Kinyogoga Livestock was given Shs 35 million and by the time of audit, it was underutilised. 
    • Kiwoko, Ngoma and Wakyato SACCOs were given the same amount and their status is as reported. 

It was noted that investments in coolers do not qualify under the intentions for which the funds were appropriated.

The Senior Presidential Advisor for Political Affairs, Mr Moses Byaruhanga, wrote to the PS/ST on 19 April 2011, as annexed, for the attention of Mr Henry Mbaguta, indicating that funds meant for hawkers in Rubaga be given to car washers and food vendors. Mr Byaruhanga wrote another letter dated 18 July (Annex 6) to the Executive Director of MSCL indicating the names of Muslim founded associations in Kampala District, which should benefit from the programme.  

The committee observed that Mr Moses Byaruhanga interfered with the operations of MSCL by writing letters dated 19 April 2011, 26 May 2011 (Annex 7) and 18 July 2011, directing that the funds meant for hawkers, who were the intended beneficiaries, be given to car washers and food vendors, and by personally specifying a new set of beneficiaries of Muslim founded associations. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Mr Moses Byaruhanga be held personally liable for the financial loss occasioned by the groups he smuggled into the programme, which failed to account for the money advanced - Shs 100 million to Muslim founded associations and funds disbursed to car washers and food vendors in Rubaga Division.

The committee further recommends that Mr Byaruhanga be held responsible for abuse of office and influence peddling. 

The committee established that Gen. Salim Saleh wrote an email to Mr Mbaguta on the 23 February as annexed, directing him to handle a list of beneficiaries who included Jinja and Arua District NRM Women and Youth League leaders. Gen. Salim Saleh further directed Mr Henry Mbaguta on who should supply the inputs required by the said group.

The committee wondered how a government programme under Microfinance Support Centre Limited with a clear board and management came to be directed by Gen. Saleh. The committee invited Gen. Saleh on two occasions to explain his role in this matter. Gen. Saleh asked the committee to avail to him particulars of his involvement, which was duly given as annex 8(b) but he subsequently did not turn up. During a follow up conversation with the committee clerk, Gen. Salim Saleh wondered whether the committee could not proceed without hearing him since he was very busy.

The committee recommends that Mr Henry Mbaguta, the Assistant Commissioner, Microfinance, be held responsible for accepting and acting on the directive of Gen. Salim Saleh who is outside the structure of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee further recommends that Gen. Salim Saleh be held responsible for influence peddling and using public funds for politicking. 

The committee established that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the then Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance), on the 20 May, 2011 as in Annex 9, wrote a letter directing the Executive Director of MSCL to avail funds to the following:

    i) Dwaniro Livestock and Dairy Cooperative Society
    ii) Lwamata Women Dairy Cooperative Society
    iii) Kapeke Farmers’ Association

She further directed that the coolers be purchased without going through proper procurement process. 

The committee observed that these beneficiaries were not on the original list compiled by the Joint Steering Committee. Furthermore, these beneficiaries were drawn only from the minister’s constituency.

The committee recommends that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa be held personally responsible for influence peddling, abuse of office and influencing diversion of public funds for political gain. 

The committee further recommends that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa be investigated by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) for violation of the Leadership Code.

The committee further recommends that hon. Nankabirwa be relieved of her appointment as a minister. 

Personalisation of the programme and management of MSCL

The Microfinance Support Centre Limited was established as a company limited by guarantee with government represented by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a sole shareholder. Its board is appointed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the main objective to channel cheap loans to targeted beneficiaries for economic empowerment. It receives funds from government and development partners for onward lending.

As a private limited company, it is not the business of MSCL to give out grants or disburse political donations. It has its own system for appraising, granting and collecting its loan portfolio. At the time MSCL was assigned implementation of the initiative, the Chairperson of the Board was Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe. 

The committee observed that at the time of Mr Rwabukuku’s appointment as Executive Director (ED), he was a member of the Board. He was therefore irregularly appointed as acting Executive Director when the substantive Executive Director, Mr Byanyima, was sent on forced leave. 

It is evident that there was conflict of interest and influence peddling in his appointment because the Board subsequently decided to headhunt and appoint Mr Rwabukuku as Executive Director without competition. Mr Rwabukuku was therefore under the influence of the Board and could not execute his duties diligently and independently. Mr Rwabukuku was under undue influence of the Board Chairperson. 

As executive director, he did not attend any meetings with the Joint Steering Committee, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and MSCL. The committee established that Mr Rwabukuku did not have the requisite qualifications for the job of Executive Director of the MSCL. The Human Resource Manual stipulated that for one to qualify as Executive Director, one had to possess a Bachelor’s Degree in Economics or Finance, a Master’s Degree and eight years’ experience. 

The committee observed that Dr Specioza Kazibwe has served in high offices in Uganda. On her appearance before the committee, Dr Kazibwe expressed no regret as to how the programme was handled. The committee had expected that given her political stature, Dr Kazibwe should have offered MSCL credible leadership and protected public funds as the Board Chairperson. 

The committee recommends that the former Board Chairperson, Dr Specioza Kazibwe, be held responsible for conflict of interest and influence peddling in the appointment of Mr Rwabukuku as Executive Director and subsequent abuse of the mandate of the MSCL.

The committee further recommends that considering her record in public leadership positions and the subsequent losses occasioned under this initiative, she be barred from holding appointive public office in accordance with the law. 

The committee recommends that MSCL should desist from undertaking activities, which are not in line with its mandate.

Audit observes that there were no concerted efforts by various departments at MSCL in implementing the programme. Most of the departments had no idea of the programme and this was evidenced by the lack of management meetings involving departments such as Internal Audit, Business Development and zonal offices. In addition, MOUs between MSCL and the beneficiary SACCOS were not witnessed by the company secretary. The activities of the programme at the MSCL were largely managed by Mr Rwabukuku, Mr Sabila the Head of Finance, Mr Okello Joseph the Zonal Manager and Ms Helen Masika Petronila, the Credit Officer of Kampala. 

This did not allow for proper planning and management of the fund leading to the massive fraud and misappropriation. The intended revolving fund was not established as a result since all the funds were squandered. 

The committee recommends that Mr Rwabukuku, Mr Jackson Sabila, Mr Okello Joseph and Ms Helen Petronella Masika be held criminally liable for causing financial loss by executing fraudulent MOUs with the SACCOs.

Programme funds not revolving

Audit established that the intention of the programme was to create a revolving fund for market vendors and small market operators to access working capital loans at no interest. Audit, to the contrary, found that no revolving fund was established but the funds that were released to the SACCOS were promptly withdrawn and shared by purported members. 

The committee established that the funds were indeed withdrawn and shared by officials from the Microfinance Support Centre Limited and the SACCOS. The technical leadership of MSL believed that this was political money and not a revolving fund. Moreover, this was not new as this had been the case during the 2006 elections where similar funds amounting to Shs 5 billion were released and disbursed to the beneficiaries by MSCL.

Although the PS/ST indicated in his letter dated 14 February, 2011 to MSCL that it was a revolving fund, the funds were remitted to the MSCL with instructions to disburse funds to listed SACCOS with individual beneficiaries already listed. Each individual beneficiary was to get Shs 30,000 for those within Kampala and Shs 20,000 for those upcountry beneficiaries. 

It was observed that the beneficiaries did not apply for the money but rather, a list was generated from a list of individuals that had been registered as market vendors and who would only be informed to go and collect a pre-determined amount of money from the SACCOS within their proximity.

Many of the beneficiaries that appeared before the committee submitted that they did not apply for the money. They were mobilised to go and receive Shs 30,000 or 20,000 as kasiimo from His Excellency the President for mobilising votes prior to the elections and voting wisely after the election. To them, this was not money meant to be used in business and/or returned. This evidence was corroborated by the submission of a number of SACCOS who disbursed the funds to beneficiaries without the requirements of having it returned. 

The SACCOS had been told that they were acting as conduits to enable money reach the intended beneficiaries and that they would be paid 10 per cent for successfully carrying out this activity.

The table below shows some of the SACCOS, which received money and shared programme funds without establishing the revolving fund. The list is as presented. 

The committee observed that whereas there were SACCOS, which had made a good start like the Bugoloobi Vendors’ Market SACCO, when the members of the SACCO received mixed signals about the purpose of the fund, the members refused to re-pay the money. When the SACCO leaders attempted to resist the political interference, they were arrested on the orders of area counsellors. The committee also observed that in some SACCOS like Ntinda Market SACCO and Nakawa Market Vendors’ SACCO, the leadership simply shared out the money with officials in the Microfinance Support Centre.

The committee established that the newly smuggled in beneficiaries were not obliged to pay given that the money was not disbursed to individuals but rather, it was for the purchase of milk coolers and processing plants where individual responsibility could not accrue.

The committee observed that the SACCOS had no control on intended beneficiaries. Lists would be forwarded from Mr Henry Mbaguta through Microfinance Support Centre Limited to the SACCOS. Since most of the beneficiaries were not SACCO members, it was impossible to exercise control over them in so far as recovery was concerned as the beneficiaries were told that these were political funds.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that given the ill-conceptualised, ill-conceived and ill-implemented nature of the programme, future programmes should be properly planned to ensure good utilisation of public funds.

Verification of beneficiaries as per the JSC list

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development undertook to conduct a joint verification exercise together with the Joint Steering Committee to identify and correct possible anomalies in the lists submitted. The committee also established that instead of verification, new and grossly inflated lists were submitted by Mr Mbaguta to the Microfinance Support Centre for payment. We refer you to Annex 10. For example in Bundibugyo market alone, the number rose from 808 proposed beneficiaries to 10,000 in the list submitted.

The committee further observed that this number was exaggerated with a view to defraud government. The committee therefore recommends that Mr Henry Mbaguta be held responsible for submitting inflated lists of the beneficiaries that resulted into misappropriation and financial loss.

Lack of Funds, Supervision and Monitoring 

Audit observed that whereas monitoring and evaluation provide regular flow of information on programme implementation and performance, MSCL and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, despite signing MOUs between MSCL and the SACCOS, did not undertake monitoring and evaluation.

The committee established that there were no reports at all levels in regard to programme monitoring and evaluation. The committee noted that the entire initiative was premised on a distorted plan, which could not allow for effective monitoring and evaluation. Actually, the Executive Director MSCL, in his submission to the committee, summarised the entire initiative as ill-conceived, ill-conceptualised and ill-implemented.

The committee recommends that government should desist from initiating ad hoc programmes involving the use of public funds. For example, for electioneering as captured in the concept note by the Joint Steering Committee. For purposes of empowering vulnerable groups, government should use established/appropriate government officials.

Unaccounted for Funds by the Joint Steering Committee

Audit observed that Shs 130 million was allocated to the Joint Steering Committee to finance the sensitisation of market vendors on the utilisation of programme funds as a revolving fund in their markets. Audit observed that the money was shared by the Joint Steering Committee members and Shs 30 million each deposited on their personal bank accounts. The auditor further noted that on 12 September, 2012, Mr Godfrey Kayongo submitted his accountability of Shs 29,171,000 leaving a balance of Shs 829,000 unaccounted for.

The committee recommends that hon. Dr Lyomoki Sam, Mr Chris Kahirita and Ms Winnie Atwine, the Joint Steering Committee members who did not account for the programme funds deposited on their personal bank accounts be held personally liable for Shs 90 million. The committee further recommends Mr Godfrey Kaja Kayongo be held responsible for failure to account for Shs 829,000.

The committee also upholds the recommendation of the Auditor-General that Shs 10 million withdrawn to pay questionable transactions at Nakawa Market SACCO should be accounted for.

Observations and Recommendations on SACCOS

Mr Speaker, I just want to propose that members look at the details as proposed in the table; the Nakasero Market SACCO received Shs 586,152,000 and the committee accordingly recommends that:

    i) The SACCO leaders should be held responsible for deviating from the MOU between them and MSCL.
    ii) The committee further advises the SACCO leaders to adhere to the guidelines governing SACCOs and MOUs. 
    iii) The committee recommends that the then Minister of State for Microfinance be held responsible for directing the SACCOS to distribute money to beneficiaries without following proper guidelines.

For Wandegeya Market SACCO, the committee makes the following recommendations:

    i) That they should adhere to guidelines governing their SACCOs and MOUs. 
    ii) The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be held responsible for directing SACCOS to distribute money to beneficiaries without proper guidelines.

For Nakawa Market SACCO, the committee recommends that Ms Abuti Jane and Mr Okello Joseph be investigated for this fictitious transaction with the view of recovering the money.

For Nyahuka Town Council SACCO, the committee recommends that the Zonal Manager, Akello Immaculate and Muhumuza Tony, the Credit Officer Fort Portal (MSCL staff), Bazaliza Fred and Byensi Nicholas; SACCO leadership be investigated with a view to prosecution and having the money recovered.

For Kampala United Parkyard SACCO, which received Shs 685,314,000, the committee advises:

    i) The SACCO leaders to adhere to guidelines governing SACCOS and MOUs. 
    ii) The committee recommends that the then Minister for State for Microfinance be held responsible for directing SACCOS to distribute money to beneficiaries without following proper guidelines.
    iii) The committee recommends that further investigations be carried out by government in order to bring Mr Sabila and all those involved to book.

For the Boda boda 2010 Association Limited, the committee recommends that the circumstances under which funds were deposited on the association account instead of the SACCO account be investigated.

For the Jinja District Women League Association, which received Shs 48 million, the committee recommends that given the non-availability of accountability, an investigation be carried out with a view of prosecution and having the money recovered.

For the Jinja District Youth and NRM League, the committee recommends that given the non-availability of accountability, an investigation be carried out with a view of prosecution and recovering the money.

On Bosasa- Masese SACCO, which received Shs 55,780,000, the committee advises the SACCO to adhere to the guidelines governing management of SACCOS and MOUs. The committee recommends that the former manager of the SACCO, Mr Dan Rugambwa, refunds the money misappropriated.

For Busia Market SACCO, the committee recommends that Mr Byemukolo Martin be held responsible for the financial loss at the SACCO and be prosecuted for theft of SACCO funds.

Uganda Mechanics Engineering Association The committee recommends that the management of Uganda Mechanics Engineering Association should be held liable for misuse of programme funds.

On Ggaba SACCO, the committee recommends that the leadership of Ggaba SACCO and Mr Okello Joseph be further investigated for causing financial loss of Shs 15 million and if found culpable, he be brought to book.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your attention and I would like to implore this House to adopt this report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable members. We have now received the report and the motion for processing this report is for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the special audit by the Auditor-General on the Presidential Initiatives on Market Vendors and Small Businesses.

I propose the question for debate. Honourable members, are we ready to debate this matter now or should we give ourselves some time and then come and discuss it properly?

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In line with your remark, the network has let us down and yet the issues being raised are very pertinent. In that regard, I would like to propose that we defer debate on this particular matter and get time when we have the relevant information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we defer it to Thursday? Would we have read it properly? Thank you. Madam Chairperson, we have received this report and let us open debate on Thursday 2.00p.m. We would have received all the documents and everything clearly since I have received complaints from the Leader of the Opposition and my friend from Terego that the Ipad was not showing the report properly. We may have time to look at it properly and then come and have this debate on Thursday 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

Honourable members, there was a matter that was raised by the Member for Jinja Municipality East on the situation that was in Jinja and the minister was ready to make a statement on this. I do not see the minister or the minister of state. Can somebody alert the minister or the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to come and make this statement now?

Honourable members, I think that the Kasokoso report should also be debated on Thursday together with this one. I have looked at some of the documents and I have issues with them. I need to go through them properly so that when we come on Thursday, everything will be clear and we can take a decision properly.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the absence of the minister, could the House receive our other report, which is also on the Order Paper so that we can prepare to handle both?

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR- GENERAL’S FINDINGS 
ON HEALTH INSTITUTIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010
 
MR BAHINDUKA: Mr Speaker, a few minutes ago, some members complained that they had issues with the Ipads and, therefore, they could not read through or follow the report as the chairperson of the committee presented. How do we proceed now? Will Members doze off? Some of us can pick without reading from the Ipad but there are a few elderly people who may not move at that pace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those kinds of people are not in this House. The people you are speaking for are not in this House. Honourable members, let us receive the report, take note and when we have the full text we can then debate. 

4.58
VICE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present to this House the Public Accounts Committee report on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2010, Volume II, Central Government, covering Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Uganda Heart Institute, Uganda AIDS Commission and Uganda Cancer Institute.

The committee interacted with accounting officers of these institutions and begs to report as follows: 

The scope covers audit queries of the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2010 under paragraph (45) Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, (49) Uganda Heart Institute, (50) Uganda AIDS Commission and (48) Uganda Cancer Institute. 

Considering the audit report, the committee held meetings and received responses to the queries from accounting officers of the respective votes and analysed the documents submitted to explain the queries under review.

Audit revealed that only 30 per cent of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services’ budget was financed directly by Government of Uganda. The other portion was funded by various development partners, the funding gap in the period under review stood at Shs 9.93 billion. 

The Auditor-General observed that over reliance on donor funding is not sustainable. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that the problem had been brought to the attention of the ministry of finance. 

The accounting officer further explained that in the case of critical input like blood testing kit, laboratory consumables and blood collection bags, the Ministry of Health intervened through supplementary allocation from the National Medical Stores. As a strategy to attract more allocation from government, the entity had come up with a proposal to be granted an autonomous status which was under review by the Ministry of Health.

The committee noted that whereas the proposal to make an entity semi-autonomous was believed to be a way of getting more funding, it should not be the basis for funding but rather the mandate of the entity. 

The committee recommends that Uganda Blood Transfusion Services be granted autonomy and adequately funded by the government to carry out its mandate as it is a critical sector.

Audit revealed that at the institution, they did not have a list of pre-qualified supplier for the year under review as required by the procurement guidelines.

The accounts officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and argued that the omission was caused by a delay in posting a substantial procurement officer to the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services following a gap arising from staff validation exercise carried out in 2007.

The committee noted the submission of the accounting officer and recommends that the process be fast-tracked.

Audit observed that Uganda Cancer Institute incurred excess expenditure amounting to Shs 316, 894,620 million without authority contrary to the Public Finance and Accountability Act. 

The accounting officer explained that the excess was caused by expenditure of Non Tax Revenue (NTR) collections on allowances for relief staff, following advice of the Board that in order for the institute to operate in the interim it was important for management to conduct an assessment of the existing staff structure and fill essential vacant positions with qualified staff on temporary terms and pay their allowances from NTR collections. Although there was authority in place for the use of revenue at source, the revenue and expenditure budget was not consolidated in the main budget for approval. 

The accounting officer further explained that management had rectified the problem by consolidating the Non Tax Revenue and expenditure budget in the main budget.  

From the explanation of the accounting officer, the committee noted that whereas the entity had authority to spend Non Tax Revenue as appropriation in aid, the amount in question was not spent in relation to the budget.  

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always spend NTR in appropriation in aid only to support their approved budget.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for spending Shs 316,894,620 million without due regard to the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

Audit observed that the management incurred domestic arrears amounting to Shs 225,340,260 million which contravenes Commitment Control Systems of Government.

The accounting officer explained that the arrears indicated were composed of invoices that had accumulated before the institute became autonomous. They were however taken on and cleared.

The committee observes that the domestic arrears were inherited from the mother entity, Uganda National Health Research Organization under Mulago and, therefore, were not incurred by the accounting officer. The committee recommends that entities should adhere to government commitment control systems.

The Auditor-General reported that there was an Act or instrument creating Uganda Cancer Institute as a government entity. The accounting officer explained that the institute was one of the constituent bodies that fall under Uganda National Health Research Organization, created by an Act of Parliament. 

The committee observed that indeed the Uganda Cancer Institute was a constituent body under the Uganda National Health Research Organization. The committee recommends that since it is a vote, an instrument should be created to give legal basis to its existence.

The Auditor-General reported that, Uganda Cancer Institute did not have a Strategic Plan in place. The accounting officer agreed with the observation and explained that the process for procuring a consultant to develop a strategic plan had been initiated. Bids had been received and a contract awarded but there was a request for an administrative review, awaiting a final decision from PPDA.

The committee noted the explanation and the measures undertaken to have the plan in place, and recommends that the issue be followed up by the accounting officer. The committee observed that the entity’s budget was approved without a strategic plan.

The committee observed that the entity, despite having qualified personnel who would develop a strategic plan chose to source for a consultant for the same. 

The committee recommends that sectoral committees of Parliament should only have budgets of entities approved inter alia upon presentation of strategic plans. 

The committee further recommends that the entity should desist from enlisting the services of consultants to develop their strategic plans.

The Auditor-General observed that Uganda Cancer Institute had an allocation of Shs 192,000,000 million for staff training, but it did not have a training plan during the year under review. 

The accounting officer explained that management had developed a training policy but were advised to have an independent person go through it. 

Consequently, the entity entered into a memorandum of understanding with an experienced resource person to finalise the policy.

The committee observed that whereas the Auditor-General talked of a training plan under review, the accounting officer dwelt on a training policy which would be a basis for the plan hence admitting the audit issue. 

The committee recommends that the sectoral committees of Parliament should only have budgets of entities approved in respect of human resource development upon presentation of human resource policy and staff training plans.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer should fast-track staff training plans.

Audit observed that the Uganda Cancer Institute did not have a procurement plan to guide it in the procurement of goods, works, and services contrary to PPDA Act and regulations there under.

The accounting officer explained that they had a procurement plan that did not conform to the prescribed format. This anomaly was attributed to the caretaker staff that were manning the Procurement Unit at the time. The entity replaced the staff and procurement planning was being done on an annual basis.

The committee observed that the entity did not have qualified persons to come up with a procurement plan which left the committee wondering how their budget was approved.

The committee recommends that sectoral committees of Parliament should stop approving budgets of entities without procurement plans.

The committee further recommends that the appropriate human resource be recruited to facilitate effective running of the institute.

Audit observed limited space and poor storage of supplies. The accounting officer explained that storage had partially been addressed. They installed three containers with air conditioning systems for safe storage for the different drug items that require cool conditions. The initial store had been decongested as items that had just been delivered were eventually allocated to the various wards.

The committee observed that the accounting officer after taking cognizance of the audit observation took remedial measures to rectify the anomalies.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to take timely action on the poor storage of supplies.

Auditor-General observed that most of the new state of the art equipment were either underutilized or not utilized at all due to lack of reagents.

The accounting officer agreed with the observation, and explained that the situation had improved. Reagents for the Haematology Analyser and Immuno Machine had since been received on a regular basis from NMS and the machines are working and being utilized, save for the Chemistry Analyser that still lacked specific reagents and was not working.

The accounting officer further submitted that some or the reagents could only be procured upon registration with the relevant international organisations and to which National Medical Stores was not a member. This had been however solved by transferring the procurement of such reagents under the institute.

The committee observed that lack of adequate provision for reagents undermine service delivery and commends that shift in government policy be made to take into account the clarity of the sector in order to avoid hampering service delivery.

Nonexistence of national policy on cancer

audit observed that the institute did not have a policy on cancer prevention and treatment. The accounting officer agreed with the observation and explained that a draft policy had been adopted by the board and submitted to the Ministry of Health for consideration. The committee observed the absence of the cancer prevention and treatment policy led to absence of a policy direction on the subject.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health fast tracks the cancer prevention and treatment policy and report to Parliament within one month.

Procurement of drugs

    a) Cost of drugs 

Audit observed that centralised procurement of drugs and medical sundries was expected to result into cheaper drugs because of the volume involved. However, the prices charged by the National Medical Stores were higher than those on the open market price.

The committee observed that while the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, the committee observes that this is anomalous and should be corrected.

    b) Consignment not received by Uganda Cancer Institute

Audit observed that support medicine worth Shs 2 million was not received by Uganda Cancer Institute. The accounting officer explained that it was hard for the Uganda Cancer Institute to know whether the money was deducted from the account or not. This also applies to the rejected items since they would never get to know what happens to the money for such items. This made reconciliation of the funds difficult. 

The committee observed that in spite of the various attempts by the accounting officer to get National Medical Stores to reconcile its deliveries with the orders, they were simply ignored. The committee noted various communications by the accounting officer to National Medical Stores.

The committee recommends that the Executive Director National Medical Stores be held responsible for negligence of duty which has a direct impact on the life of the patients.

    c) Quality of drugs delivered

Auditor-General reported that cancer drugs were potentially poisonous and were prescribed in combination of up to four drugs. The drugs were intravenously administered and for this reason, quality, timing and the right dose of drugs are of paramount importance in the effective treatment of cancer.

The accounting officer explained that some of the medicines needed specific diluents to mix them. An example was given of Docetaxel that would sometimes be sent without a diluents and administering this particular medicine was not possible. This led to wastage of medicine, since most times they could not use it to treat the patients.

The committee observed that delayed supplies, stock outs of drugs, inability to supply specialized drugs and medical sundries, supply of poor quality drugs and deliveries made to Uganda Cancer Institute affected service delivery during the period under review. 

The committee observes that whereas there is National Drug Authority, an entity mandated to deal with quality of drugs, there is still supply of poor quality drugs by National Medical Stores.

The committee recommends that the National Drug Authority should strengthen inspection and testing of drugs imported and locally manufactured to ensure that they comply or meet international set standards. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health put in place a mechanism to harmonize requirements of the hospitals’ user departments and the procuring agency National Medical Stores. Means should be devised to address the current challenges in the implementation of the policy on the procurement of medical drugs.

The committee recommends that National Medical Stores should act professionally and desist from supplying drugs different from the specifications ordered for by the entities. 

    d) Partial Selective Delivery and Erratic Supply of Drugs and Sundries

The Auditor-General noted that National Medical Stores supplied less than half of the orders placed by Uganda Cancer Institute. The accounting officer submitted that most times, National Medical Stores used to supply less than the order. When some items are left out, all the other supplies are rendered unusable since they are given in combinations of two or three.

The committee observed that this was wastage of the highest order since drugs given in combination would not be appropriately administered.

The committee recommends that National Medical Stores should strictly adhere to the orders as made by Uganda Cancer Institute.

    e) Delayed Supplies and Stock out of Drugs

The Auditor-General observed that certain drugs appeared on the list of drugs, which were mostly out of stock and patients were sent to buy the drugs on their own or await the delivery of the required drugs by National Medical Stores.

The accounting officer agreed with the observation but explained that there had been improvements in supplies though the quality and quantity was still wanting.

The committee observed that the continued stock outs affected service delivery hence putting patients at risk given the critical nature of the illness of Cancer.

The committee recommends that National Medical Stores should ensure timely delivery, strict procurement and stocking of all drugs required for cancer treatment.

Construction of a 5-Level Cancer Ward for UCI; query 48.11

The Auditor-General noted that the contract for the construction of a 5-Level Cancer Ward worth Shs 5.7 billion was awarded to a company, but there was a change of the construction site without making adjustments to the BOQs.

The accounting officer submitted that after the audit, the BOQs with a request for retrospective waiver were submitted to PPDA which declined to grant the waiver as the application was retrospective given that the foundation works were already completed. 

The additional facilities that had not been included in the initial plan and BOQs were then added to better utilize the created space. These facilities include: the operating theatre, diagnostic radiology rooms like the CT-Scan, nuclear medicine room which will accommodate the PET scan, the mortuary, rooms for investigations like the ultrasound scan and fluoroscopy as well as plain X-ray were not part of the plan and required mandatory specific thicknesses of the concrete which were all incorporated in the construction process.   

The committee took note of the reasons that occasioned the change of site. The committee observed that the accounting officer without any legal instrument and due process made variations of:

    i) Shs 5, 174,107,400 amounting 89.5 percent
    ii) Shs 2, 197,840,106; 38 percent of the contract price variation for basement 
    iii) Shs 2,976,267,294; 51.5 percent of the contract variation for extra works.

The committee further observed that Shs 2, 1 billion that is 38 percent of the contract price variation for basement was paid out to the contractor without any contract. The committee undertook an onspot assessment of the progress of the project at the cancer institute and came to a conclusion that there was no value for money attained.  

The committee recommends that the consultant and the accounting officer be held responsible for certifying the work for which there were no BOQs. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for paying Shs 2.1 billion without a valid contract.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for any losses that may have resulted and for flouting the PPDA Act and regulations there under. The committee further recommends that the IGG investigates the said procurement with the intension of prosecuting those culpable. The committee recommends that an urgent engineering audit be undertaken to establish value for money.

Uganda Heart Institute Legal Framework

The Auditor-General noted that there was no Act or instrument creating Uganda Heart Institute as a government entity to help provide an enabling legal framework within which to discharge its functions. The accounting officer agreed with the observation and provided evidence that the matter had been followed up with the relevant offices namely, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health and the Solicitor General’s Office.
 
The committee observed that whereas Uganda Heart Institute lacked a legal instrument, a draft Bill has been presented to Cabinet to cure this anomaly. The committee also took note of the resolution by the former shareholders, Makerere University, Mulago Hospital, Ministry of Health and Uganda Heart Foundation to dissolve the company. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should fast-track the process of having a legal instrument in place and urgently table the Uganda Heart Institute Bill within one month on the date thereof.

Management and Operational Challenges at Uganda Heart Institute 

Audit observed that the Uganda Heart Institute become a vote on 1 July, 2009 and it had been established as a company limited by guarantee. The Uganda Heart Institute as a company had a Board of Governors that even recruited the personnel before Uganda Heart Institute became a vote. 

The Memorandum and Articles of Association did not spell out the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders which complicated matters and its relationship with other stakeholders: The Health Service Commission, Uganda Heart Institute Board & Public Service Commission. 

The accounting officer agreed with the auditor’s observation and submitted that the matter had been brought to the attention of the relevant Parliamentary Committee.

The committee observed that while Uganda Heart Institute was a body corporate and Government had already made a decision to grant it a vote status, the institute needed to harmonize its relationship with the Public Service Commission, Uganda Health Service Commission and Uganda Heart Institute Board.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to smoothen the operations of Uganda Heart Institute, there is an urgent need to bring together the stakeholders and define roles under a new legal framework, that is the Uganda Heart Institute Bill.  

Lack of an approved organizational structure

The Uganda Heart Institute operated throughout the year under review without an approved organizational structure which negatively impacted on the implementation of the institute’s activities. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. He submitted that the structure was eventfully approved in July 2011.

The committee observed that the creation of an organizational structure was a matter of law as the Company's Act provides the Board and the Annual General Meeting as the structures of the company and, therefore, government cannot direct a private company.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health should fast-track the process of having a legal instrument in place. The committee further recommends that government pursues the option of lifting the veil of incorporation with a view of turning Uganda Heart Institute limited into Uganda Heart Institute.

Lack of a Human Resources Department 

The Auditor-General observed that the institute does not have a Human Resource Management/Personnel Department with the responsibility of managing its human resource. This created a vacuum in the management of the personnel serving the institute. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and further submitted that the unit was eventually created by Ministry of Public Service and the relevant personnel had been recruited.

The committee observed that there seemed to be confusion in the entity as there was no way Public Service would be charged with the responsibility of setting up a human resource department in a private company.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health seeks advice from the Solicitor General to establish the relationship between the entity and other government departments.

Lack of a Corporate/ Strategic Plan

Audit observed that the Uganda Heart Institute did not have a corporate/strategic plan in place. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. At the time of meeting the accounting officer, a strategic plan for five years had been prepared and forwarded to Uganda Heart Institute Board.

Observation

The committee observed that the absence of a corporate strategic plan in the entity showed lack of policy direction of the entity as a strategic plan is the basis of a work plan and budget.

The committee recommends that the relevant parliamentary committee ensures that strategic plans from which annual plans are drawn should be a basis upon which resources are allocated to the entity.

Staff training arrangements

Audit reveals that Uganda Heart Institute did not have a training plan during the year under review, though the ministerial policy plan had Shs 21 million allocated for training. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. The committee observed that the absence  a staff training plan affected proper human resource development. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to put in place a staff training manual.

Irregular budget provision

Audit observed that there was a budget provision of Shs 150 million for construction of roads and bridges, which was not a core function of the institute. The accounting officer explained that the funds were used to procure a vehicle for the institute. 

The committee observed that the entity budgeted for roads and bridges which were not their mandate. The committee further observed that such conduct was intended to divert public funds from the priorities of the entity that is why it was used to procure a vehicle which was not within their work plan and budget, hence the diversion.

The committee observed that the parliamentary sectoral committee responsible for health did not carry out due diligence before recommending for budgetary approval of the entity. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for diversion of public funds.

The committee recommends that the relevant parliamentary sectoral committee should never approve activities that do not fall under the entity.

Lack of a procurement plan

The audit revealed that the entity did not have a procurement plan to guide its procurements during the year under review.

The accounting officer agreed with the audit observation. The committee observed that the absence of a procurement plan created haphazard procurement within the entity.

The committee recommends that the relevant parliamentary sectoral committee should never recommend approval of budgets of entities without procurement plans. 

Supply of drugs and medical sundries by National Medical Stores to Uganda Heart Institute

Audit revealed shortcomings in supply of essential drugs to the institute by National Medical Stores namely: Erratic supply of drugs, stock-outs of drugs, delays in supply of drugs, failure to supply some drugs and supply of wrong specifications of drugs and poor quality drugs.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and explained that the problem arose from a combination of stringent PPDA regulations that did not cater for their unique needs, and the budget provision that was not adequate to procure the required highly specialized drugs/sundries, implants and chemical laboratory reagents for the Heart Institute.

The committee observed that delayed supplies, stock-outs of drugs, inability to supply specialised drugs and medical sundries, supply of poor quality drugs and deliveries made to Uganda Heart Institute affected service delivery during the year under review.

The committee observes that whereas there is a National Drug Authority, an entity mandated to deal with quality of drugs, there is still supply of poor quality drugs.

The committee recommends that the National Drug Authority should strengthen inspection and testing of drugs imported and locally manufactured to ensure that they comply or meet international set standards. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health put in place a mechanism to harmonize requirements of the hospitals (user departments) and the procuring agency (National Medical Stores). Means should be devised to address the current challenges in the implementation of the policy on the procurement of medical drugs.

Non-existence of a national policy on cardiothoracic related ailments

Audit observed that the country did not have a national policy on cardiothoracic management to give direction on how the prevalence should be managed.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and further explained that the Ministry of Health was addressing the problem through the Non Communicable Disease Programme. 

The committee observed that the Non Communicable Disease Programme used to fill the gap of the non-existence of a policy on cardiothoracic related ailments was inadequate.

The committee recommends that a policy on cardiothoracic ailments should be put in place by the Ministry of Health.

Project accounts 

The Auditor-General reported that the project account No. 223214082 was opened by Mulago Hospital on behalf of Uganda Heart Institute. This was during the time when it was a department of Mulago Hospital Complex. Shillings 2 billion out of 4.8 billion (equivalent to $2.7 million) transferred by the Treasury to Mulago Hospital was not remitted to the Uganda Heart Institute account. 

The accounting officer explained that Mulago Hospital acknowledged receiving Shs 4,098,418,000 and not Shs 4,879,000,000 (Equivalent to $2.7 million). Shillings 2,818,986,703 was remitted to Uganda Heart Institute account while Shs 303,822,000 was paid directly to the UHI suppliers. The balance of Shs 975,609,297 was eventually remitted to the institute in December 2010.

The committee observed that the direct payment by Mulago of Shs 303,822,000 to the entity’s suppliers was irregular as the accounting officer did not prove supplies made to it to warrant such payment.

The committee further observed that Shs 975,609,297 allegedly eventually remitted to the entity in December 2010, six months after the end of the financial year, ought to have been returned to the Consolidated Fund as at 30 June 2010.

The committee recommends that a special audit be carried out to ascertain value-for-money for Shs 303,822,000 directly paid to the suppliers by Mulago Hospital for and on behalf of Uganda Heart Institute.

The committee further recommends that a forensic audit be carried out to establish value-for-money for Shs 975,609,297 received six months after the close of a financial year, transferred from Mulago to Uganda Heart Institute and Shs 780,582,000 transferred by the Treasury to Mulago, but reportedly not received by Mulago.

Uganda AIDS Commission

The Auditor-General observed that the Commission spent Shs 17, 241,118 above the approved amounts on various items without relevant authority.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that a letter was written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development seeking retrospective authority but no response. 

The committee observed that spending the money before getting the response from PS/ST was anomalous and defeated the purpose for which authority had been sought.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for abuse of budgetary control procedures.

Inappropriate structure of the entity

The audit observed that the staff structure had gaps that could not allow the commission to effectively handle the complex coordination activities entrusted to it at the national level.

The accounting officer also agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that corrective measures were taken as follows:

    i) A new Board of Commissioners for Uganda AIDS Commission was constituted in February 2011. 

    ii) A detailed Institutional Organization Development Review of Uganda AIDS Commission Board, Uganda AIDS Commission Secretariat and the National HIV/AIDS Response was undertaken and a review was carried out by external independent consultants. 

The review proposed new organisational and salary structures for Uganda AIDS Commission Secretariat which was approved by government. The structure increased staffing of Uganda AIDS Commission from 54 to 84 staff. 

Recruitment of staff to fill positions in the new organisational structure had already started but was limited by the wage bill ceiling.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that the accounting officer had taken positive steps to address the problem after the audit as evidenced above.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always carryout prompt reviews of the structure and make submissions to the board and subsequently to Public Service Commission for filling the vacant posts on time to enhance service delivery.

Capacity to manage donor funds

The Auditor-General observed that a firm had been hired to manage the funds of the entity by the development partners. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that the development partners hired a private firm to manage their funds on behalf of the commission citing inadequate capacity at the commission. The development partners undertook the above position and promised to reverse it only if the commission strengthened its finance and internal audit functions. 

The accounting officer further submitted that an institutional review had been carried out and critical positions especially in the finance and audit departments filled. An MOU to have the funds managed by the commission by 1st August 2012 had been planned. 

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that it is not good practice for the development partners to hire a consultant to manage the entities’ finances as this undermines the entities’ opportunities to develop their capacity to manage their finances.

The committee recommends that the entity strengthen its finance and audit functions.

Staffing position

The Auditor-General noted that the organisation structure provided for 54 posts but only 46 posts were filled. Audit further noted high staff turnover. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained corrective measures had been taken and the positions were filled.

Observation and recommendation

The committee noted that after the audit, efforts were undertaken to address the staffing levels but there was no effort to address the high turnover. 

The committee recommends that the recruitment be fast tracked to fill the staffing gap and efforts be made to address the high staff turnover.

Funding arrangements for the entity

The Auditor-General reported that only 60 per cent of the commission budget was financed directly by government and the balance by development partners which may result into sustainability challenges.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. The matter had been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, including exploring the possibility of creating a national AIDS fund.

Observation and recommendation

The committee noted the proposal mooted by the accounting officer and urges government to allocate more funds to the commission.

Undelivered generator

The Auditor-General noted that although the entity had fully paid Shs 27,531,638 to a firm for supply of a generator, this had remained undelivered. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. The matter was handed over to CIID to carry out detailed investigations.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that there was laxity on part of the accounting officer as this amounted to breach of contract.

The committee recommends that the issue be further investigated to ascertain the culpability of all those involved.

The committee further recommends that the matter be referred to the Attorney-General for civil action.  

The committee strongly recommends that the police follow up this matter to a logical conclusion.

Domestic arrears

The Auditor-General noted that the entity incurred domestic arrears amounting to Shs 169,489,700 in the financial year under review contrary to the requirements under the commitment control system.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that corrective measures had been put in place to avoid a reoccurrence.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that failure to adhere to commitment control systems may lead to litigation. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to adhere to government commitment control system as provided for in the financial regulations.

Assessment of delivery of output

The Auditor-General reported that management prepared progress reports only up to the third quarter of the financial year under review.
 
The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that the reports were delayed due to late implementation of the activities caused by the late release of funds in the fourth quarter. 

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that the late release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development affected the entity’s planned activities. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always release all funds voted for by Parliament to an entity on time as failure to do so could affect the entity’s planned activities.

Follow-up of the forensic audit report on the commission activities for the Financial Year 2008/09

The Auditor-General reported that Uganda AIDS Commission commissioned a forensic audit investigation on the commission activities for the period July 2008 to June 2009, but most recommendations of the audit were not implemented.

The accounting officer explained that a forensic audit was carried out by KPMG Certified Public Accountants on the request of the donors and recommendations made. 

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that despite money having been spent on a forensic audit, its recommendations were not acted on by the accounting officer.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to implement recommendations of the forensic audit.

The Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Regional HIV/AIDS Partnership Programme (IRAPP)

Inter account borrowings
 
The Auditor-General reported the several inter account borrowings of Shs 88,038,642 between IGAD and Government of Uganda accounts and observed that this could complicate the accountability process.

The accounting officer agreed with the audit that there was inter account borrowings and that all the money had been paid back.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that inter account borrowing complicates the audit trail hence curtailing accountability.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be cautioned to desist from carrying out inter account transfers with project funds as it could cause discontinuation of aid.

Lack of internal audit reviews

Audit observed that the internal audit department did not regularly conduct reviews of the internal control systems of the programme and issue periodic reports.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and explained that this was due to understaffing in the department at the time. 

Observation and recommendation
The committee observed that absence of internal audit reviews can facilitate fraud.

The committee recommends that there should be regular internal audit reviews and reports to avert possible fraud in the entity.

Non acknowledgement of URA remittances

Audit observed absence of URA acknowledgement receipts

The accounting officer agreed with the audit observation that receipts worth Shs4,825,653 and Shs1,433,266 from URA for PAYE and Withholding Tax respectively had not been received at the time of the audit. The receipts were eventually collected from URA and are available.
 
Observation and recommendation

The committee noted laxity on part of the accounting officer and recommends that the entity should promptly pick receipts from URA.

Expenditure lacking accountability/support documents

Audit was not provided with documents relating to expenditure amounting to Shs 12.5 million meant for per diem for participants for several workshops and expenditure amounting to Shs 5.1 million being funds for safari to Busia for the mini launch of the IGAD project.

The accounting officer also agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. The activity took place towards the end of the financial year and the supporting documents were not complete by the time of the audit. 

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that the Treasury accounting instructions require funds advanced to any officer for any activity to be accounted for within 60 days from the date of disbursement and the audit took place six months after the close of the financial year.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to account for Shs17.6 million advanced to various officers within the statutory time and made to recover the same.

Delayed release of funds

The Auditor-General reported that remittances to the districts and the implementing partners were supposed to be done in two equal instalments per year, but funds were remitted late.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. The release of funds to implementing partners was dependent on actual receipt of funds from donors by Uganda AIDS Commission. There was a delay in receipt of funds from the donors.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that remittance of funds by Uganda AIDS Commission was dependent on the receipt of funds from the development partners.

The committee recommends that release of funds should be streamlined so as not to affect planned activities of the respective entities.

Budget Analysis
Audit observed that there was no budgetary analysis during the period under review, and no vote book was maintained to track expenditures.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation that there was no vote book maintained in respect of IGAD/IRAPP funding at the time of the audit.

The committee observed that absence of budget analysis and vote book maintenance makes trucking of expenditure difficult.

The committee recommends that there should be timely budget analysis and maintenance of vote book in order to truck the entity’s expenditure.

Manual Accounting System

The Auditor-General reported that the programme did not have a computerized accounting system in its finance department. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. 

The committee observed that a computerized accounting system eases book keeping process. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should budget to obtain an appropriate accounting package to ease book keeping process.

Fixed Asset Management

The Auditor-General reported that the programme did not maintain a fixed assets register to record the fixed assets it owned.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation.

The committee recommends that absence of an asset register would lead to abuse of the entity’s assets.

The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to maintain an asset register.

Acting Appointment for the Position of IGAD Focal Person – Uganda

Auditor-General observed that the position of a project focal person responsible for the general coordination and direction of the project activities had remained without a substantive officer for 11 months.  

The accounting officer explained that the focal person for the project absconds and management temporarily appointed a staff to coordinate the IGAD activities. 

The committee observed that the absence of a permanent focal person of the project substantially affected the project performance.

The committee recommends that the entity should always comply with MOUs signed under projects as noncompliance impacts negatively on the entity’s capacity to undertake projects.

Maintenance of Records

The Auditor-General reported that the project maintained one set of records for the IGA funds and the UNHCR funded activities contrary to the MOU.

The accounting officer explained that this was a one of off transaction relating to care and maintenance for Kyaka II Refugee Camp. 

The committee observed that non maintenance of separate records of the project funds could hinder proper accountability and was contrary to the MOU.

The committee recommends that in future separate records should be kept by the accounting officer.

Inspections 

Busia Hospital, Busia District

Unutilized Funds: The Auditor-General reported that Shs 88,706,250 advanced to Busia District Local Government in June 2010 was still on the account at the time of audit.

The accounting officer explained that Shs 88, 706,250 was still lying in the bank account unutilized because:

i) The funds were channelled through the district collection account;  

ii) An independent account for the project funds had not been opened;  

iii) The bureaucracy involved in accessing funds from the district collection account, partly contributed to the delay in accessing and utilizing these funds;

iv) The district received these funds rather late, on 2 June 2010 and being the last month of the financial year, it was not possible to absorb the funds on time.

The committee observed that the funds were disbursed 28 days before the end of the financial year and would not be absorbed.

The committee recommends that there should be timely release and accountability of funds. 

Friends of Christ Revival Ministries

Discrepancy in Work Plans

Auditor-General observed that under the IRAPP Country work plans/budgets for 2010 held by Uganda AIDS Commission and IGAD work plan obtained from the implementing partner was paying monthly staff salaries amounting to Shs 1.7 million from the project budget but the activity had not been provided for under the project work plans and budget.
  
The accounting officer explained that the project focal person had discussed this shortcoming with implementers of the project, and it was agreed that only the activities in the work plan should be implemented and funds wrongly allocated be recovered from the next disbursement.

The committee noted the explanation and recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for the anomaly as it affects project goals and objectives. 

Amuru Hotspot 

Auditor-General observed that out of the total amount of Shs 45,584,000 advanced to the district for the implementation of planned activities for the first half of the year, only Shs 19, 366,600 had been spent by the time of audit.

 The accounting officer explained that the activities for the Amuru Hotspot started rather late, but the first allocation had eventually been spent, accounted for, and replenishment to their bank account for subsequent activities done.

The committee observed that Shs 26,217,400 was unspent at the close of the financial year which poses a risk of the activity not being implemented in the subsequent year as it falls outside the work plan.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always carry out timely implementation of the projects for effective service delivery.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted as presented. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson and the members of the Committee of Public Accounts for this insightful analysis of the report of the Auditor-General. 

Honourable members, as we did with the other report, I now also request that we defer debate on this subject until Thursday when the honourable members have also internalised this particular report. 

Can I now ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to make a statement on the issue that has been happening?

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, on 5 February 2015, hon. Paul Mwiru, MP Jinja Municipality, raised a concern on the alleged demolition of a government-owned commercial building on plot 60-62 Allidina Road, Jinja. Consequently, my ministry was asked to respond to this inquiry made in Parliament on that day.

The matter of the demolition of that building emanates from the fact that M/S Allidina Twegaise Traders Association and Isiko Ben sued Jinja Municipal Council and a company called Birus Property Services Ltd, seeking civil remedies among others, a permanent injunction restraining Jinja Municipal Council and M/S Birus Property Services Ltd from demolishing the building comprised in Plot 60-62 Allidina Road, Jinja.

The suit filed by M/S Allidina Twegaise Traders Association and Mr Isiko Ben was struck out for disclosing no cause of action against Jinja Municipal Council and M/S Birus Property Services Ltd. 

Consequently, a company called KMT Advocates acting on behalf of Jinja Municipal Council and M/S Birus Property Services Ltd requested for the enforcement of the ruling.

On the 10 January 2015, KMT Advocates on behalf of Jinja Municipal Council and M/S Birus Property Services Ltd further requested for the enforcement of the ruling and the Director of Operations Uganda Police, on receiving it, addressed it to Commandant Land Protection Police Unit. The Commandant Land Protection Police Unit, advised KMT Advocates to complete the process that would require police witness for the execution of the court orders.

Thus on the 12 January 2015, the Assistant Registrar  of the Jinja High Court granted an order arising out of the ruling to the effect that the plaintiff had been struck out for disclosing no cause of action against the M/S Allidina Twegaise Traders Association and Mr Ben Isiko.  

On the 13th day of January, the Commandant of the Land Protection Police Unit instructed the Regional Police Commander, Kiira Region in writing to the effect that:

    i) To serve court documents to the tenants as M/S Allidina Twegaise Traders Association and Mr Ben Isiko occupying the building comprising of plots 60 to 62 on Jinja Road.

    ii) To find out whether there were any other court orders in place.


    iii) To give them ample time to vacate the premises at will since there was nothing restraining Jinja Municipal Council and M/S Birus Property Services from demolishing the building.

The police was to act in liaison with other stakeholders like the Resident District Commissioner, the DISO and the local council leaders.

Mr Speaker, on receiving the instruction from the Commandant of the Land Protection Police Unit, the Regional Police Commander Kiira Region Jinja readdressed the said instructions to the District Police Commander Jinja for further management.

The DPC Jinja, the in charge OC Station Jinja and the Community Liaison Officer, Jinja and Sergeant Mutunga Kefa No.35413 informed the tenants about the court order and requested them to remove their properties.

The police commandant, the DPC Jinja and his group, having served the court documents on the tenants occupying the building comprising plots 60 to 62 Allidina Road Jinja, the Community Liaison Officer Jinja read the court order in English and interpreted it in Lusoga. They received no information to the contrary other than the tenants requesting to remove their properties.

Immediately the tenants were done with the removal of their properties as requested, the building was handed over to M/S Birus Property Services Limited. 

Mr Speaker, according to the police, it is indicated that the demolition of the building was carried out at around 10.00 hours when all the tenants had left. However, the demolition later sparked off complaints from the Jinja Municipality Member of Parliament, hon. Paul Mwiru and the Inspectorate of Government. 

The Inspectorate of Government is indicated to have received complaints from the Privatisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and from the sitting tenant that the property above belonging to government was unlawfully demolished by a group of people supported by the police, a story that was also published in the media.

It should be noted that the Police were not aware that the Inspectorate of Government had previously carried out an investigation in respect of the ownership of the property, which had established that there was fraud and irregular allocation and leasing of the same land to M/S Birus Property Services Limited by the Uganda Land Commission.

Therefore, the police agree with the Inspectorate of Government that if the lease granted to M/S Birus Property Services Limited and registered as LRV 4232 folio 15 was cancelled on the 2nd day of December 2014, then the property truly reverted to the Privatisation Unit.

The Police would also like to agree with the Inspectorate of Government that if the certificate of title issued to M/S Birus Property Services Limited was lawfully cancelled by the commissioner for land registration, then M/S Birus Property Services Limited is not the lawful owner of the property.

We note that in all this, the police operated legally in the spirit of upholding the rule of law by helping the court of law to enforce its order. Police do support crime because one of their cardinal functions is to keep law and order, prevent and investigate crimes.

The new development is that on the 5th day of February 2015, Mr Benedicto Isiko the chairperson of M/S Allidina Twegaise Traders Association informed His Excellency the President about the withdrawal of the petition against the illegal eviction by M/S Birus Property Services Limited on the ground that Mr Birungi Samson was ready to cooperate and compensate the tenants - but that is a different matter altogether.

In conclusion, as indicated above, the police operated legally in the spirit of upholding the rule of law by helping the courts of law to enforce court orders. In doing so, the police liaised with all government institutions to share information. Therefore, since the facts as put by the Office of the Inspector General of Government are now known, the activities on the disputed property need to be stopped as recommended by the IGG.

This is our response to the queries raised by hon. Paul Mwiru on the demolished property in Jinja.

5.56
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for the statement but I have a request to make.

The minister refers to documents but he has not laid any on Table. The minister refers to a suit which was struck out because the tenants had no locus when they went to court.

He does not talk about the demolition order and that is why I would implore him to lay a copy. The people in dispute about the property are saying that if there was a lawful court order, they would have no problem. There was none in respect of that; even the order you are referring to is not a demolition order but an order striking out the suit because they had no locus to bring this matter on behalf of government. But if the minister could lay these documents he is referring to on Table we would have had the benefit of accessing them. 

The minister does not mention that the police came to the place at 3.00 a.m. We are leaders, we would have asked the people to conduct themselves otherwise. I would have wished to hear from him about that issue because he is depicting me as if I do not know the time. He is aware that I reached there at that time; I saw the execution taking place at night and I wondered why they were doing it at night, if this was a lawful court order. I do not understand how the minister intended this House to proceed on that matter but otherwise, if we would only be privy to those documents, the complainants would want to look at those documents.

The minister makes mention of a withdrawal of this complaint before the President. He lays no copy about the same because the tenants have never written any such letter and yet they have written to everybody complaining about the same.

Finally, Mr Speaker, what the minister did not tell this House is that the IGG gave a stop order which the IGP was supposed to implement. However, the construction is going on even up to now. Even the IGP issued an order stopping the constructing. We even gave the RPC a copy but he said that he does not take orders from us; that he would wait for his boss. As we speak, the construction is going on and this makes it seem as if there is a lot of impunity in this country; that people cannot be helped.

Therefore, the minister needs to come out very boldly. We are not opposed to development but you must develop your property and not develop people’s property. I thought that should be put clear to this House.

5.59
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the first time, I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Paul Mwiru, over the actions by the Uganda Police in this matter. We were really dismayed and disappointed. Indeed like he has said, if this particular action was lawful and legal, they should not have executed it at night. The minister is talking of 10.00 a.m. but that weekend, I was in Iganga and radio stations began announcing at around 2.00 a.m. saying there was a state of emergency in Jinja. There was heavy deployment along the Jinja Central Market, where the building is. They said there was heavy deployment and they did not know what was happening. By 3.00 a.m., people began yelling in the background because the media was there and covering the incident.

The Uganda Police Force needs to protect its image in one way or another. This is because very early at around 5.00 a.m., Ambassador Zake Kibedi rang me saying, can you help me access the IGP or even the Minister of Internal Affairs? The way this thing is being handled is causing suspicion. Therefore, I would like to agree with the facts provided by hon. Paul Mwiru that there was some foul play in this particular incident and there was some suspicion on the way this building was being handed over or managed.

Therefore, hon. Minister, I would like to appeal to you that if at all these facts were just written by somebody who wanted to clear his image, your name is respected. I will leave it at that. I thank you.

6.01
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we debate matters particularly that regard our colleagues, I do not know to what extent we should go; but where a colleague gives very misleading information to this House, I find it strange. The minister said the demolition took place at 10.00 a.m. yet our colleague said that it was actually in the dead of the night. 

When we rise up here, I really feel much constrained to attack a colleague or friend yet they are the ones who are giving this misleading information. I would really implore our colleague that you are a minister but then when you are reporting to Parliament, report with some sincerity so that you can enable the House to reach a fair and just conclusion on such matters.

Having said that, I heard the minister – I do not know if I got him wrong – saying that it has since been established that the title acquired by the developer was cancelled in December and that indeed the IGG has moved to stop every development taking place. What the minister should have reported is the arrest of those who misled the police into destroying the market. This is because the police moved in – and I would like to agree with him that at that time the police thought that they were executing a lawful court order. 

However, if it was established that indeed the police was misled and accompanied a person to destroy a market without any kind of ownership, I thought the minister should have been reporting to us that having realised that mistake, they have indeed moved on the person who misled the police, for having caused the suffering. In addition, giving false information to police is a crime. 

Secondly, when you destroy people’s property to that magnitude, you should show that indeed you have now taken charge. You should be telling us what has so far been done to this developer.

Lastly, when did these maters arise? There is a directive from the IGG and another one from the Inspector General of Police and there seems not to be any action. Somebody is continuing in total defiance of these orders. What does the minister want us to do? Is there Government? Why are you quick to enforce a fictitious court order yet when later the lawful orders are being issued against the developer, you are adamant and totally ignore this? 

Hon. Minister, what do you want this Parliament to do when a department of Government – the IGG - issues a directive and it is ignored? What message would you like we, the people’s representatives, to take to the people? That against the weak ones, the IGG’s orders operate and to the powerful ones, they are ignored? Is there a sense in us upholding the institutions of this country when they are being ignored?

To that extent, Mr Speaker, I think the minister should really be telling us what he has done to those defying the orders of the IGG and those who misled the police into carrying out evictions when they knew they did not have the rights as their title had been cancelled by December 2014.

6.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been very closely associated with Jinja Municipal Council since 1983. To date, I am still a resident there and I am very familiar with the building that is in question and the people who have been affected by this eviction. 

What surprises me is the manner in which this eviction was carried out. Even if it is a legitimate eviction with a court order, the court bailiffs will always give you an opportunity to evacuate your property. However, in this particular case, the businessmen were not only evicted, but lost property because they were not given an opportunity.

This brings me to address myself to my senior brother, hon. James Baba. James, you have been a career diplomat. For that reason, I would like you to conduct yourself the way we know you as James Baba – the only career diplomat then from that region. You seem to be fighting other people’s war by not being yourself. I must be very candid to you, my senior brother. Here is a situation where – as hon. Ssekikubo said – you claimed you were misled. Granted; but on realising that you were taken for a ride, what did you do? 

Police is known to be the custodian of law and order. However, with what is happening in Jinja, if you went there now and any of those traders on the streets gets to know that you are a Member of Parliament, they will come to you and say, please just have a look at what is happening. They will make that sort of appeal to you and say, what is it that you as Parliament can do to ensure that there is rule of law in this country? 

I would like to appeal to the minister through you, Mr Speaker, that they need to go back to the drawing board and reinstate confidence in these people who have been displaced. The situation down there is very disappointing. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to appeal to the minister that he should reconsider the content of this report he has submitted to us. It is not factual; you are taking us for a ride. Please, the people on the ground are suffering. You have DPCs and zonal police officers in all corners of Jinja. Rely on them and crosscheck so that you get facts so that when responding to issues, which are being raised, you are factual and respected because you are on the ground. Otherwise, your title as a career diplomat is going down the drain. I do not know whether with your full knowledge or you are being used; that is food for thought for you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs is presenting a report from the ministry, which report is prepared together with his technical people within the ministry. Therefore, to attack him as an individual as if he prepared the report alone, I think is not proper and I do not think we are proceeding very well.

We would rather request or direct the minister to go back to the ministry so that his ministry prepares a report. Sometimes as an individual, you cannot be on the ground everywhere. However, you can call a meeting and you get assisted by a technical person. Therefore, for somebody to directly accuse the minister yet he is just an individual presenting a report from the ministry, I do not know whether we are procedurally moving on very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes messengers are killed also and yet they have nothing to do with the message. They are only delivering it. I think there are issues with this matter and maybe the minister should say something and we see how to proceed with it.

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): I want to thank the new Government Chief Whip for sympathising with me -(Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, hon. Paul Mwiru asked me to lay some documents on Table. I will lay down; the Civil Suit No.048 of 2013 in which this case was heard and which the Court ordered that the plaintiff B - and is hereby struck out of disclosing no cause of action, which was the basis of which the police moved there to act the way they did. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, what is the effect of the striking out of that case from Court? Did it grant anybody right to demolish any property?

MR JAMES BABA: It does not say so but it just says that those who are claiming rights over the arcade show no cause of action. This is what is contained in this judgement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, on what matter before court was the demolition ordered? 

MR JAMES BABA: I believe then the police moved to act knowing that those who are claiming rights over that property had no cause.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, a precedent has been made in this House where a statement made by a minister does not agree with the situation on the ground. This House has before taken a decision for the minister to go back and prepare a proper report to be presented to the House and in good faith. I remember some time ago, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business presented a report on the West Nile Border dispute. It caused a bit of contradiction between the report presented by the Deputy Prime Minister and members of Parliament who knew what was happening on the ground. The House decided that an opportunity should be given to the Second Deputy Prime Minister to go back and verify the facts and bring the report to Parliament. That was done.

In good faith, we should implore the minister to humble himself, since he is a career diplomat - I wish the Government Chief Whip could allow the minister to listen - since he is a career diplomat - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is retired.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: He could actually agree with the House that this report be taken back; he can polish it up and tune the ground properly and he then can inform the House from an informed position. Therefore, I am imploring the minister through you, Mr Speaker, that he should agree to take back the report and bring it when it is ready. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I asked the minister to speak, that was precisely what I hoped the minister was going to say because there are issues that have been raised that seem to be factual from both sides of the House. I was hoping that the minister would take the line and help the House so that we do not go into disagreement about this matter. 

Honourable minister.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, in light of what has just transpired – 10.00 a.m. against 3.00 a.m. -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless of course you are speaking in vernacular where 4 O’clock is actually 10.00 a.m. - cawa apar! (Laughter)

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I was properly schooled. I know the distinction but nevertheless, I agree with your guidance that we go back and try to properly synchronise these details and come back to report to the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, let us have that statement again. This time the statement from the minister on this particular matter will be on the Order Paper. Hon. Ekwau, on what matter do you rise?

MS EKWAU: On procedure, Mr Speaker. Thank you. In fact, it is connected to the same docket; something so appalling again happened in Jinja. Maybe we would get the benefit of - now that he is going to polish up the report, he should maybe come back on Tuesday with a report as well about the demise of people that were killed in the process of protesting what the crime preventers were doing. The police went on rampage, shot live bullets and in the process, some people were killed. Maybe this House could benefit out of the same issue as well.  If this issue is not handled well, it is likely to incite people who are already aggrieved. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware of the matter of the killing? 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I am just hearing this now. Can I just handle one issue at a time? Allow me handle this issue of the demolition of the property and once we have dealt with that, we can come to the next. Let us not mix issues because this is an important issue. Hon. Paul Mwiru raised it a number of times here and even when we were passing the Registration of Persons Bill, during committee stage, he rose up and that is why we are here today. Apparently, we needed to do more. Please, allow me to come back next week and we do this work.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, are you saying that you were not aware that people were shot last week in Jinja?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we deal with this matter at the time when the minister will be - we will put it on the Order Paper on Tuesday next week so that you can be given sufficient time and Members can handle it. Honourable members, you now know that this matter is coming back; you can find out also so that we can compare with what the minister has stated.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, before you reported to the House this afternoon - because you were wishing us a prosperous new year; we are meeting you in the House for the first time.

Before you reported, we had a very elaborate debate on evictions of people from government land and Members from both sides of the House were so concerned that these evictions seem to be driven by government officials and aided by military personnel and police officers. This matter was debated at length and I think it would be of interest now that every other day the issue of demolition of property and evictions seems to be taking a lot of our time.

I would like to implore you, Mr Speaker, that if a substantive minister could come and reply to the issues that were raised during that debate. This motion was moved by hon. Rosemary Seninde and I seconded the motion because you know, I am very concerned about the issue of land. It is very important that this Government comes to this House and clarifies these issues. Otherwise, every other day, we will be dealing with matters of this nature. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was this motion debated and passed? If it was debated and passed, were those prayers we are making now part of the prayers in the motion, in which case we will now ask the minister in terms of following up on that motion what has been done and what association is that so we can ask for an update of that? I need to crosscheck on that and then I will give guidance on that particular issue.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give additional information that last Thursday, as we adjourned, there was a commitment from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. They were supposed to come today and update us on most of the issues that were raised by Members. That is why the motion that was presented by hon. Seninde was not adopted. They said - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was stayed.

MR MUWUMA: Yes, it was stayed. There was debate but adoption was stayed until responses were made by the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, the only time that the response can be given is when the motion is brought back on the Order Paper? Wouldn’t that be proper? That would be the proper procedure. If the motion was not concluded, then the only housing or vehicle for debating to conclusion all those issues including the response of the minister would be that motion itself. 

We need to put it back on the Order Paper and then the minister will supply his responses to those issues and a decision will be taken on the motion [HON. MEMBER: “May I give information?”] - on the same thing? Maybe I need to consult with the people who were here so that I know.

MR OKEYOH: In line with the killings in Jinja and also the killings in Mbarara, would it be procedurally right for the minister, even if he does not appear on Tuesday, to give a statement to this country because the police was involved in killing people in Jinja and Mbarara.
 
The statement given by the RPC in Jinja was simply that they had given Shs 1,000,000 for burial. Then in Mbarara, they said they have given Shs 500,000 for burial. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this House and the country are told about these killings?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not a matter you pause to the Speaker in that manner. Procedurally, it is not right because it is not on the Order Paper. It is not a matter that is before the House. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this issue of the motion which we debated last week that was moved by hon. Seninde, the ruling at the time we adjourned, was that the motion will be concluded today on the submission of the statement by the minister. 

We came here and in fact we expected that to be on the Order Paper. It is our prayer that you direct the clerk that tomorrow or the day after, this matter should be on the Order Paper. The more it delays, the more we lose the points on the issues which we raised. 

There was a point where the minister was not ready to bring it. We would have concluded it today -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can we have this matter on the Order Paper tomorrow? 

MR OKUPA: It will be much appreciated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have this motion back to the House tomorrow afternoon and we conclude those issues. 

Remember also, there is the Prime Minister’s Question Time tomorrow. So, we will start with it then and by the time the Prime Minister’s Question Time comes at 3 O’clock, possibly we will have made some head way on it. Let us handle it this way.  

MR OKUPA: Most obliged. I also want to beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. I know this is on short notice but if you would allow me to bring to the attention of the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Internal Affairs to go and handle this matter.

This afternoon, I have received a number of calls and messages from Masindi Police Training School (PTS) from the boys who were supposed to be passed out. The pass out was supposed to be today. I was one of those who were invited but it has been pushed to 11th March, next week.

Today, the communication has come from a number of people who are undergoing training - they are 200 people. Allow me to read the message from these trainers. They allege that they have not been put on the list of the people that are going to be passed out. They are accusing one ACP called Halango to be the one who has removed their names from the list. I would like the former chairperson of the committee in this matter to follow this up because there is no way someone can spend all the nine or 12 months in the training and in the end, they are told they will not appear on the list on the last day. If the pass out had taken place last week, they were on the list.

The other issue is what they call the boom. Originally, as soon as you start the training, you start earning salary and by the time you conclude, you go with your boom. That has also been withdrawn from these people at the pass out. I remember we passed money here; there was a supplementary and these were the arguments that were being put forward. The former chairperson can help us with more information on this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you help us with these issues and have them resolved? Possibly, that is why it has been postponed.

MR JAMES BABA: It is true the Police recruits who were enlisted were refused from being passed out today, 3rd March. All of us were prepared to go there. I was in Mbale; I was going to go straight to Kibaale for that. Late yesterday, this arrangement was put off to next week, I think, arising out of His Excellency’s commitment because he is going to be the one passing them out. 

As to salaries for training, we have made this thing very clear right from the beginning; all police recruits, constables and cadets who go for training are given allowances. They will only be put on the payroll after they pass out. This is what is indicated in the budget and the IPFs for the police. They are only given allowances and training kits during training and they will put on the payroll on passing out. That is how we have been able to recruit large numbers in order to cater for this provision.

As to names being struck off the list, this is news to me. We are going there today to pass out all the 3,500 we recruited. If hon. Okupa can help me with more details on why these have been struck off, I will oblige. We do not want injustice to be done to anybody who has gone through this training for the past nine months. To be struck off in the last minute would be unfair and unjust. Let me have the details and then with my senior colleague, hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, we can sort it out. I thank you.

6.30
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for trying to shed some light on this issue, but this is a true fact being reflected. A very big number - over 125 people - have not been handed appointment letters whereas the others who were to pass out today have already received their appointment letters.

The argument is that these people joined with forged documents. However, there is a process that the trainees, before they enrol for the Kabalye Police Training School, are subjected to. Right from their districts where the interviews are done, there is a vetting process on papers. These people are vetted and enrolled into Kabalye Police Training School and they have trained for nine months and as they reach the final day, you tell them that over 150 were admitted on forged documents and will not get cleared. Where is the problem? This is what the minister should take interest in before next Tuesday when the other people are to be passed out. He should establish where the problem is. This is all that we have gathered.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give you, hon. Muwuma, is that when these police officers were recruited, very many of them who went with false documents were sent back home. In my district alone, I received five of them who were sent back. They claimed that they forged the documents. It means that the screening was done much earlier. If over 200 names have been screened again, there must be other factors other than that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we conclude this matter? The minister is going to investigate this matter and come back to us on this. We cannot continue on this matter. Two hundred or so have been affected and their names are not there; can you find out and let us know what the situation is?  Thank you.

Honourable members, we draw this to a close. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
