

Tuesday, 16 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As we are all aware, since last week, the last cycle of the budget process has been underway. A number of ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022 have already been laid before the House and referred to the relevant sectoral committees for scrutiny.

I expect that all the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to have submitted their policy statements to the office of the Clerk by 15 March 2021, which was yesterday, as required by Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure. Those which are ready are to be laid before this House.

I wish to further direct that all the MDAs should submit soft copies of their respective policy statements to the Clerk to Parliament through email at clerk@parliament.go.ug. This will enable the House expedite consideration of the budget process.

I wish also to remind the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to prepare for submission of alternative policy statements to Parliament by 29 March 2021. This is under the requirement of rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure.

I also would like to encourage the sectoral committees to work expeditiously because this is the final stretch of the Third Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament. As you know, it will be interrupted by the coming of the new Parliament. Therefore, whatever we have to do has to be done expeditiously. Thank you very much. 

There are a few matters of public interest.

2.13
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two matters of national concern. 

One, yesterday, fire gutted Kiziru Island in Mpunge on the shores of Koome Island and destroyed 280 houses together with all the property, and seven business shops. My humble request goes to the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to come and support the people who have nowhere to stay at the moment and have no food - you know the challenges that have been on the lake.

The other matter is about the pledge of Shs 20 billion that his Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni promised the private schools in Uganda. Three weeks back, I saw the Minister of Education and Sports with a small team of people calling themselves the association of private schools in Uganda. When I went to find out who they were, many districts including Mukono, Jinja, Kamuli, Mbale and Masaka were not represented. 

We have learnt that that money is soon going to be released to private schools. The Minister of Education and Sports should come and give this House clear guidance on how they are going to select private schools. We know that all the private schools in this country are fully registered by the Ministry of Education and Sports. There is no need to have a few people somewhere to represent the interests of the majority. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the first one, we will ask the Prime Minister to send a team to Koome Islands to establish the damage caused and to remedy the situation there.

Secondly, concerning the private schools and the Shs 20 billion, I saw the Minister of State for Sports, I do not know if he has something to say about it. The honourable member is complaining that the group that apparently met the minister last week did not represent the private schools in the country especially the upcountry schools. They would like to know how the upcountry schools fit in into the Shs 20 billion.

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that the ministry should be responding to about eight issues that were raised earlier on. If this particular subject matter raised by the honourable member is not part of the eight issues, we will extract the issue as raised and we will be able to provide an answer in written form by next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How far have you gone with the eight issues? Are you ready so that we can put you on the Order Paper?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the issues that are supposed to be responded to by the Minister of Education and Sports are part of today’s Order Paper and we are ready. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table - 

1. 	The annual report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2020; 
2. 	The Auditor-General’s annual performance report for the year ended June 2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both reports are sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

As I indicated earlier in the session, we may need to arrange for better management of the annual reports of the agencies, which have not been handled during these five sessions. 

2.19
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Fourth National Integrity Survey Report, 2019. 

THE SPEAKER: This is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

2.19
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, this is the presentation of the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021 to the Parliament of Uganda for approval.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to present to Parliament the proposed Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021 for your approval as required by Section 8(2) of the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Matters in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008.

THE SPEAKER: They will be examined by the committee; just lay the instrument on the Table. 

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report to the House. 

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the treasury memorandum on the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2016/2017 on 115 district local governments, 41 municipal councils and 63 town councils. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Public Accounts Committee (Local Governments) for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS

2.24
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the ministerial policy statement for votes 010, 121, 122, 125, 142, 152, 155, 160, 501 up to 850 for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for perusal and processing. 

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and processing. 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 130, Treasury Operations. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and processing. 

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development covering vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; and vote 156, Uganda Land Commission for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back. 

2.28
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Vote 102, the Electoral Commission; Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission; Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission; Vote 109, Law Development Centre; vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau; vote 133, the Directorate of Pubic Prosecutions; Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission; and the report for the Judiciary. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and processing.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs, for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on East African Community Affairs for perusal and processing. 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs for the Financial Year 2021/2022 covering the following: Vote 024, Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs; and Vote 22, Kampala Capital City Authority.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for perusal and expeditious processing. 

2.32
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the sector of local government, covering vote 011, Ministry of Local Government; Vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission; votes 501 up to 850 for all local governments of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and processing. 

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and processing. 

I know some sector ministers are not here but these are all Government documents; if the statements are there, they should be laid so that they can go to the committees.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 006, vote 201, vote 238 under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Foreign Affairs for perusal and report back. 

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back. 

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 017, Vote 123 and Vote 312 under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and processing.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for perusal and report back.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Inspectorate of Government, vote 103, for Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for processing. 

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Office of the President - Vote 001, Office of the President; Vote 002, State House; Vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission; Vote 112, Ethics and Integrity; Vote 158, Internal Security Organisation; Vote 159, External Security Organisation for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for perusal and report back.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2021/2022 for vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for Ministry of Internal Affairs - Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters; Vote 120, National Citizenship and Immigration Control; Vote 144, Uganda Police Force; Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service; Vote 305, Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory; Vote 309, National Identification and Registration Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for perusal and report back.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I hesitate to lay this one on the Table because it is not to the standard we agreed. 

THE SPEAKER: Which ministry is that that?

MR BAHATI: The same applies for National Environmental Management Authority. We shall sort out tomorrow. It was the Office of the Auditor-General. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. The one for the National Environment Management Authority is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources and Environment. We now need the one for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry which has not yet been submitted. 

Hon. Migadde, you can now raise your issue.

2.38
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We know very well that recently, Lake Victoria had massive death of fish resulting from a number of scientific factors. This majorly affected fish was Nile perch, which is the most commercial species that we have in the country.

As we talk, there is scarcity of fish in all parts of the country especially on Lake Victoria. The species that is currently there is the Synodontis, which is locally known as nkolongo. 

As far as our legal regime is concerned, the minister has not come before this Parliament to present regulations on how to harvest this specific type of fish. Currently, the fisheries protection force, headed by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), does not allow the locals to harvest this specific species, yet it is the only species on the lake. Therefore, currently, our people are really disadvantaged because the other species are not there.

We are not asking for food. We are not asking for beans or posho. Our people should be allowed to harvest this specific species because it is seasonal; it is there from March to July.

I do not know if colleagues really understand this specific species that I am talking about – the nkolongo. I have it. Madam Speaker, if you allow me –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is from the fishing community, so he understands those things better.

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, the fish looks like this. This is when it is mature. Being stunted does not mean that it is immature. We have had colleagues like hon. Nzoghu here, – (Laughter) – so we cannot say that the –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order!

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, we cannot bar them from accessing Parliament or from contesting simply because of their size.

My prayer is that our people should be allowed to harvest this fish because it is mature and it has been scientifically proven that this is the biggest they can grow. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker,

I do not know whether I have to lay this fish - (Laughter) -­ Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We do not have capacity to store that. The minister was here but I do not know whether she is still in the vicinity. Hon. Adoa, the minister of state in charge of that nkolongo, is here.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that some few months ago we had a challenge of Nile perch dying in our lakes, especially in Lake Victoria – on the side of Uganda.

However, it is not the first time we experienced that. In 2018, we had a similar incident on the side of Kenya and in 1983, we had the same problem, which was worse. Our scientists told us that the challenge is that our water got mixed with the swampy water. Nile perch needs clean water and cannot be able to breathe in cold, mixed warm water.

As a result, most of the Nile perch died. That is why tilapia and other species that hon. Migadde has showed us here is not dying. Unfortunately, if we use smaller sizes of nets to catch the said fish, it will affect the small, immature Nile perch. Therefore, I ask you, Madam Speaker and the House, to allow me consult with my technical people so that I go to Buvuma Islands to address that issue. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the one who represents the islands raise a supplementary issue. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister but this is specific. You see, the immature Nile perch is not normally in deep waters; it is normally along the shores. This specific species that we are talking about is not on the shores but in the deep waters. 

Actually, it is fished during day while Nile perch majorly moves at night. If you put up a net for Nile perch during the day, unless you are using hooks, you cannot harvest Nile perch using a net.

As the minister goes to the islands, she should not only consult the technical people because many of them may not know the practice; she should also consult members of the fishing community. Thank you very much.

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, that is why I requested the honourable member to give me time – maybe two weeks – then I will visit them. When you allow the fishing of this type of fish with smaller nets, it will definitely also affect the other one. It is not only at night that you catch Nile perch; that is not one hundred per cent true. 

You have already said the Nile perch is now scarce. The more we use smaller nets, the more we can even reduce it further. Please, give me two weeks and I will visit you and handle that issue.

On top of that, Madam Speaker, we now have our fish Bill before this Parliament. It has been referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Therefore, all these questions will be addressed soon. The law that we have was for 1951 and amended in 2011 and we have many challenges right now, which will be addressed by this new law.

I only ask the House to help me so that we sort this out. By the time we have the Eleventh Parliament, we should be having a law that will regulate this. As the honourable member said, during some months, this fish is there and in some months, it is not there. It would be good that in some months we suspend the fishing of the other one and we encourage this one. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, come back to us in a fortnight to update us on the fate of the nkolongo fish.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO AMEND THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO 101.88 MILLION EUROS FROM THE UK EXPORT FINANCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOLAR-POWERED IRRIGATION AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROJECT

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow up to €101.88 million from the UK Export Finance for the development of the Solar-Powered Irrigation and Water Supply Systems Project. I move under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda, in accordance with Article l59 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, l995 and Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, laid before Parliament a draft loan agreement for €101.88 million to be concluded between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the UK Export Finance for the Development of the Solar-Powered Irrigation and Water Supply Systems Project;

AWARE THAT on 17 November 2019, Parliament resolved to authorise the Government to borrow €101.88 million, as per the terms and conditions in the draft agreement from the UK Export Finance;

NOTING THAT there has been further discussion and review of the project with the creditor and implementing entity, the Ministry of Water and Environment, on the total cost of the project, reducing the total loan amount from €101.88 million to a total loan amount of €95,843,490.84, thereby reducing the loan burden by €6,036,509.16;

REALISING, therefore, that there is need to amend the total amount authorised by Parliament for this loan;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves to amend its resolution dated 17 September 2019 as follows:

Government is hereby authorised to borrow €95,843,490.84 in accordance with the terms and conditions stated in the loan agreement from UK Export Finance to finance the development of the Solar-Powered Irrigation and Water Supply Systems Project.”  I beg to move.

2.51
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The intention of the money is good and since we are just reviewing it downwards, I do not see a big problem.  
However, I would like to make a comment. Madam Speaker, when we speak about irrigation – Teso, as you are aware, is badly hit by drought every year. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The rule under which the minister responsible for borrowing is moving this motion requires a written notice, which we have not been briefed about as Parliament. I do not know whether there was written notice to the Speaker or the Clerk three days before.

The procedural issue I am raising is: in the absence of this notice, is the Parliament proceeding legally to consider a motion under a rule that the minister has not complied with?

2.53
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the reduction of the money to be borrowed. However, what is bothering me is that we have already borrowed money for hydropower generation, and we are producing more than what we use. In fact, some of that power is just wasted. 

I do not know where these irrigation schemes are. Wouldn’t it be better if we distributed this power to those areas so that we do not let power we have generated go to waste, yet we are borrowing more money to do the same thing that wasted power would have done? I wish the minister could tell us whether it is not possible to put more money in hydropower distribution to cover what we want to do with solar power. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We cannot go into the merits of the motion. However, I have just been shown a letter from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury directed to the Clerk, dated 10 March 2021. They gave the letter to everyone except me. This notice was given on 10 March 2021.

2.55
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion proposing reduction on two main grounds. 

One, time and again, we have complained about increased borrowing. Therefore, any proposal to reduce borrowing is good news to the House and the country. On that point, I support the motion.

Two, borrowing comes with associated costs in terms of interest. Here is a motion proposing that instead of borrowing to the tune of €101 million, we borrow €95 million and finance the difference from our own monies. What this means is that there is interest forgone as a result of reducing by €6 million. 

Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that this reduction does not adversely affect the objective of the project, I would like to appeal to colleagues in the House to support the minister’s motion and we adopt it as Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the history is that on 17 September 2020, this House approved a resolution for borrowing the sum of €101 million. What the minister is doing is now cutting this down by €6 million. Otherwise, we already passed it.

MR AOGON: Just like my other colleague said, I equally support the motion of the minister. However, the only issue I would like to address is the issue of observing the requirements of the Constitution in terms of balancing the country. Who is going to benefit from this loan? If this is about rural irrigation and solar schemes, is Teso on board? Those are the issues. Just make sure that Kumi is catered for. I thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: Accordingly, the sum is reduced by €6,036,509.16. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019

3.00
The deputy Attorney-General (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for a second time.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, as you recall, I introduced in this House the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 on 22 August 2019, when it was read for the first time. 

The objects of the Bill are:

a) 	To revise the monetary jurisdiction of the magistrates courts to conform to the Magistrates Courts Act.
b) 	To provide for a revocation of a grant of probate or letters of administration for want of jurisdiction.

Salient provisions of the Bill are:

a) 	The Bill makes provision for increasing the monetary jurisdiction of Magistrates Courts Grade I, from the maximum value of Shs 50,000 to the maximum value of Shs 20 million.

b) 	It increases the monetary jurisdiction of the Chief Magistrates Court from the maximum value of Shs 100,000 to the maximum value of Shs 50 million.

c) 	It amends the Act to provide that probate or letters of administration may be revoked or annulled for want of jurisdiction.

We have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with whom we have shared comments from interested parties as well as our own views. The committee also made comments and proposed amendments to the Bill to which we shall respond. Government also received proposals intended to further improve the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019”, be read a second time.

The Speaker: As I invite the chairperson of the committee, the Clerk should amend the title of the Bill on the Order Paper. The word, “amendment” is missing. 

Can I invite the chairperson to present the report of the committee.  Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? What about the vice-chairperson, hon. Bitangaro? Can we go to another item?

3.04
Ms Jovah Kamateeka (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am ready to submit the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 but not the one on small estates. My colleague, hon. Veronica Isala, is supposed to submit that on behalf of the chairperson.

The Speaker: Isn’t your report ready? Let us go to item No.6.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PROBATE RESEALING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.05
The deputy Attorney-General (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read a second time.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded, honourable members? 

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: Okay, it is seconded. Please, state the justification.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, as you recall, I introduced in this House, on 12 August 2019, the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019, when it was read for the first time. 

The objects of the Bill are:

a) 	To repeal any reference to the Commonwealth and British courts in the Act.
b) 	To align the Act to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The salient provisions in the Bill are as follows:

a) 	The Bill makes provision for a repeal of reference to the Commonwealth and British courts in the Act.

b) 	It makes provision for amendment of Section 3 to provide that probate and letters of administration granted by a court of a country other than Uganda shall only be resealed in a court in Uganda, where the relevant laws of that country would not be deemed contrary to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

We have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, with whom we have shared comments from interested parties and our own views. The committee also made comments and proposed amendments to the Bill, to which I shall respond. Government is also receptive to proposals intended to improve the Bill further.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

The Speaker: Honourable members, can I now invite the chairperson of the committee to present our report.

3.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019. Before I do so, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the report. 

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence to present an abridged version of the report as the full report is uploaded on the iPads.

On 12 August 2019, Government introduced in Parliament the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and the Bill was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Probate (Resealing) Act, Cap. 160, in order to repeal any reference to the Commonwealth and British Courts in the Act and to align the Act to the Constitution of Uganda. Madam Speaker, the committee interacted with relevant stakeholders and now we have the report.

The Probate (Resealing) Act is the law that governs the enforcement of letters of administration and probate granted in any part of the Commonwealth in any foreign country, or a British court in a foreign country and their enforcement in Uganda.

When letters of administration or probate are granted in any part of the Commonwealth in any foreign country, or a British court in a foreign country, an interested person may produce the letters or probate, deposit with the High Court a copy of the letters or probate and have them sealed with the seal of the High Court. Thereupon shall be of the like force and effect and have the same operation in Uganda as if granted by that court.

Before letters or probate can be enforced, Section 3 of the Act requires that the person must pay duty for the probate or in case of letters of administration, provide security in the amount to cover the property, if any, in Uganda to which the letters of administration relate, and prove the domicile of the deceased person.

Section 4 of the Act also allows court to, if it thinks fit, on the application of any creditor, require before sealing that adequate security be given for the payment of debts due from the estate to creditors residing in Uganda.

The Probate (Resealing) Act, Cap. 160, came into force on 30 May 1936. Due to passage of time, some aspects of it have become outdated, especially in light of the Constitution, Government policies, emerging international best practices and the legal environment. The Probate (Resealing) Act has been found, over the years, to be limited in scope, only applying to the enforcement of letters of administration and probate granted in any part of the Commonwealth or a British court in a foreign country.

The committee notes that the limitation has meant that letters or probate granted by a court other than a court of a country belonging to the Commonwealth cannot be enforced in Uganda. This limitation means that Ugandans in those countries cannot benefit from the provisions of this Act and succession laws generally.

This Act, therefore, needs to be expanded to reflect Uganda’s position in the global world and reflect the fact that a Ugandan can stay or obtain letters or probate from any country in the world and not face difficulty in enforcing the same in Uganda under the provisions of the Probate (Resealing) Act.

This Bill, therefore, seeks to remove the limitation inherent in the Act in order to give it broader application. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to report on some salient areas of the Bill.

Short Title and Commencement

The Bill proposes in clause 1 to provide for the short title and commencement of the Bill once enacted into law.

The Bill proposes that the Bill, once enacted into law, is to be cited as the Probate (Resealing) (Amendment) Act, 2019 and it will come into force on the date of publication in the Gazette.

The committee observes that this provision is redundant in light of sections 3, 14 and 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act. On commencement of the Bill, Section 14 of the Acts of Parliament Act requires that an Act commences on the date as is provided in or under the Act, or where no date is provided, the date of its publication as notified in the Gazette.

The committee recommends that Clause 1 is deleted with the justification that it is redundant in light of sections 14 and 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act, Cap. 2.

Interpretation of Specified Words used in the Act

The Bill proposes in Clause 2 to amend Section 1 of the principal Act by deleting the definition of the words, “British court in a foreign country” and “probate and letters of administration”.

The committee has examined the proposal by the Bill and whereas it is in agreement that in light of the amendments made to the principal Act, the inclusion of the words, “British court in a foreign country” is redundant. The proposal to delete the definition of the words, “probate and letters of administration” should therefore be rejected.

The committee observes that deleting the words, “probate and letters of administration” will create a lacuna as to the extent of the principal Act, considering that the principal Act deals with the sealing of probate and letters of administration. The committee notes that the object of the amendment to the principal Act is to expand the application of the Act beyond countries in the Commonwealth. 

The committee further notes that whereas countries in the Commonwealth use the terminology, “probate or letters of administration” to refer to the authority given to a person by court to administer the estate of a deceased person, countries applying the civil law system use a different terminology. 

The committee is of the considered opinion that the definition should be amended to reflect the new broader application of the Act instead of being deleted as proposed. Therefore, clause 2 should stand part of the Bill albeit the definition of the word, “probate and letters of administration” is made broader in application instead of being deleted.

Application of the Principal Act beyond Commonwealth Countries

The Bill proposes to amend Section 2 of the principal Act by deleting the words, “of probate in any part of the Commonwealth in any foreign country, or a British court in a foreign country, has either before or after the passing of this Act granted” and substitute it with the following words: “of any country other than Uganda, grants”.

The committee thinks that this amendment should be supported since it expands the Act beyond the countries that are in the Commonwealth and probate issued from British courts. The expansion of the provisions of the Act will result in the enforcement of probate and letters from any country in the world. Needless to say, this is practical and reasonable since it takes into account the fact that a Ugandan or a person domiciled in Uganda may have property in Uganda as well as in any other country in the world. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends for the adoption of Clause 3 of the Bill.

4) Conditions to be fulfilled before resealing of probate or letters

Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 3 of the principal Act by inserting a new sub-clause (2) to require that letters and probate cannot be resealed in Uganda unless the relevant laws of the country that issued them are in conformity with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The committee has considered the amendment and is of the considered view that the proposed amendment is ambiguous in so far as it requires the laws of another country to conform to our Constitution. The Constitution of Uganda does not make provision for the resealing of letters and probate in Uganda. 

The committee is also aware that laws of a country are made with the uniqueness of that country in mind. So, to require another country’s law to conform to our Constitution yet the same does not guide on the resealing of probate or letters granted by a foreign court is ambiguous. 

The committee is of the considered opinion, therefore, that this amendment should be rejected by amending Clause 3 to ensure that countries provide reciprocal enforcement of letters or probate issued by courts in Uganda before they can have letters or probate issued by that particular country enforced in Uganda. 

In conclusion, the committee agrees that the Probate Resealing Act, Cap 160 is due for amendment as explained above. This House should therefore have the Bill read for the second time and passed. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. You are free to comment on the proposals. 

3.20
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Often, it is very difficult for people to process ownership of assets abroad. I do feel this amendment comes in handy and at the right time so that it eases and smoothens the process. 

This matter touches on the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. We cannot have laws which are not aligned to the Constitution. Therefore, what we are doing is something that we need to do. I would not expect any Member to rise up and delay this Bill. It is a matter of urgency and we should process this law as quickly as possible. 

Not everybody in the world belongs to the Commonwealth. There are countries outside the Commonwealth but if we limit ourselves to the Commonwealth – I am talking about the British law - what of those people that have access to places which are not within the Commonwealth? How do we smoothen their ability to own property or administer estates outside this country? Because of that, I really want to agree with the committee. 

This Bill is brief. We can hit it and conclude it today and it is passed into law. 

On probate and letters of administration, I know somebody has been talking about the English that we use in the Commonwealth and the language used outside the Commonwealth. I think it is found necessary that we align it - we find something better so that it is smoother for us to operate when someone wants to get the resealing of probate. 

I, therefore, stand here to urge the House not to waste any time but to support and agree with our committee. They have done a good job. Let us go straight away to the committee stage, if you agree with me, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit. 

3.23
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

Looking at the committee report, there are two things that we needed to align. Since 1930 to date, 2021, the Act as it is is obsolete. The amendments are in line with the Constitution. Section 3, as was proposed by the Bill, has also been amended by the committee which puts it in proper alignment with the Constitution. I think we should not waste time debating this. Everything is in order. Let us move to another Bill and align this to the Constitution. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there are no other comments, I put the question that the Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the committee stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PROBATE RESEALING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 1 be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chair, for section 1, we do propose that paragraph (a) be repealed and that in (b), we substitute the words, “probate and letters of administration” with the following: 
“‘probate’ or ‘letters of administration’ include any instrument having in any country other than Uganda the same effect given to probate or letters of administration under the Succession Act Cap. 162, the Administration of Estates (Small Estate) (Special Provisions) Act, Cap. 156 and the Estate of Missing Persons (Management) Act, Cap. 159.”

The justification is that the proposal to delete the definition of the words “probate and letters of administration” will leave a lacuna in the law as regards the instruments that the law applies to, considering that the words “probate and letters of administration” have universal understanding and application in Commonwealth countries and not in all other countries. 

Also, it is a consequential amendment arising from expansion of the application of the law from only applying to Commonwealth countries to apply to all countries of the world.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose that:

a) 	We substitute for the proposed subsection (2) the following: “Probate or letters of administration granted by a court of a country other than Uganda shall only be resealed in a court in Uganda where the relevant law under which the letters of administration or probate was granted is not contrary to the Succession Act, Cap. 162, the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act, Cap. 156 or the Estate of Missing Persons (Management) Act Cap. 159.”

b) 	We insert the following subsections -(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we reject the proposed amendment. Our reason is that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 31, recognises marriage between a man and a woman and prohibits same-sex marriage.

The proposal in the Bill would allow the courts to only recognise and reseal letters of administration or probate granted to a spouse married under the laws recognised in Uganda. This would give the courts discretion whether or not to recognise a spouse of a same-sex marriage and therefore, process his or her probate and letters of administration under the Act.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable minister, the Bill we are talking about is in respect of persons who have passed on and on whose estates either letters of administration have been issued or grant of probate if a will existed. Where does the question of marriage now arise when the people have since passed on?

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, my senior colleague. Upon application for letters of administration or a grant of probate, one is required to indicate the relationship with the deceased whose property he intends to administer. If I am a man and I am indicating that the deceased is my husband and that is not recognisable in a country in which I intend to enforce the grant - we need not be ambiguous in law as to leave a loophole for such to be recognised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, first, the probate would have been granted in another country. The other person is seeking to enforce it in Uganda. This is what this Bill is about. The letters are already granted in another country; they just want to be able to use it here.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable Chairperson, we are ready to concede because in Uganda, we do not recognise same-sex marriages. Therefore, if we are to honour these letters of administration or probate, it should be a recognised marriage between man and woman. 

As the Attorney-General has said, if you are a man and you come to Uganda and say, “this was my wife”, yet he was a man, Uganda should not be able to honour those letters.

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable Chairperson, probate and letters of administration may not necessarily be issued to a widow or a widower. It could be a brother, creditor or anybody else.

Trying to connect this Bill to issues of marriage, in my view, is going beyond what the Bill seeks to do. Otherwise, you will absolutely have no enforcement of the probate and resealing Act because you are now lifting veils in things that do not concern you.

Your interest is: has the court that issued the probate of the will or letters of administration competence to issue them? If it is competent to issue, do we have a reciprocal arrangement here? You do not have to concern yourself when it is a matter of letters of administration or probate on whether people were married under same-sex marriage or something else.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us not deviate into those issues. The letter of administration has been granted maybe in Germany, the person is only saying “I am coming to Uganda, can Uganda allow me to reseal here and operate?” That is all and it has nothing to do with marriage. It could be a child -

MR KAFUZI: Madam Chairperson, we beg to concede. We need not look beyond how the grant was made and look at how it should be administered in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for the partner states of the East African Community, here they are talking about Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania but I know that for over 10 years now, the community has six states. Can anyone explain why you are excluding Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan? The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has applied but I do not think they have been admitted. 

MS KAMATEEKA: That was a serious omission, Madam Chairperson. We will gladly add them. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We add the republics of Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan because they are already members of the East African Community. The Democratic Republic of Congo has just applied but they have not yet been admitted.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, we also wanted to insert two subsections; one was (a) and the second one provides for the East African countries as follows: “Probate or letters of administration granted by a court or a country other than Uganda shall only be resealed in Uganda where the relevant laws of that country allow the enforcement, within that country, of letters of administration or probate obtained in the courts of law in Uganda.”

Sub-section (3) shall not apply to a partner state of East African Community. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Sorry, I did not conclude. 

“(4) Sub-section (3) shall not apply to a partner state of the East African Community.

(5) A partner state of the East African Community means the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania and any other country granted membership to the Community under Article 3 of the Treaty Establishing the East African Community.”

The justification is:

    1. To require a country to give reciprocal enforcement of letters and probate issued by courts of law in Uganda;

    2. To require the resealing of probate or letters only where the relevant law under which the letters of administration or probate was granted is not contrary to the Succession Act, Cap. 162, the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act; 

    3. To apply the application of the Act to partner states of the East African Community; and

    4. For the completeness to define “partner states of the East African Community”.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you want a proviso. What you are talking about is a proviso. What you are calling a new section is, I think, a proviso after sub-section (3).

MS KAMATEEKA: Yes, Madam Chairperson.
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: Just restate it - provided that a, b, c, d.

MS KAMATEEKA: Sub-section (3) says, “Probate or letters of administration granted by a court of a country other than Uganda shall only be received in Uganda where the relevant laws of that country allow the enforcement within that country of letters of administration or probate obtained in courts of law in Uganda”.

Subsection (4) says, “Section 3 shall not apply to a partner state of the East African Community.”

Subsection (5) says, “A partner state of the East African Community means the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania and any other country granted membership to the Community under Article 3 of the Treaty Establishing the East African Community.”

Indeed, it is a proviso.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The numbering will be done by the drafts people. They will have to change the numbering. I put the question.

MR KAFUUZI: I had hoped we would go simultaneously through the numbering but since she has gone through them all, I have to read all the responses at once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to respond to the proposal?

MR KAFUUZI: Yes; I want to respond to the proposal.

Firstly, we reject the amendment. The proposed amendment will deny beneficiaries of probate or letters of administration granted abroad access to the estate where the deceased owner resided in a country that does not have a reciprocal arrangement with the Government of Uganda.

Secondly, the Act does not specify the countries with which Uganda has such a reciprocal arrangement that would recognise probate and letters of administration issued by courts in Uganda, as is the case with the Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgements Act, Cap. 21.

The implication of this provision is that one can obtain letters of administration from Kenya and bring them to the land registry in Uganda for registration without first undergoing the probate resealing procedure. Such a provision has to first be agreed to by the partner states of the East African Community.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable minister. I agree with you in respect of resealing of probates granted by the East African partner states. However, in respect of reciprocity, how will you determine the validity of a probate or letters of administration if the country that has issued it has no connection whatsoever with Uganda, be it at diplomatic level or reciprocal enforcement level? 

Why would you want it to be so wide open that anybody can go to a country that has just gotten independence, purportedly get letters of administration from there, and come and enforce them here? Why don’t you want reciprocity to be included in the Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this law was simpler because we are all part of the Commonwealth but what we are removing is the Commonwealth. Now, if I have been living in Brazil and I die, I issued a will and my relatives want to – (Interruption) – 

I was saying that this Bill is dealing with removing the structure of the Commonwealth and opening it up. However, if you are now going to say we must have relations with you and have reciprocal enforcement of judgements, what about a country like Brazil, for instance? 

Suppose a Ugandan who has been living there dies and a will is issued for handling the properties in Brazil and in Uganda, then you say, “You are in Brazil, you are speaking Spanish; we do not know what you are doing so we cannot reseal your probate here”.

MR AOGON: First, Madam Chairperson, I think the intention of the Bill is to widen the scope and we should not again twist around and shoot our own feet. If we are after widening the scope, maybe let us talk about the mechanisms that can be placed. That can maybe be done as something, which is administrative. We can always work with other countries.

If we now say we are going to go back to the same thing of the Commonwealth, what will happen to – like you have put it – Brazil, for instance? I think those who administer these probates have a mechanism of managing what happens outside this country, to establish authenticity and make sure that everything is okay. 

I stand with the committee position. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, we were mindful of our laws being abused. For example, we have seen these issues of rice in the East African Community. However, given the way you have put it, it is okay; we can open it up and then maybe later, if it is necessary, the minister can issue guidelines as to how we can deal with other states. I beg to submit.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, after consultation, I concede to the committee chairperson’s proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I still think that already, the East African Community has got six countries. We are making a law when we are already six. Here, we are only talking about three. Why don’t we put the countries which are there and then the other allegiance with those who might join us?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the proviso says the other countries that have been admitted under the protocol. You talked about the drafts person; that can be redone. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying, honourable members, is that these laws, after we make them, are available to our counterparts in the community. So, you can imagine our friends in Burundi saying that we made a law but left them out; they are already part of the community. 

The ones we expect will be dealt with by the other leg of any other country granted membership in the community. Some of these things may look simple but may cause diplomatic issues.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, it is in our proposed No. 5 which gives what a partner state of the East African Community means – Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and any other country granted membership to the East African Community -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for the future, yes, but these people are already here.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, we shall add Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan.

THE CHAIRPERSON: After that, “any other country granted membership”.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, that definition is in the treaty. What they have done is to co-opt the definition in the treaty. At the time the treaty was made, only those three countries were partner states. Therefore, it is not that they are excluding those countries. It is only that the treaty, as it was then, described the partner states as those three plus others that have come in since the treaty was promulgated. Therefore, if we are to mention Rwanda, Burundi and these other countries that have come in, we may have to do away with the definition in the treaty. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I do not see the danger in mentioning them and we go back and redefine the treaty. That would be the best route to take. Rwanda and Burundi would be happy to hear their names in there. As long as there is no damage created, why don’t we do it?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I buy your proposal wholly and I would like to depart from my senior colleague, Counsel Winfred Niwagaba’s. The intention is not to adopt the definition but to make a law that conforms to what the treaty says. This law is coming to Parliament some years after the treaty is in force and several other partner states have been brought on board.

Therefore, there is no reason why we should not mention them and let the other part of the provision of the definition continue running. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended to include the existing states of the East African Community.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.50
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.51
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and amended it as follows: Clause 1 is deleted, Clause 2 amended, Clause 3 passed without amendment and Clause 4 passed with amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.51
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PROBATE RESEALING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.52
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PROBATE RESEALING (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I would like to take the opportunity to thank you, the honourable minister and members as well as members of the committee for passing this Bill. Thank you very much. As you can see, it was a long time since this law came into existence in 1936.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, allow me to say thank you to you specifically, and to members of this House, for the guidance. You know none of us is superhuman. We are learning as we move on and I believe whatever we are doing is in good faith for the good of our country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We know we have overloaded you during this session but we thank you for delivering again in the estates sector. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATOR GENERAL’S (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.55
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administration of the -

THE SPEAKER: Administrator General’s –

MR KAFUUZI: Pardon me, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Administrator General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for a second time. 

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: Please, justify your motion.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, as you recall, I introduced – you will forgive me; these papers are not matching. I beg for more time.

The Speaker: As the minister is still organising himself – the minister has many Bills - can I invite the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Aren’t they here? Can I ask hon. Opendi to assist the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

3.59
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (mineral development) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

The Speaker: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for processing and report back. Let us proceed to item No. 8. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ESTATES OF MISSING PERSONS (MANAGEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.00
The deputy Attorney-General (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for a second time.

The Speaker: Honourable members, is the motion seconded.  

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: Yes, it has been seconded. Justify.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, as you recall, I introduced in this House, on 12 August 2019, the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019, when it was read for the first time.

The objects of the Bill are to:

a) 	Align the age of a child in the Act to the age in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
b) 	Provide for the rights of children with disabilities.
c) 	Revise the monetary jurisdiction of magistrates courts to conform to the Magistrates Courts Act, Cap. 16.

Salient provisions of the Bill are as follows:

a) 	The Bill makes provision for the amendment of the age of a minor from 21 years to 18 years.

b) 	Inclusion of the category of dependant relatives of a missing person, children who are above 18 years of age but below 21 years of age who are still in school and are not married, and a child with disabilities.

c) 	Revision of monetary jurisdiction of the magistrates courts to conform to the Magistrates Courts Act, Cap. 16.   

We have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with whom we have shared comments from interested parties and our own views. The committee also made comments and proposed amendments to the Bill to which we shall respond. Government is also in receipt of proposals intended to improve the Bill.

I beg to move that this Bill entitled, “The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” now be read for a second time.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. Can we hear the report of the committee.

4.03
Ms veronica isala (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present the report of the committee on the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

Before I read the report, I would like to lay it on the Table. It is signed by several members. I would like to also inform you that the minutes were done concurrently, covering all the five Bills, starting with the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018. They are all consolidated in one.

I would like to lay on the Table the report of the committee on the Bill that I am about to present.

Allow me to also seek your indulgence and read the abridged copy of the report. For detailed analysis, I would like to refer Members to the main report, which has been uploaded on the intranet. 

On 12 August 2019, the Government introduced in Parliament the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019. It was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The Bill seeks to amend the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act, Cap. 159, to align the age of the child in the Act to that age in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

To provide for the rights of children with disabilities and to revise the monetary jurisdiction of the magistrates courts to conform to the Magistrate Courts Act, Cap. 16.

Madam Speaker, for the methodology, the committee sought and received opinions from –

a) 	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
b) 	The Attorney-General
c) 	The Uganda Law Reform Commission
d) 	The Equal Opportunities Commission
e) 	The Justice Centre Uganda
f) 	The Foundation for Human Rights Initiative 

In Uganda, the administration of estates of missing persons is governed by the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act, Cap. 159. Under the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act, Cap. 159, Section 1(f) defines a missing person to mean a person who disappears from Uganda, without making provision for the administration of his or her estate, and investigations have shown that his or her whereabouts are not known.

Section 2 of the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act requires that where a person is a missing person without making provision for the administration of his or her estate, or the maintenance of his or her dependent relatives, if any, and is not heard of within six months, any relative of the missing person, with the concurrence of the family, may apply to court for a management order.

The Act lists the courts that have jurisdiction over estates of missing persons and these include:

(a) 	A Magistrate Grade II, where the total value of the estate does not exceed Shs 10,000;

(b) 	A Magistrate Grade I, where the total value of the estate exceeds Shs 10,000 but does not exceed Shs 50,000;

(c) 	A Chief Magistrate, where the total value of the estate exceeds Shs 50,000 but does not exceed Shs 100,000; or

(d) 	The High Court, where the value of the estate exceeds one Shs 100,000.

Need for the Bill

It is important to note that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act is almost 48 years old, having commenced on 1 October 1973. Due to the passage of time, some aspects of it have become outdated, especially in light of the Constitution, Government policies, emerging international best practices and the legal environment. 

The committee notes that the amendment of the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act is premised on the need to expand the pecuniary jurisdiction of the magistrates courts in granting management orders in estates of missing persons, and to align the jurisdiction with the jurisdiction granted to such courts under the Magistrates Courts Act, Cap. 16.

Furthermore, the values prescribed in Section 3 of the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act have, with the passage of time, been eroded by inflation, making the provisions redundant and ineffective. For instance, the provision requires a missing person’s estate of a value above Shs 100,000 to apply to the High Court for a management order. 

The committee notes that this is a small estate and the cost of obtaining a management order from the High Court might exhaust the beneficial value of the estate.

The committee is of the considered opinion that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act is still a relevant law that makes provision for the management of the estate of a missing person and the provision of welfare to persons in that estate.

The committee notes that where a person disappears, a number of problems arise, including the provision of welfare for the family, the need to take care of the missing person's property, business interests as well as meeting that person's obligations to his or her creditors.

It can, therefore, be argued that the missing person's Act is applicable to date because the mischief that the law set out to cure is still prevalent. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to report on some of the salient areas of the Bill. The principle that was stated in the short title was articulated in the probate. So, I will not repeat it. All I want to say is that the Acts of Parliament Act takes care of the short title amendment. I will now move to dependent relatives.

Dependent Relatives

The Bill proposes to amend Section 1 of the principal Act by amending the definition of the words, “dependent relative”, as well as imposing restrictions on who may be appointed manager of the estate.

The committee considers this proposal to be ambiguous, especially the inclusion of the missing person’s children, among his or relatives and it is likely to create confusion. Currently, Section 1(1)(b) of the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act defines a dependent relative as follows:

“(i) 	a wife, a husband, a son or daughter under eighteen years of age or daughter of or above eighteen years of age who is wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person;

(ii) 	a parent, a brother or sister, a grandparent or grandchild, who, on the date when a missing person disappeared, was wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person for the provision of the ordinary necessities of life suitable to a person of his or her station.”

The above provision wrongly assumes that a child of a missing person is at the same time a relative of that person. A child of a missing person is a lineal descendant and not a dependent relative. 

It is important to note that the same definition of dependent relative as contained in the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act is similar to the one contained in the Succession Act, which we dealt with but did not complete.

The committee, however, notes that Government, in the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019, intends to amend this definition by restricting – let me jump this and move to (3) - jurisdiction of court.

Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 3 by –

(a) 	exempting magistrates grade II from handling matters of missing persons.
(b) 	expanding the value of the estate that can be handled by a magistrate grade I and chief magistrate.
(c) 	Repealing the reference to the High Court in the provision. 

The committee finds this amendment, especially the proposal to remove the magistrate grade II as well as expanding the value of the estates’ magistrate to have jurisdiction over such matters, to be in line with the Magistrates Court Act, Cap. 16.

The committee notes that magistrates grade II are being phased out, making the reference to such a court under the principal Act redundant. 

It should be noted that the pecuniary jurisdiction of magistrates courts was revised in 2007 through an amendment to Section 207 of the Magistrates Courts Act and the Administration of Small Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment of Jurisdiction Magistrates Courts) Order, S.I 20 and 21 of 2009. Through that amendment, a chief magistrate’s jurisdiction was increased from Shs 5 million to Shs 50 million. The magistrates grade I was increased from Shs 2 million to Shs 20 million. 

The committee, therefore, supports the amendment since it will harmonise the provisions of the principal Act with the Magistrates Courts Act, making the law books easy to use. 

The committee, however, notes that the proposal to express the jurisdiction of court in Uganda shillings does not shield the provisions from inflation. One of the shortcomings of Section 3 of the Act is its failure to shield the jurisdiction of court from inflation and changes of value of money over time. 

The committee observes that one of the ways of shielding a provision from inflation is by expressing it in currency points and not in Uganda shillings. This is because the value of a currency point is expressed and changes with changes in the time value for money, making the value remain consistent. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends for the adoption of Clause 3 of the Bill except that the provision should express the values in currency points.

Harmonisation with other Succession Laws

The committee has examined the Bill and the principal Act and found that the Act is not in harmony with the other succession laws. 

Succession laws in Uganda include the Succession Act, the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act, the Probate Resealing Act – which we have just considered - the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act, and the Administrator General’s Act. 

The committee notes that laws must be in harmony if the succession law books of Uganda are to be effective. For instance, there is disharmony with the use of certain words like “dependent relatives” and the provisions on intermeddling of the estates of a missing person. 

The committee notes that in order for harmony to be restored, the Bill should be harmonised with the provisions of the other succession laws. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends that the Bill should be harmonised with all the other succession related Acts mentioned above. 

The committee found that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) Act is due for amendment as explained above. Therefore, it is the prayer of the committee that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time and do pass. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number. Could we have your comments on the report.

MR SILAS AOGON: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure based on the noise which is above us because of the rain. I do not know, procedurally, if it would not be proper for us to stay this for a while for proper business. It is rather loud, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t you hear?

MR AOGON: It is not very clear.

MS SARAH OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to disagree. I think this microphone is loud enough and we can all hear. I do not know why we should even debate this report. I would like to propose that we move right away to the committee stage. Otherwise, we can all hear. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you need to shout, please do. Let us proceed.

4.23
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): It is good, Madam Speaker, if the Members can all hear clearly. 

My first concern is the issue of shielding the value of the shilling from inflation. The committee has suggested that we use currency points instead of using the shillings. How sure are we that that will provide sufficient cover against inflation?

I know that under our laws, the currency point is given a value of Shs 20,000. If you are talking about 20 currency points, it means you are going to multiply it by Shs 20,000. That will give you about Shs 400,000. How sure are you it is different from prescribing Shs 400,000 in the law? 

I think the committee needs to go back and do some homework there. It needs to get the proper cure to this particular concern. Using currency points does not help, in my opinion. Thank you. 

4.25
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the currency points and inflation, I think we shall be mixing up issues. For now, currency points can cure the issue. 

I would like to thank the committee for the well-articulated report. I have listened keenly, especially on the interpretation of the estates of missing persons. When you look at the interpretation clause, the interpretation of “dependent relative”, which includes a wife, husband, son or daughter under 18 years of age as it is in the principal Act is obsolete. The committee recommendation to align it with other succession laws is very up to date. 

I would also like to comment on the definition of a child, which they have aligned with the Constitution. It is very proper. 

When you go to Section 3, on jurisdiction to make a grant on the pecuniary jurisdiction, specifically for magistrates grade II where the total value of the estate does not exceed Shs 10,000 - that was then - now, the currency points cure this. Yes, your concern, hon. Aogon, is very right; our currency has devalued but for now, the currency points cure that. We shall look at that when we look at the economic part of the law.

The committee observations to me are up to date and they are aligning everything with the Constitution. I urge the House that we move to the committee stage as senior colleague, hon. Sarah Opendi, requested. The committee report is accurate. I beg to submit. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Before we go to the committee stage, I would like the committee to give me comfort on the issue of shielding the shilling against inflation. I am still not convinced that a currency point is the treatment. May I get a clarification from the committee.

MS ISALA ERAGU: Madam Speaker, the expression of money in currency points or units is now a conventional thing. In our law books, we are now using currency points instead of the currency unit to shield it from inflation. Although sometimes you cannot do everything, it is the best way that we can do it.

4.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM,	Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In hon. Aogon’s interest, if it is a currency point, we know that one currency point equals to Shs 20,000. Even if there is inflation or when the dollar is very low, we know that at whatever time, whether the money is low or high, you are getting a standard currency point. 

That is why you are not going to be affected by inflation; whether it is low or high, the measure remains the same. If it is high, you benefit. It is 20 times the amount that you are supposed to get. I hope I have made it clear.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, she has attempted to convince me but not beyond reasonable doubt. For this reason, a currency point has its value prescribed; right now, it is Shs 20,000 and if it gets inflated, it will always remain in the law books. What are you going to do to convince me that you are shielding against inflation by using these currency points? 

If you multiply and divide, you keep on playing about with the same figures. You will not achieve anything in terms of shielding against inflation.

MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee and I would like to thank my colleague for presenting our position. The issue hon. Aogon raised is general and we need to agree on two things.

One, on standardisation of legislation, nowhere are you going to find a piece of legislation with a different bearing outside the issue of currency points.

Two, currency points in all our pieces of legislation appear in schedules and they constitute part of the subsidiary legislation, which even the minister is authorised to amend as and when circumstances permit.

You cannot get worried of the fact that as of now, its standard is at Shs 20,000. If circumstances permit, all our pieces of legislation empower the line minister to amend a schedule and some of them relate to currency points. So, it is standard but also flexible. Therefore, do not get scared at this point in time. I hope your issue is addressed.

4.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The previous speaker should have been reminded that a member of the committee should not contribute; they should give chance for others who are not members of the committee to speak.

THE SPEAKER: He was clarifying an objection.

MS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification on the definition of a “missing person.” I am not comfortable with the definition. I want a clear definition of a missing person. Here, it means a person who disappears from Uganda without making provision for administration of his or her estate.

Does the person have to disappear from Uganda or you can disappear from the village? If I am smart enough that I had written my will before I disappeared, do I still fall under this definition? If you make it conditional that a missing person is a person who has disappeared without making adequate arrangement for his estate, do I still fall under this definition? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a missing person is one who is presumed dead but there is no proof. There are a number of years which need to pass before the presumption is confirmed, that you must be dead, and that is when your will comes in.

MR AOGON: I know colleagues want to hurry home but legislation is not easy. You have to be patient with me because this is a very important issue.

If we are talking about reviewing the figures that we are inserting in the law after sometime, that will work, but I am not yet convinced with the idea of putting in the report that we are using currency points to shield against inflation.

As we go for committee stage, we need to have a clear position. It is never a cure. Using currency points in this law and the other one is okay but let us get the appropriate solution to cushioning against inflation. 
If we feel that it is convenient, we can review the law -(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 78 of our Rules of Procedure says, “Motion that a Member be no longer heard 

If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be no longer heard…” I beg to move under the same procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the honourable member holding the Floor be no longer heard. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us move to Bill’s committee stage. Honourable members, I put the question that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ESTATES OF MISSING PERSONS (MANAGEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended by deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, we propose in Clause 2 –

i) 	to substitute for paragraph (a) the following:
	“(a) by substituting for the definition of the phrase ‘dependent relative’ the following:
	‘(b) ‘dependent relative’ includes a parent, a brother or sister, a grandparent or grandchild who is wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person for the provision of the ordinary necessaries of life suitable to a person of his or her station.’”

ii) 	We propose to insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) and re-number the provision accordingly:
	“(b) by substituting for the definition of the word ‘family’ the following:

	‘(c) ‘family’ include a spouse and a lineal descendant of the missing person.’”

iii) 	Insert the following new definition immediately after paragraph (b) as follows:
	“(ca) ‘lineal descendant’ means the child of a missing person regardless of the age of the child, including those adopted by the missing person under the laws of Uganda;”

iv) 	We propose to delete paragraphs (b) and (c).

v) 	We propose to insert the following new paragraph, immediately after paragraph (c), as follows:
	“(d) by deleting subsection (2).”

The justification, Madam Chairperson, is:

    1. To define the words, “dependent relative”, as the words are ordinarily used and to harmonise it with the way it is used under the Succession Act;
    2. To define the word, “family”, as the word is usually understood and used; 
    3. For completeness, to define the words “lineal descendant”;
    4. Paragraphs (b) and (d) are misplaced since they do not relate with the head note and the rest of the provision;
    5. The deletion of subsection (2) of the principal Act is intended to remove a misplaced section; 
    6. The introduction of a fit and proper persons test is redundant, since the Act already limits the grant of a management order to relatives of the missing person, and imposing of a fit and proper person test will be an unreasonable addition that is not necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I just want clarification on the issue of “fit and proper person”. The person is missing but we are not sure whether he or she is dead. Suppose I am a really big drunkard and I come and say, “I want to manage the estate of my relative”, can’t the court say, “But you man, you live in the brewery; you are not a fit and proper person”? Can’t the court say that?

MS ISALA: To the drunkard?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MS ISALA: The test of a drunkard depends – I think we then go to the interpretation of the –

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is a responsibility being given by the court to the relative. However, if this relative is known as a drug addict, can’t the court say, “You man, your lifestyle does not show responsibility”? That is what I am asking.

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, that would be subject to evidence when –(Interjection)- Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General has something to say and I am also reminded of what we had discussed in the Succession (Amendment) Act. After he has said what he has to say, I would be willing to have this deleted.

MR KAFUUZI: She has basically said it; we are willing to delete it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think you should not delete it; that is what I am saying because you will now be giving the possibility of just anyone, whether they are irresponsible with their life - You have a history of drug addiction or drunkenness and they say, “Now, you manage your father’s estate”. That is what I am asking. Why are you removing this requirement?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that it is a question of fact. Whoever is in charge at the time should be able to assess and see that you are a fit and proper person. If he exercises the discretion and says you are not, then he should not allow it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why you should not delete it. You have seen the court sometimes say that a surety is insufficient. You are now telling someone to administer the estate of someone whose whereabouts we do not know. I do not think you should remove this. That is my position, unless you have a –

MR KAFUUZI: We agree with your proposal, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us leave that as it is. There is the other amendment which came earlier, so do not delete that last paragraph. Rather, let us substitute for paragraph (a) what has been proposed by the chairperson. We insert a new sub-clause under (b), we amend (c), insert a new sub-clause under (3) and we delete paragraphs (b) and (c) and we do not touch (5).

I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have some responses. The only problem is that the clauses and sub-clauses were all read through, so I now also have to read them. It would have been better if we could read the sub-clause with its response but now I am taking you backwards.

On Clause 2, we reject the amendment. The proposal by the committee in reference to a child as a lineal descendant and the others as dependent relatives is in respect of succession to an estate of a deceased person, while the proposed amendment in the Bill under Section 1(1) (b) is in respect of the management of the estates of missing persons. Care should be given to all persons that have been substantially and wholly dependent on the missing person.

Our proposed way forward is that the definition of “dependent relative” in the Act should be retained subject to the amendments proposed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the definition of the dependent relative in the Act?

MR KAFUUZI: It says, “‘dependent relative’ includes a wife, a husband, a son or daughter under eighteen years of age or daughter of or above eighteen years of age who is wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person.”

Madam Chairperson, we reject the proposal to amend the definition of a family in the committee report. The definition of family proposed in the committee is restrictive. If the proposed definition is carried, dependent relatives of a missing person in the category of uncle or aunt or grandparent, first cousin that were wholly and substantially dependent on the missing person would be left out under the care and management of the estate of the missing person.

Still, under Clause 2, we reject the proposal to delete insertion of sub-section (2). The amendment proposed in the Bill leaves the determination of a fit and a proper person to the discretion of the court. This is the current practice of court. It is not practical to define who amounts to a fit and proper person as the court will take into consideration the several factors of who is a fit and proper person. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you stand by your original proposals in the Bill?

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Anything from the committee?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am just wondering, who are we to determine a dependent relative? Why are you refusing my grandmother to be a dependent relative of mine? The list he read was wife, husband, child –(Interjection)- what is the new one? I want my grandmother to be there.

MR MULINDWA: The clarification I would like to give to hon. Byandala is that what you are complaining about is in the principal Act. The committee is proposing to amend and align it with the Succession Act. 

“Dependent relative” includes a parent, a brother or sister, a niece or nephew, a grandparent or grandchild who on the date of the deceased’s death or missing person was wholly or substantially dependent on the deceased for the provision of the ordinary necessities of life suitable to a person of his or her station. Therefore, we are broadening it. Thank you. That is the clarification, Madam Chair.

MS ISALA: Madam Chair, maybe I could be of help by reading the definition of a dependent relative in the Act and then that would guide us. 

“‘dependent relative’ includes -
(i) 	a wife, a husband, a son or daughter under eighteen years of age or daughter of or above eighteen years of age who is wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person;

(ii) 	a parent, a brother or sister, a grandparent or grandchild who, on the date when a missing person disappeared, was wholly or substantially dependent on the missing person for the provision of the ordinary necessaries of life suitable to a person of his or her station.”

Madam Chair, I read this earlier but when questions came from the Floor, people were talking about grandparents or whoever they were maintaining. For the practices of the missing person, I would suggest that we stick to this definition and then leave the Succession Act, which we have not dealt with, to make a definition of a child, a dependent relative and of course the lineal dependent. Those are all very well defined and dealt with in the Succession (Amendment) Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we leave this until we finish the succession law?

MS ERAGU: I will concede to deleting the proposal of the committee to amend this. I would agree with the Attorney- General but then we maintain the definition of the dependant relative as in the Act. If that is agreeable to the Attorney- General.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chair, I am a member of the committee but what the Attorney-General would like us to do is to expand to include uncles, aunts. However, we must be mindful of the issue of management of this estate because if you are an uncle, you are supposed to be having your own means. If they were looking after you, maybe there would be a way that you can continue to be looked after. However, if we enlarge it so much, the estate will be unmanageable, Madam Chair. That is my take.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The key words in the law are “wholly” or “substantially”. You know if I send you something during Christmas time, once a year, you are not dependent on me.
 
MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I still have the feeling that the presiding officer will have the powers to decide the right thing. For instance, if he is an uncle or herdsman to somebody and he goes missing when that somebody has been wholly dependent on the missing person, how do we get them away from benefiting?

I think that it is proper to use the words “any person wholly dependent” and the court will test that. The major word is “wholly”. The court will prove whether it was true or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is not a dependent relative. Attorney-General, what do we do?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee chairperson has conceded to our proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Restate your proposal for the record.

MR KAFUUZI: The definition of “family”, proposed by the committee is restrictive. If the proposed definition is carried, dependent relatives of a missing person in the category of uncle, aunt, grandparent or first cousin that were wholly and substantially dependent on the missing person would be left out under the care of the estate of the missing person.

The chairperson of the committee agrees with that proposal and believes that we should have them included.

MS KAMATEEKA: I am a member of the committee but people are confusing it. “Grandparent” is already there. I do not know why the Attorney-General wants us to include it.

For the others – the uncles, the first cousins – I think we better leave them for the Succession Act, as the chairperson has said. We must be reasonable. In any case, the provision already states “or any other person who was wholly dependent.” That takes care of the Attorney-General’s concerns.

MS ISALA: Madam chairperson, I understand these are sensitive matters but I thought I made it very clear, on behalf of the committee, that for purposes of this small estate of a missing person, we should not – I do not want to say stress it, but overburden it with somebody who is remembered once a year or twice. Let us stick to the definition, which is in the Act.

I have conceded to defining these others in the Succession Act. That is where they find their space. This is a specific law on a missing person, who when he is found, reverts to managing his estate. However, when he is not found, then all his estate – because he will have been presumed and proved dead - will be managed normally under the administration and succession Acts, etcetera.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we remain with the proposals of the Attorney-General to retain the definition in the Act?

MS ISALA: To align with what the Attorney-General said - I have not understood the question.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It seems there is no reason for making these amendments because the categories you are stating here are already in the Act. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, it is only the “grandparent” that is repeated here. The others are not in the Act. Maintaining the status quo would leave out the uncle, aunt and first cousin.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They should only be included if they have been wholly dependent. The fact that I know and send to you something during Easter does not mean that you are wholly dependent on me. I just send you a gift once in a while. We are talking about people for whom you pay rent, buy clothes, food and the children for whom you pay school fees.

MR KAFUUZI: I concede, Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, we propose an amendment of section 3 of the principal Act.

Clause 3 of the Bill is amended –

a) 	in paragraph (b) by substituting the words “twenty million shillings” with the words “one thousand currency points”.

b) 	in paragraph (c) by substituting the words “fifty million” with the words “two thousand five hundred currency points”.

c) 	by substituting paragraph (d) with the following: “the High Court, where the value of the estate exceeds the value prescribed in paragraphs (b) and (c).”

The justification is: to express the values of the estates in form of currency points in order to shield the provision from inflation and loss of the value of the shilling over time, as well as to prescribe the jurisdiction of the High Court.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we are fully agreeable to the proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aogon, I would like to give the example in the Act. Shs 50,000 is the limit of a chief magistrate. Can you see how ridiculous it is? That is what this is dealing with. If in the original law it was in currency points, we would not be making this amendment. However, since the value has changed, we can no longer state it in Uganda shillings. We are now talking of Shs 100,000 in the High Court. You go to the High Court for an estate of Shs 100,000! Please, accept this.

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, we are inserting a new clause in the Bill. Immediately after clause 3, insert the following new clauses:

“4. Amendment of section 7 of the principal Act
Section 7 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after subsection (2) the following:

‘(2a) For the purpose of this Act, an order for the management of an estate of a missing person shall not be granted to any person under the age of eighteen years.’

5. Replacement of section 9 of the principal Act 
For section 9, there is substituted the following:

‘9. Intermeddling with property of a missing person
(1) 	A person who intermeddles with the estate of a missing person commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding ten years, or both.

(2) 	A person is taken to intermeddle in the estate of a missing person where that person, while not being the manager - 
    (a) takes possession or disposes of a missing person’s property;
    (b) unlawfully refuses or neglects to deliver to the manager any property in his or her possession belonging to the estate of the missing person, or
    (c) does any other act which belongs to the office of the manager.

(3) 	Subsection (1) shall not apply in cases where the intermeddling is by a spouse or lineal descendant of the missing person and it happens before the grant of an order under Section 7 of this Act, in circumstances prescribed in sub-section (4).

(4) 	The circumstances referred to in sub-section (3) are where the intermeddling is for the purpose of –

    (a)  preserving the estate of a missing person;
    (b)  providing for the welfare of the missing person's lineal descendants;
    (c)  providing immediate necessities of the missing person's family;
    (d)  preserving and prudent management of the missing person's business, including preserving the missing person's goods of trade; or
    (e)  receiving money or other funds belonging to the missing person.

(5) 	The duration for which a person referred to in sub-section (3) may intermeddle in the estate of a missing person is six months from the date the person is presumed to be missing or until the grant of an order under Section 7, whichever first occurs.

(6) 	A person intermeddling with the estate of a missing person pursuant to sub-section (3) shall forthwith report particulars of the property and of the steps taken to the manager or Administrator General or its agent.

(7) 	A person who has reason to believe that the person intermeddling in the estate of a missing person pursuant to sub-section (4) has caused loss or damage to the estate or that there are reasonable grounds for ending the intermeddling may apply to the Administrator General or its agent for redress.

(8) 	A person who intermeddles in the estate of a missing person pursuant to subsection (3) shall be personally liable for any loss occasioned to the estate arising from the intermeddling and shall make good the loss caused to the estate.

(9) 	A person who intermeddles in the estate of a missing person beyond the time prescribed in sub-section (5) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding ten years, or both.”

The justification is as follows:

    1. This is a consequential amendment arising from the deletion of Section 2(2) of the principal Act, which was misplaced were it was.

    2. For harmony with other succession laws were processes are awarded to persons above l9 years and not 21 years, to require the award of a management order to be made to a person above 18 years, and not 21 years.

    3. To harmonise the provision on intermeddling with similar provisions in the other succession laws.

    4. To revise upwards the penalty prescribed in the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first, the question is that a new cause be introduced under Clause 4.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: With respect to Clause 5, I put the question that Section 9 of the principal Act is amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.13
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.14
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and passed it as follows: Clause 1, deleted; Clause 2, no amendment; Clause 3, amended; and a new clause inserted in the Bill, providing for (2a) under Section 9.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.15
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ESTATES OF MISSING PERSONS (MANAGEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.16
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for a third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE ESTATES OF MISSING PERSONS (MANAGEMENT) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”.

THE SPEAKER: The title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)

MS ISALA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you very much, on behalf of the committee, and to thank all the Members who debated and helped process this Bill. This is also to most sincerely thank the Attorney-General, who was very cooperative and allowed the whole process not to be intermeddled with. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the earlier mix-up. We carried very many documents and it seems we left others behind. 

We would like to thank you very much for your tireless guidance. I also thank the Members for pulling us through. Most obliged. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you again. On behalf of the House, let me thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the major contribution they have made during this Fifth Session. Many of the laws have come from that committee. 

I am not sure whether we are ready with the Succession (Amendment) Bill. Are we?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we harmonised but we need to sit again. We shall be ready tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Of course, you are not ready with the Administrator General’s -

MR KAFUUZI: No. We mixed it up. 

THE SPEAKER: Are they together? 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: In that case, we do have some questions. Also, there was some important matter last week which we asked the Prime Minister to handle. Can I ask him to report on the issue of the maize.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT ISSUE RAISED ON THE BAN OF MAIZE EXPORTS TO KENYA

5.18
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last Thursday, after the heated debate here in this House, I promised that we would come with the Government position, which I am ready with. 

I would like to say that I am grateful that the House, under your directive, had guided to give us an opportunity to discuss what we went through here. Now, I am in a position to do so. 

Madam Speaker, I greet you and I present to you an update on Government decisions regarding the ban of maize exports to Kenya since the last engagement on the Floor of Parliament, on 10 March 2021.

Madam Speaker, as you may recall from the presentation made by the honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives on 10 March 2021 on the maize ban, a number of resolutions were presented to the Floor and the Government pledged to continue following up the issue. I have continued to deliberate with my colleagues to find a lasting solution. 

Further to note, the ban of maize was on the Cabinet agenda of 15 March 2021, and that was yesterday. The Cabinet discussed the issue and noted that in the Government response to address the ban of Uganda maize export by Kenya and to boost bilateral trade flows, Government endorsed proposals contained therein as follows:

1. 	Government will formally raise concerns with the Government of Kenya over their failure or refusal to follow laid down procedures under the East African Community and the World Trade Organisation’s instrument in communicating the ban, and urge them to follow the procedures in future.

2. 	The Government of Uganda and Kenya will urgently hold a joint inter-ministerial meeting to address the issue of maize and all non-tariff barriers affecting trade between both countries.

3. 	Government will put in place an administrative measure that allows only Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) to certify grains and cereals to be exported or to circulate in the domestic market.

4. 	Government will intensify efforts to explore alternative markets, including to expand into the bigger African market under the African Continental Free Trade Area and any other markets. 

5. 	Government will continue to encourage and support the formation of co-operatives to undertake self-regulations and act as avenues for increased production, information dissemination, promotion of essential agricultural extension services and capacity building, consolidated marketing and storage at parish level. 

6. 	Government will urgently implement the earlier conceived plan of building silos in strategic locations in every region for post-harvest handling and storage of grains. 

7. 	Mass sensitisation of farmers by the leaders on good agricultural practices will be conducted, especially in regard to post-harvest handling.

8. 	Government will explore the options of procuring the gamma irradiation machine, in order to mitigate against exportation of contaminated productions.

9. 	Government will fast-track approval and implementation of United Kingdom Export Finance (UKEF) funded post-harvest handling project, by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, under which several silos are planned to be established across the country.
 
10. 	Government will carry out its own investigations or tests to establish the veracity of the claims by Kenya against Uganda’s maize exports and destroy any grain that is found to be contaminated.

11. 	Government will formalise and regulate the grain sector in the country.

12. 	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will set up a department to regulate the maize and cereals’ sector given its economic importance to the country.

13. 	The Government will carry out an investigation and analysis to rule out the possibility of increasing non-tariff barriers against Uganda’s exports being driven by a silent economic war by neighbouring countries. 

14.  	Government will, through cooperatives, provide mobile dryers and community drying and cleaning facilities at parish level.

As I conclude, I want to say that Government will continue engaging with Kenya and find lasting solutions to consolidate our economic and investment relations with Kenya and strengthen the East African Community integration. Thank you for the attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In Uganda, we have the private grain processors and they even have silos. I do not know whether you cannot partner with them now since you do not have your own yet. The Grain Council of Uganda is engaged in the export of maize and have silos all over the country. Can’t you partner with them in the meantime, as you organise to get us our own silos in the parishes? 

Honourable members, you have heard the report. Please, comment. 

5.29
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the statement. He was saying that Government will engage all those 14 points but this is happening now. The maize is in an open place, in direct sunshine and rain. What can the traders or farmers do now because the maize is almost germinating? 

Traders expected the Prime Minister to say that Government will buy this maize tomorrow and maybe, give it to National Agricultural Advisory Services, but you are talking of “engaging” when the maize is rotting and the border is closed. This is a time of school fees and the traders are stranded. The Prime Minister should be fair to these traders. Thank you.

5.30
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister has told us many good things but the problem with this country is implementation. We come up with very good ideas but rarely implement them. For example, he talked about cooperatives but you will appreciate that our cooperatives have undergone a lot of losses following the wars that we experienced and Government has not come out to strongly empower them.

In the past, when cooperatives were operating freely, they were able to ensure quality of agricultural products. I request the Government to empower cooperatives so that they can come back to the standards we used to have in the past. Otherwise, I am wondering whether they will be able to implement all these many things he is talking about. 

I also agree with my colleague that Government has to come out and see how to compensate these exporters that have incurred many losses. As she was pointing out, the maize is germinating. How are we going to assist these farmers? We need to compensate them so that they are able to operate again in the next season. If we do not, we may not have exporters next season.

Time has come for the Government to take agriculture very seriously, especially maize growing. It is now grown everywhere in the country but we have not done enough to assist the farmers.

He has been talking about looking for new markets, perhaps in the DR Congo and other places but let us see them doing it because we just keep talking and we do not do anything. (Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. About two weeks ago, I raised a similar matter as a matter of national importance. It was sugarcane the other day, previously other agricultural items, now it is maize; we do not know what it will be tomorrow. 

You had advised the country to begin Hass avocado growing but people are afraid of the market. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come up with a consumer and farmer protection law that is comprehensive. We cannot be in this cycle every day. The Minister of East African Community Affairs, the Minister of Trade and the Prime Minister are all here. We need to stand firm on what we have started on rather than giving false hope. 

I am very aware of maize at the border all the way from Jinja; people are stuck. As earlier requested, they should update the country; we cannot keep like this. Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, it was more than information. The honourable member was actually contributing to the debate. 

Setting up mobile dryers does not take ages. Just order for them and they start drying maize for these farmers. I request that we install serious measures at the borders to make sure that no grain leaves Uganda unless it is fully certified as being of the right quality and standards. This does not require ages. You can even start it tomorrow so that you make sure that any maize leaving the country is of the right quality.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I do not know what the Government will do with these informal exit points at the borders. Much as we may insist on the quality, you will find that a lot of maize will still go through our borders informally by these – I do not know what you call them; are they smugglers? So, that has to be looked into. How do you control these porous borders? I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: As we wait for the Minister of East African Community Affairs, Rt Hon. Prime Minister the signal has now gone out throughout Uganda that Ugandan maize cannot be sold. I do not know whether you can consider even coming here with a supplementary to purchase the existing maize, put it somewhere, clean it and help the farmers. I do not know now where they are going to go. 

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for apprising Parliament on the decision of Cabinet and also addressing the country on the measures that Government is coming up with to address problems emerging from business and trade within the region.

Madam Speaker, the problem which we have today could have escalated with regards to maize, which is a crop widely grown by most of our people. However, the issue right now is not only affecting Uganda as a country. Aflatoxins are a regional and world problem. It is not only on maize; it is even in coffee. Anything that grows in the form of a berry, cereal or even legumes is bound to attract aflatoxins. That is a problem that we need to address as a country and region. 

We have laws and regulations governing how we can do trade but the problem is that as a country, we had not addressed seriously how we can manage the measures, so that we can have quality products for export. I want to say that efforts have been made for the one week while the ban was there; so far, I would like to assure Parliament – and also as I second my minister – that trade has started. The border is no longer closed. 

I want to address my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Busia District. The border is operational. Maize is going to Kenya but the speed is still low because there are so many traders who have been in the peripherals. It is very difficult for people who go deep in villages and are loading maize to go through the regulated system, which has now been established by Uganda National Bureau of Standards, which is now certifying the maize before export.

By the time we close out this month, most of the people would have already been regulated and put this maize in established stores along the border points, through which they can access the services of UNBS. That is one measure which is already in place. That is one problem that some of us who come from the border are supposed to be addressing because you find these stores even in our shops and homes. 

The second problem, Madam Speaker, is that we need to appreciate that Kenya has a wider aggressiveness in the market because they are able to cross over to Uganda and establish stores within our subcounties and even districts, far deep in the country. Sometimes, you find that Ugandans do not have proper capacity on how we are going to administer the movement of this grain from the stores to the border.

One of the things Government is coming up with is a regulation to reduce on how far foreigners should come and establish business in Uganda, process these businesses to their countries and still call it a business exported by Ugandans. If you look at the 150 trucks, which were impounded and returned, there was no report indicating that these trucks had aflatoxins per se. They were stopped but there was no report which was indicating that they had been tested. 

That is the basis; those are some of the things we protested about in our letter to Kenya - give us the report indicating that these trucks were tested. You informed your partner agency, UNBS, before stopping because we have a period of 60 days to warn the country on any discovery of any element in the weaknesses that emerge during trade. These things were not done.

So, we are also trying to engage and we shall continue engaging at bilateral level. However, this is most urgent; the most urgent thing is we open the border. Let the traders observe all these measures and standards and then slowly, we shall keep sensitising the masses on the right way to do all these businesses.

The other item, Madam Speaker, is the driers. I have been involved in purchasing them from one of the farmers in my district. A small drier that can do about 20 metric tonnes per day is around Shs 40 million and uses solar. It is a bit cheaper for the standards of a Government but for an individual, it might be expensive.

However, the problem now is not even the driers. The problem is the after-harvest handling. You could have dried this maize, cereals or legumes very well but the way you handled the drying could attract aflatoxins. It is a wider range of understanding and making our farmers really appreciate that there is a problem, even before we reach the level of drying.

So, these are some of the things we need to keep engaging on. I believe as Government and as a ministry, we have already started engaging on when we can have a bilateral meeting with Kenya. Kenya is yet to respond to our letter from the Minister of EAC Affairs. 

As Uganda, we have concluded our meetings and put a Government position. So, within a very short time, Madam Speaker, we shall still come back here to address colleagues on a wider range of issues, not basically on maize; we shall include even other things like poultry. Remember, the poultry carcasses and eggs are also not moving. Milk is moving so slowly; we want the market to be opened wider for it and some of the other items. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now have some more information about what is happening. Let us listen to the Prime Minister and after that, we will go to the Ministry of Education and Sports for our questions.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On private silos handling, we have organised a meeting on Friday to discuss this matter and we have even invited these private handlers, so that we can see, in the interim, how we can handle this issue.

On the issue of the loss by traders, the trade at the border is already complicated. For example, a colleague has mentioned some of our neighbouring brothers who go deep inside our country. Actually, these vehicles that have been impounded in Nakuru were not ours. They were Kenyan-registered. This, therefore, means that these are the very people who went deep inside. By the time they loaded the goods, they had already actually paid the owners of the maize; whether it is enough or not, that is another issue. 

However, at the time when this maize is being impounded on the trucks, this maize, whatever the tonnage, now belongs to the owner who bought it in Kenya and it is no longer Ugandan maize although it was bought from Uganda. Therefore, we have not lost something because they have paid for this maize. That is something which was not in my memory; it is for clarity. These traders whose maize is now stranded should be part of our subject of discussion once again on Friday.

In response to another matter that has been raised, that the Government takes time to implement issues - co-operatives will help us see how we can improve better and make sure our maize is properly protected. If you see in today’s newspapers how we dry our maize, you would really feel sorry and would you run away from aflatoxins in that type of system. 

Some of these measures we have read were thoroughly discussed and we shall be moving in a good direction in handling our harvesting of maize and cereals in the not-too-distant future.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of a supplementary, we shall also discuss this on Friday further. We request for your patience. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me invite the Minister of Education and Sports to respond to items under item 10.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON CONTINUED CLOSURE OF PRE-PRIMARY SCHOOLS

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I would also beg to be guided; from the time some of these issues were raised, a number of events have unfolded to the extent that some of them may not be the state of affairs at the moment. Therefore, I beg, in the interest on our rule on relevance, to brief the House on the current state of affairs as opposed to what could have been contained in the written responses, which are no longer in force. 

The issue was about the continued closure of local pre-primary schools and early childhood development centres yet their counterparts in the international schools were opened. Madam Speaker, this particular subject matter is combined together with the petition you received from the Early Childhood Development Association of Uganda. 

I would like to respond as follows: 
From the time you received the petition and the matter was raised, the same association also petitioned the Ministry of Education and Sports and on 5 March 2021, the ministry had a very constructive meeting with the association. 

In that meeting, all the stakeholders agreed that as guided by the Government through the Cabinet position, and for the safety and health of our children in school, we will support in principle the position of the Government to open schools in a phased manner with the exception of the pre-primary schools.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports was able to advance three scientific reasons that the scientists under the Ministry of Health had advanced before: 

1. 	That category of learners in pre-primary are susceptible to respiratory infections including COVID-19 since their immunity is still low.

2. 	That the learners at this level are advised not to wear facemasks yet they are unable to adhere to social distancing recommendations.

3. 	That the learners at this level are potential carriers of COVID-19 to both teachers and parents who are not yet vaccinated.

Therefore, in principle, we agreed with the position of the Government.

On the issue of international schools, it is clear that in principle, all pre-primary schools, including pre-primary of international schools, are supposed to remain closed. That is the position of the Ministry of Education and Sports and Government.

In principle, we have agreed that we will monitor the evolution of the pandemic and agreed to open schools in a phased manner with the exception of pre-primary. For pre-primary, it is for both international schools and schools owned by our own citizens of the Republic of Uganda.

Therefore, on issue number one, this is the brief. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you run through the others? You have responded to the petition, which I sent to you. You can proceed to the next on restructuring of loans for the private-

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, issue no.2 was on the concern raised by the proprietors of private education institutions whose plea to the Government, for the restructuring of their loans with commercial banks and support for educational logistical requirements such as laboratory reagents, remains pending as raised by hon. Atiku.

Madam Speaker, on the concerns of a beneficiary criteria and disbursement of COVID-19 stimulus package that Parliament appropriated in 2020, I would like to inform the House that private education institutions were not part of the original beneficiaries for this package. This leadership of the private education institutions association held a meeting with His Excellency the President and made their request for support directly to him. 

In addition to this, I had two meetings involving the Minister of Education and Sports, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pledged to consider including this category among the beneficiaries for a stimulus package. The minister of Education and Sports will continue to follow up this lead and continue engaging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that had pledged to include this category under this package.

On the exclusion of caretaker head teachers of seed secondary schools from the ongoing recruitment exercise of teachers by the Education Service Commission, I would like, on behalf of the Minister of Education and Sports, to respond as follows: 

Madam Speaker, the ministry appreciates the concerns raised by hon. Margaret Namubiru, MP for Workers, on the exclusion of caretaker head teachers of seed schools from the ongoing recruitment exercise of teachers by the Education Service Commission.

A serving officer can only work in a school based on a posting instruction issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports. In the above case, none of the “caretaker” head teachers in the seed secondary schools was posted or assigned by the Ministry of Education and Sports to the respective schools. They were, therefore, irregularly serving in the seed secondary schools, yet they were on the payroll of other established Government secondary schools. 

The ministry is investigating the possibility that they could have abandoned duty at their stations of posting, in which case disciplinary action will be taken against them.

The Education Service Commission is interviewing sitting teachers in the operational seed schools for appointment on probation. The caretaker head teachers are staff of existing Government secondary schools and could not, therefore, be considered as sitting staff in the seed secondary schools.

The Ministry of Education and Sports continues to emphasise merit and transparency during the recruitment exercise for staff who serve in our schools. We appreciate the feedback from Members and we shall use it to improve on our work and ensure the provision of quality education for our children.

Let me proceed to issue No. 4 on the stalled construction of Nyamarwa Seed School in Kibaale District, raised by hon. Kisembo.

The Government of Uganda, in partnership with the World Bank, is implementing the Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer (UgIFT) programme in the sectors of health, education and sports. In the education and sports sector, the programme is constructing 259 seed secondary schools in three phases: 117 schools in phase I, l15 in phase II and 27 in phase III. Implementation is expected to conclude in the Financial Year 2023/20214. 

Nyamarwa Seed School is part of the 117 seed secondary schools currently under construction. Most of them are nearing completion in time for operationalisation.

On the concerns raised regarding works at Nyamarwa Seed School, Kibaale District, please, note the following: Under the UgIFT programme, works for construction of seed secondary schools were captured in 28 lots, each with between three to five schools. Solicitation for contractors was jointly undertaken by the district local governments, Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Works and Transport at the end of which contracts were awarded by the respective district local governments.

M/s Kwik Build Contractors and Engineering Ltd was awarded contracts to implement works for the schools captured under lot I as shown below:

1. 	Hoima District - Kigorobya Seed S.S, Shs 1,847,996.900.
2.	Kagadi District - St Catherine S.S Kiryanga, Shs 1,853,968,900.
3. 	Kibaale District - Nyamarwa Seed S.S, Shs 1,842,960,400.
4. 	Kakumiro District - St Matia Mulumba Seed S.S, Shs 1,849,303,400
5. 	Kikuube District - Nyairongo Seed S.S, 1,861,056,900

As shown above, M/s Kwik Build Contractors and Engineering Ltd was awarded five separate contracts by the respective district local governments valued at those respective sums. While all conditions seemed favourable for the smooth running of these projects, the contractor has demonstrated a lack of capacity to fulfil her contractual obligations.

Challenges include:

1. 	Failure to deliver substantial materials for works to the sites, leading to long spells of redundancy.

2. 	Failure to maintain consistent teams on these sites.  The changes in key personnel happen way too frequently with no explanation given, some with questionable qualifications. This in turn has evidently compromised the quality of works implemented.

3. 	Failure to provide a performance bank guarantee as per requirements in the contract.

4. While the contractor was advanced funds, the advance payment bank guarantees against which these payments were effected have since expired with no significant works implemented. 

Correspondences have been written to the contractor outlining the critical areas for action to which the contractor has failed to comply. Some of the challenges listed above, particularly number 4, amount to gross breach of contract, creating grounds for termination. 

The ministry is in the process of guiding the concerned district local governments on how to get out of the failed contracts, keeping in mind the need for mechanisms to recover funds advanced with no significant works implemented.

The UgIFT is a national programme and not all projects are facing gross challenges. District local governments are getting regular support from central Government to ensure the success of projects under this programme.

Finally, please, allow me provide a brief comment about the procurement process for the contractors currently constructing the aforementioned schools.

Following a directive by Cabinet, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health, under the guidance of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) agreed on a hybrid procurement mechanism where roles are shared between the central Government and beneficiary local governments.

The Ministry of Education and Sports, in particular, is required to initiate the procurement by running a central advertisement for all schools, lot and cluster the schools, develop the evaluation criteria and issue the working documents such as bills of quantities and standard bid documents. The local governments, on the other hand, evaluate, award the contract, pay for the works, supervise and pay using funds, which are under their full control. 

It is, therefore, not true that the companies are selected by the Ministry of Education and Sports. The ministry has already acted in terms of forwarding this particular contractor to the PPDA for further disciplinary action, as provided for in the law.

Issue No. 5 is on the fate of the Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) candidates who are currently in residential training as part of the Ugandan contingents to the U-17 and U-20 Africa Cup of Nations, yet national examinations are due to commence on 26 February 2021.

Madam Speaker, on this particular subject matter, a number of events have unfolded. Let me explain it this way. On the U-20, I would like to inform Parliament officially that the Republic of Uganda assembled a team that participated in the U-20 Africa Cup of Nations. Team Uganda was able to make history, again, after the 1978 history, through the group stages and they qualified for the finals against Ghana. Uganda is now rated in football, in the U-20, as the second best country in Africa (Applause). 

They came back with silver medals after losing to team Ghana 2-0 in the finals but also after beating powerhouses in sports in Africa – Tunisia and Mauritania, to mention but a few. 

We are also happy that team Uganda produced the top scorer of the 2021 U-20 Africa Cup of Nations. (Applause) Team Uganda produced the coach of the tournament for the U-20 Africa Cup of Nations. (Applause) Team Uganda was voted and rated the fair play team of the tournament, meaning they were the most disciplined team in the tournament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, coming to the issue of missing examinations, first, those who participated in the U-20 and were meant to sit for the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) have not missed because the tournament got concluded before we started UACE. Therefore, those particular candidates are back into the country and will be able to sit for UACE. In that category of U-20, we had only one student – the son to a renowned musician, Bebe Cool – who was supposed to sit UCE. However, for UACE, those students are back in time to sit for their examinations.

Madam Speaker, what is the standard practice? The standard practice is that before these underage Ugandans are assembled by the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA), National Council of Sports, Ministry of Education and Sports in providing overall guidance, the guideline is to the effect that for every child assembled by any country – be it Uganda, Kenya Tanzania, etcetera – you must seek written consent from the parent or guardian.

In the case of Uganda, all the four underage children - three participated in the U-17 and one in U-20 - the parents consented in writing. They made choices for their children to participate in the tournament. Therefore, this was purely a question of choice and opportunity cost because at the time these kids were assembled, the parents were aware that there were two competing priorities - one, to represent the country in the African Cup of Nations; and two, to sit exams.

As the Minister of State for Sports, I took keen interest and even called the parents of these children. I would like to read to you the responses as quoted from the parents, speaking on behalf of their children.

Patrick Semakula Kikwalu, telephone No. 0754341115, parent of Travis Mutyaba, a student at St Mary's Kitende Senior Secondary School said that he wanted his son to use the opportunity to develop his football career. He said his son could sit examinations at the next examinations sitting. 

Secondly, he said his family was poor and under-privileged and they saw the boy's talent as an opening to a better future for improving their family's standard of living.

Thirdly, he stated that there were foreign clubs already interested in taking his son, Travis Mutyaba, for professional football abroad if he successfully participated and excelled in the tournament. The boy could, therefore, sit for exams next time or next year.

There was Frank Mulindwa, telephone No. 0700727447, parent of Ivan Irinimbabazi, a student at Royal Giants Senior Secondary, Mityana. He said that after detailed discussions with the student - Ivan Irinimbabazi – and with his school authorities, he established that the boy was not in the right mindset and not prepared to sit for examinations as his focus was on the U-17 football tournament.

He further stated that his son would, obviously, not pass the examinations and if he did not participate in the tournament, it would be a double loss for the boy and his family. He said the boy may excel at the tournament and land professional opportunities to play abroad, thereby securing his and the family's future. In addition, the school has committed to keeping the student to repeat and sit at the next UCE exams.

Oscar Kotevu, telephone No. 0392965971, guardian to Oscar Mawa, a student at Gombe Senior Secondary had similar views. He said his son, Oscar Mawa, had this rare opportunity to showcase his talent which could lead to his elevation to international professional ranks and better earning like professionals in Europe, thereby enabling him to support his family and lift Uganda's profile in the world through his sports talent. 

It is also important to note that these three students are studying in their respective schools, through bursaries awarded by the schools because of their excellent sports talent. All these students, by the secondary school sports association regulations, are required to do well at school. If one does not study, he or she is not eligible to play in the school championships and tournaments. This explains the position of the parents of the three who were within the team. 

In respect to the son of Bebe Cool, I personally spoke to him on phone. First of all, he accepted that he also consented, as a parent, but this was his view: His view and request was that if it is practical under the UNEB Act, Parliament and the Government would consider organising what he called “special examinations”, but I think to UNEB it they are called supplementary examinations for these boys, who were undertaking this national cause.

For the U-17 team, they have even suffered double jeopardy. They assembled a team, trained them, facilitated them and they departed the country to participate in the U-17 Africa Cup of Nations. Twelve countries in Africa were set to participate in this tournament in Morocco and four countries, including Uganda, had already arrived. However, the Confederation of African Football cancelled the tournament while four countries were already in Morocco. This is a question of double jeopardy because the parents had high hopes in their children participating and probably landing better and greater opportunities but the tournament was cancelled. Secondly, at home here, they have missed exams. This is a catch-22 situation. Maybe this Parliament should guide on how best we can proceed. 

Also, under the UNEB Act, there seems to be no specific provision compelling UNEB to organise either special or supplementary examinations. These four senior 4 candidates have not sat. In a nutshell, they have missed examinations. Three were with the U-17 team and one with the U-20 team. That is the state of affairs, Madam Speaker. 

The last one is on the unrealistic guidelines for reopening of schools issued by Ministry of Education and Sports, particularly that learners are not supposed to travel to schools by public transport and that international schools may reopen, according to the programme of the affiliated institutions in other countries, and the hiking of school fees by some institutions, purportedly to defray the cost of mitigating the threat of COVID-19. This was raised by hon. Betty Nambooze. 

I would like to respond as follows on the question of the unrealistic guidelines issued by the ministry for reopening of schools and that learners are not supposed to travel by public means: 

Madam Speaker, the provision in the guidelines on transportation of learners and staff did not ban public transport for learners. Rather, it was intended to guide schools, parents and local authorities to minimize the risk of infection associated with uncoordinated use of public transport. Given that at the time the guidelines were issued the country was on a steep pandemic curve towards the peak, the provision sought to guide schools and urban authorities to have dedicated vans or buses to transport learners on specific routes. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports is currently working with Ministry of Health to review and update the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and the guidelines, with lessons learnt from the implementation of the guidelines since schools reopened in October 2020. This and a number of other provisions are being revisited to make them more realistic and feasible.

In a nutshell, there was no specific provision stopping the use of public transport. It was only meant to guide parents that in the circumstances, please take note of public transport. 

International schools may reopen according to the programmes of the affiliated institutions in other countries. As earlier stated, the position of the Government is clear. In principle, the Government accepted to open schools in a phased manner, with the exception of pre-primary at all levels, as I stated. 

The decision to allow international schools to reopen – mark my words - with the exception of pre-primary - they too remain closed – was based on the following considerations and conditionalities: Just like we have allowed our semi-candidate classes to reopen on terms and conditions, these were also the terms and conditions for the international schools:

1. 	Learners in these schools follow an international programme that cannot be easily altered by one country. Therefore, if we insisted on keeping these schools closed, the affected learners in Uganda would have been forced to have a dead year. 

2. 	It was also at this time when key examinations for a number of grades were to be done. It was, therefore, deemed necessary to allow the reopening if they fulfilled the requirements so that the learners could prepare and sit their examinations. 

3. 	The learners in these schools include children of diplomats and expatriates who, because of restrictions on international travel, could not easily be repatriated to their home countries for education purposes. 

4. 	The classroom to pupil ratio in these schools is apparently within the requirements for effective implementation of the social distancing. Similarly, they had demonstrated capacity to implement the stringent and high cost safeguards required to minimize possible infection, including transporting learners by private means, regular disinfection of facilities and equipment as well as supplying both learners and staff with adequate personal protective gears. 

5. 	Even then, as directed by His Excellency the President, the schools were allowed to reopen only on condition that Ministry of Health inspected and certified them as being in position to effectively implement all the SOPs of COVID-19.

It is important to note that closure and reopening of schools under COVID-19 is a public health consideration. Where an assessment has been made and it is determined that a certain category or level of schools can be reopened without undue risk to public health, a consideration is made to do so. This explains the reason we have embarked on phased or staggered reopening of all education institutions in principle.

On the hiking of school fees by some institutions, purportedly to defray the cost of mitigating the threat of COVID-19, the Ministry of Education and Sports appreciates that there are additional costs in operating schools arising from the requirements to put in place facilities for implementation of the COVID-19 SOPs. This is why, for Government-aided schools, we provided a small additional conditional grant of Shs 1.5 million for this purpose.

Our guidance is that schools should not increase fees at this time when parents are also facing economic hardships and challenges. However, we have also guided that schools work with parents, through the structures of the school management committees for primary and board of governors for secondary, to agree on the necessary fees adjustments and the variation can be upwards or downwards.

Section 44 of the Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008, in sections 3(b) and 57 (g), empowers the minister responsible for education to regulate fees. Given that that some schools are unreasonably hiking school fees, the minister shall issue a statutory instrument to this effect. 

This is a provision under this Act. We have already agreed and there is work in progress for the department in charge of policy analysis to draft a statutory instrument to be issued under sections 3 (b) and 57 (g) of the said Act.

These were the issues raised, but I see one of them not reflected on the Order Paper - the issue that was raised by the honourable member for Mukono Municipality. You will guide whether I can proceed to deal with it because the answer is available and I see the honourable member in the House.

THE SPEAKER: That is no.6. You have answered it. 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the one appearing in our responses was raised by the Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality. It was on a circular by Ministry of Education and Sports guiding on the reopening of schools and requiring them to be either day or boarding but not both.

The decision of some Government-aided schools to be exclusively boarding renders them too expensive for many parents, and there is a plea that it should start after UNEB examinations for finalists. This was additionally raised-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you are ready, please, answer it because that will save us time.

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education and Sports is continuing with plans to gradually reopen all our schools, in order to return to normalcy following the lockdown occasioned by COVID-19. We, therefore, appreciate the support from Members in ensuring that this process is smooth and accommodative for our parents and learners, who are also recovering from the effects of this unprecedented pandemic.

Madam Speaker, our schools are classified in three categories: 

    1. Purely boarding schools; 
    2. Boarding and day schools; 
    3. Purely day schools.

The provision in the guidelines before opening for candidates was made for the category of both day and boarding for the candidate classes. The current guidelines, which were issued last week, allow such schools to have both day and boarding facilities. The institutions, which were purely day schools before lockdown, are still day schools or are supposed to remain day. 

No child or parent should, therefore, be forced to join a boarding facility against his or her wishes. Such an instruction is irregular and should be reported to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. We shall then be able to look into the matter and ensure compliance with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to respond. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You have really cleared a good part of the backlog concerning the young people at school. I have no comment on the examinations but it is in order to bring a motion here to acknowledge the big contribution they made - reaching the finals of the AFCON U-20. It is a major achievement. I hope that one of the members of the parliamentary sports team will do this. We can create time for these young people so that we thank them.

6.31
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for all the responses to all these issues. 

On the issue of our children that have missed exams because of sports, the minister started by telling us how these kids brought us glory as a country because of their spectacular performance. Now, we are rated No. 2 in sports in this area. 

We should be encouraging these children to exploit their potential so as to bring us glory for the benefit of the country. It is very unfortunate to hear the minister say that the parents weighed the cost-benefit potential and that one of the parents said that they are poor and if this child develops his sports, he can bring income to the family. This clearly shows that we are exploiting these children. So, it is us and the parents negotiating on their behalf. It is very unfortunate.

Honourable minister, we would expect that the ministry has a policy of encouraging these children to exploit their potential and putting in place measures of how they can be facilitated to do supplementary exams, so as to continue with their education. Supposing the parents had refused their children to go, you would have taken second-class players, who would not have brought us the glory they did. It is true the under-17 team did not play but they went out on behalf of the country. This is very unfortunate.

We, therefore, urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that we encourage our children to exploit their sports potential, as we put in place measures for them to continue with their education. No child should miss or repeat a class because they went out to play on behalf of the country. I beg to submit.

6.34
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very important that we appreciate the effort of our football teams, both the U-20 and U-17. Our minister for sports has started on a high note; he has done a great thing at the infancy of his tenure. I just assume that when he takes more than 20 years in that seat, Uganda will be winning the World Cup. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, my concern is similar to the one of hon. Jovah Kamateeka. Under our Constitution, these children have a right to education and nobody can deny them that right. Nobody can take it away. I really share the feelings of the parents who said they want to give the children an opportunity. If maybe they can be spotted, they will be playing in Europe.

I equally have good talent; I could play good football but because of the age limit – (Laughter) – I cannot be able to. When we talk about football, it goes along with age. What happens when you go beyond the relevant age for soccer? That might become a problem. Therefore, how I wish that the minister and Government concentrate on bringing an amendment to the relevant laws to allow for special sittings, so that when these students return, they are always given an opportunity to do their exams.

It is good to say that the parents gave consent but you are consenting for a minor - somebody who is underage. However, in future, I want to believe they can regret. That is very possible. When you do wrong things at the wrong time, sometime in the future, you may regret. You know, soccer can be played today and tomorrow - maybe not at a competitive level – but education comes once, more so at this level. When you have aged, nobody will be willing to employ you. They will say, “Are you sixty or above?” Those questions come on board, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, I want to encourage the minister and the ministry to come up with a new amendment that allows these students to sit for a special examination and you compensate them for the time that they have lost. Give them enough time to read. I think that will work.

Otherwise, as a country, we would have lost. We are all sportsmen but sometimes, we are forced to stay at school. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know, sometimes if it is not provided for in the law, it is also not prohibited. What will happen if you give these children a special examination? There is nothing for it but nothing against it either.

6.37
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think that it was not for a purpose to bring these ministries together, that the minister for education is also the same minister for sports. The case before us right now is one of the reasons why we think that education and sports are one and related.

At university level, adults are given supplementaries but you find situations where students, having done nothing wrong at all, miss examinations and the country simply looks at them and tells them to either repeat next year or even drop out of school. I have observed that if the victim is a girl, the possibility of that girl never going back to school is very high. 

Some things must start somewhere. If we say that we leave the minister to now go and bring an amendment Bill, that will take us some time. It is not something we can finish today so as to save the four boys who went out of the country to represent us in football.

Madam Speaker, I would humbly suggest that an appeal is made to UNEB - and then UNEB should also stop this arrogance. They do not treat students as their clients; it is as if going for an examination is war. These are supposed to be friendly examinations. The very purpose is to see at what level our learners are but not the fact that you have to do the examination and without that examination, you will never be called educated.

I pray that these four boys get justice. I have heard the reasons that were given by parents and they are all shallow. These parents also need guidance and counselling.

I also thank the minister for answering my issues as I raised them here. However, I will seek clarification on the following issues: 

Firstly, COVID-19 has turned out to be a blessing to some people. In Mukono, for example, the students were paying Shs 350,000 per term. Today, all of them are being told to compulsorily join the boarding section, which never existed, by the way. This school was not a boarding school before. I went there myself; it was a day school and now it has been declared a boarding school because of COVID-19. I hear some of the people on the management committee are saying that it is a demonstration of how developed this school has become.

In any case, Ugandans need to be told that good schools are not supposed to be boarding schools. Boarding institutionalised life for our children must be done in situations where we cannot afford to have our children home. However, in Uganda, it is as if it is a trend, fashion or show of greatness for a school to be a boarding school and for one having his children going to the boarding section. I think, as a country, all of us need counselling.  

Madam Speaker, I want to know which term these children who are going back to school are starting with. Is it the last term of the last year? Is it the first term of 2021? Is it the second? We need clarification. If my son was in Senior 3 in 2019, is he now going back to write his final examinations when I know that this boy or girl did not study the first term, second term and third term fully?

Secondly, there is conflict of interest. The law gives the ministers mandate to determine fees. I do not know why these ministers have been reluctant all this time to come in and regulate fees. We were here when people raised the amounts of money we should pay for land and the amounts of money we should pay for the sugarcane but they are reluctant to regulate the fees of schools because maybe some of them, if not all of them, own schools.

Lastly, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: You have deviated; a supplementary is supposed to relate to what he has answered but you have gone far away.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. Allow me to conclude by asking how the statements will move the clarifications as made by the minister here. How will we be able to inform our headmasters about this? Is the minister going to issue a circular? Are we supposed to follow it up with a letter? 

Madam Speaker, what happens is that when things are said in this House, some people out there pretend that they have not heard or dismiss them as acts of politicians. Therefore, I am very sorry if I diverted from the main issue but all in all, my concern is about the current actions in the interim that are being done by schools across the country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support your submission of a motion being raised in Parliament to congratulate these young boys. I see in the House three members of the parliamentary sports teams - hon. Okupa, hon. Aogon and senior counsel from Bugiri. Those days when I was still on the other side, I would be more proactive to raise this but I cannot bring it by myself to thank us.

One thing that I like about this team is that this was the maiden appearance of Uganda under the category of under-20. This was the first time Uganda was appearing in the under-20 tournaments for African Cup of Nations. That presupposes that the future is bright because this team will progress into the under-23 team and later on, they will replace the senior team. Therefore, the future is bright.

On the issue raised by hon. Jovah Kamateeka, I started by explaining the glory got and, in her opinion, this is more of exploiting these boys. I would say that partly yes and partly no. The vision of the Ministry of Education and Sports is quality education and sports for all. That is our vision.

Most of these children, by the way, are those who are studying under scholarship because of their natural talents. Do not blame even the parents; no one coerced the parents but the parents saw the future in the natural talents of their children. That explains why a number of these children, through their parents, had to make the choice they made.

Hon. Aogon talked about amendment to the relevant laws. The law applicable here is the UNEB Act. Hon. Aogon, I would advise that in the circumstances, this is two-way traffic. We are not running away from our primary responsibility. 

However, both under the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, a private Member can equally move the amendment. Of course, you know the bureaucracy in the private sector and the stages. You are aware that this Parliament has amended even the mother law of the Constitution. Therefore, in the likely event that you see the other side delaying, for purposes –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my honourable colleague and captain of the Parliamentary Football Team is that there is no to amend the law. The current UNEB Act empowers the minister to make regulations in regard to this particular instance. 

Therefore, what we need to do, if we are in agreement with the principle, is just to have a regulation by way of statutory instrument to provide for this and we will have our way. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OBUA: That is a good piece of information, Madam Speaker. We will explore that particular provision. However, what I can also give as information to this House is that in my consultation with UNEB, I was informed that in the post independent history of Uganda, UNEB has only organized two supplementary examinations. 

One of the two was in 1986 when the National Resistance Army (NRA) took over the Government. Part of this country was blocked to the extent that when the NRA came in, UNEB had to organize supplementary examinations for part of the country that was blocked through River Kagera. Therefore, in principle, there are two instances. 

They also have fears, although we are engaging them and the National Council of Sports has written to them. We are not saying that it has ended; we will continue engaging them to see how these four boys can have a possibility of sitting for supplementary examinations. All is not closed, but I also do not want to commit myself that they will sit. Subject to the response of Uganda National Examinations Board, we will be able to know the fate of the four.

However, on the information provided by senior counsel and honourable member for Bugiri, we will also explore within the UNEB Act. We were told that there is no specific provision providing for such. That is the reason why I was telling my brother that if the process in the public sector is bureaucratic, on the side of MDAs we can look at this particular case.

Regarding hon. Betty Nambooze’s appeal to UNEB, I have already stated that all is not lost. I cannot make a commitment, but we are engaging them and this particular issue has already been made in writing. We are waiting for responses.

On a clarification that COVID-19 is a blessing to some people, I do not want to believe that a pandemic can be a blessing. This is because once infected, there are only two options, you can either die or survive.

Now, on the subject matter, I would like to advise. She was asking which term this is. First of all, in principle, the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, is doing all it takes to recover the lost period. We may not recover it entirely, but we will attempt to put the bits and pieces together such that we do not disorganize our children in schools.

When you ask which term this is, I, Obua on the Floor of Parliament, would be tempted to say that this is the last term of last year. It is this term where our children will be tested with some promotional examinations and they will be promoted to the next class. However, we shall put the bits and pieces together to ensure that we go back to our original and traditional term system by realigning them in terms of merging some months and weeks to ensure that some compensation is done.

In most cases, children may not even take more time with us at home. They will be more at school for us to compensate. Therefore, I am tempted to believe and submit that this is the last term of last year. This is now Obua speaking.

Regarding conflict of interest in regulating fees by statutory instrument, I can confirm this. I have stated that the Ministry of Education and Sports has already directed the unit in charge of policy analysis to invoke the provision under the Education Act that gives powers to the minister to regulate other issues, including fees, through a statutory instrument.

Your last point was: are we going to issue a circular? This was issued. If my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze, would like a copy to be availed to her, we can do that even by tomorrow. Regarding issuing another circular, I would like to advise that we usually look at these cases on a case-by-case basis.

Madam Speaker, this is part of our practice. If there is a specific school in Mukono Municipality that is doing something outside the circular that was issued by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports on behalf of the ministry and Government, I would humbly request the honourable member for Mukono Municipality to write to the Ministry of Education and Sports. We will handle this particular case as a ministry. As long as it is a Government-aided school, we will be able to handle it, and I believe in this case that the school in question is a Government school located within Mukono Municipality.

I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister, for all those responses. There is something I would like you to take note of. On Sunday, I was reading a newspaper and there is a young girl who got a bronze medal. I do not know in what sports but she is in Katanga near Makerere. She is now starving.

I had meant to write to you but I have not done so. You could check in the Sunday newspaper. This means that the pledge by the President has not been implemented to get her a house and stipend. Also, the U-20 football players are silver medallists. I hope you will follow up on that issue.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, we are in touch with the President of Uganda Boxing Federation on the fate of the bronze medallist. We have stated in clear terms that he should communicate in writing.

Unfortunately, the stipend is not managed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. What we can only do is to recommend and follow up. Stipend is managed by State House and it falls under the presidential directive. We will be able to write and recommend this lady for consideration. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. I would like to make an amendment on my direction on the treasury memorandum. I had sent it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development but it is supposed to go to the Auditor-General.

We have received treasury memorandum, under item 3 (v), on the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on the report for the Financial Year 2016/2017 on 115 district local governments, 41 municipal councils and 63 town councils. It will now be sent to the Auditor-General. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
