

Wednesday, 4 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As I indicated at the end of business yesterday, today we shall concentrate on the pending Bills. Other business will be handled after we have completed these Bills. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I am ready to proceed but the Attorney-General is attending a Cabinet meeting. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We were all here last night. They are aware that we are supposed to continue with this. Let us continue.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any amendment on clause 1?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment in paragraph (f). I wish to move that we amend clause 1 in the following terms: 

In paragraph (f) by substituting for the proposed sub section 9 (a) the following: - (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson talked of clause 9 but I had brought some amendments of which I had given you notice.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, the amendment is in respect of clause 1 and in paragraph (f) by substituting for the proposed sub section 9(a) with the following: 
“Where a new local Government or administrative unit is created after a general election, the local Government or administrative unit shall commence by statutory instruments issued by the minister one year prior to the next general Parliamentary elections and local Government council elections.”

b) By inserting the following new paragraph after paragraph (f) as follows:

g) By inserting immediately after 9(a) the following new sub section; “9(b) not withstanding sub section 9(a) where a new local Government or administrative unit is created after the local Government council elections, the elections to fill the elective positions in the newly created local Governments or administrative unit shall be held at the next local Government Council elections.”

Justification 

(i)  	For clarity
(ii) 	In order to comply with Articles 1 and 181 of the Constitution to ensure that the local Government or administrative unit does not commence immediately it is formed
(iii) 	To specify the general election being referred to in the provision
(iv) 	To require districts and local Government units created to take effect one year before the next local Government council elections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, I do not know why you want the local Government to be in place one year before the general elections. You know the problems we have been having where we have often failed to complete the administrative structures of those local Governments.

Why do you want this one year before the general elections? Why doesn’t it come to effect together with the general elections?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I am also wondering why he wants the election to be carried out one year before the general elections. Article 81(3) of the Constitution says that the elections can be carried out six months before the general elections.

Can he align his amendment to Article 81(3)? On the other hand, administrative units are created by Parliament but they are demarcated by the Electoral Commission.

In instances where an administrative unit is created, then the leadership will be created according to Article 1(4).  People must choose and consent the way they want to be led and choose their leaders. How shall we reconcile the two?

In any case, when we say that it will be carried out after the general elections, that means the Electoral Commission needs to be given enough time to prepare, to demarcate the constituencies and also bring the demarcated constituencies or administrative units to Parliament for approval.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would probably advise ourselves that we adopt the argument in the local Government, and for the record, we have three general elections - the Parliamentary general elections, Presidential general elections and local Government general elections.  

The argument that we adopted on the creation of new constituencies for districts and new constituencies – that are for directly elected members of Parliament that would wait to come into effect in the next general election – should have been harmonised in this argument. It should have been harmonised to let us go ahead.

I do not know whether I have been clear. We passed it yesterday on the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, that if Parliament creates a new constituency, whether a district or a directly elected member, it has to wait. All these constituencies and the administrative units, which he is talking about - is it one year? They should be created one year towards elections. 

Do not create them in the middle of the term. It causes a lot of impasse like in Bugweri, for example, where our committee member, hon. Katuntu, says he is the acting woman member of Parliament but there is no member of Parliament. (Laughter)  The woman Member of Parliament for Iganga District would not be attending to the people of Bugweri because she already knows it is not her constituency. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is the import of the word “commence by statutory instrument” because that is what you are proposing?    

MR OBOTH: We have to find out what formed our decision. “Commencing by statutory instrument” was largely that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government must have an agreement on the creation of new administrative units so that the Finance ministry confirms. Of course, the Ministry of Local Government was not happy with that but we have seen these local Governments being created and they do not commence immediately. It is because they do not have commencement dates.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. What you are proposing here is that once the minister issues the statutory instrument, the unit commences. That is what you are saying here. The chairperson is here. (Laughter)

MR BITANGARO: What we are saying is that the statutory instrument is by creating the administrative unit but the elections would take place the following year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The words you have used are: “Local Government or administrative unit shall commence by statutory instrument.” What you have said here is that “where a new local Government or administrative unit is created after a general election, the local Government or administrative unit shall commence by statutory instrument issued by the minister, one year prior.” That is why I am asking what the import of “commencement” is. 

MR BITANGARO: It is about the creation, the way I read it to you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, commencing means you elect and you start. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the chairperson of the committee. However, what he does not explain clearly is that for us in local Government, what we mean by “commencing” is when we should have the interim committees. Before, we used to have leadership immediately, which was becoming a bit of a problem.

I can cite some good examples of the newly created lower local Governments. In 2017, we passed here town councils of Kisoga and Katosi. The two were coming from one sub-county, which used to be Ntenjeru sub-county. 

Our committee realised that when we say that “immediately they get interim committees”, it seems as if they are getting independent councils, whereas they still have only one mayor who takes all the two local Governments. That is in the case of, for example, Kisoga Town Council and Katosi Town Council. That has been happening in many other councils.

Therefore, it should say; “commencing of interim lower local Government”. It should come out clearly.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have heard the honourable member apply the words “interim committees” interchangeably with “interim leadership”. What exactly are you stating, honourable member? What are you trying to suggest? As far as I understand, the connotation that you are referring to is interim leadership, not interim committees. Can you clarify what you intend to submit to this House?

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What I am referring to is the interim leadership. The moment we continue and – The committee looked into many issues, even trying to avoid more creation of other local Governments, which may not be in position to be facilitated and start in time. I am sure that is what they are trying to cure in that phrase.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Stand up, so, they see you. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In my interpretation of what the chairperson has stated in the report, you only constitute an interim leadership if elections cannot be conducted. However, if, for example, funds are available, then even the need to have the interim leadership may not arise.

So, for commencement – in my interpretation – that is the period from which the operationalisation of a given administrative unit starts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you meant that the minister will declare – because you can declare and leave it there – or you really mean that he issues an instrument and they have to start. The word “commencement” is very key.

MR BITANGARO: It is appointing the time when the administrative unit is created but not the election. The elections would still have to wait until the general election.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You may have to change the words then.

MR BITANGARO: We can say “create”

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I go with the guidance given by my good friend, hon. Oboth, that actually, we align this very amendment to the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill that we have passed in this House, for ease of implementation and also trying to eliminate any kind of confusion in the implementation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are assisting hon. Nzoghu. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: The confusion, Madam Chairperson, when you look at (a) and (b), which is a proposal on 9 (a), one; we all acknowledge that in the Local Government Act, there is no provision that gives effect to when these local Governments begin to commence or commence. 

In the interest of that, the Electoral Commission would be guided by an instrument. However, what we need to harmonise is the duration we have given. Giving one year to general election would contravene some parts of the Constitution and even the Local Government Act. If we reduce it to six months, the minister will issue a Statutory Instrument to indicate the time when these districts will come into effect. That is when the Electoral Commission would go ahead to gazette the area and that can be either a district local Government or any other new administrative unit.

The only amendment that would be there is to say, “six months prior to the next general elections” because within that time, there is no need to have an interim office bearer or an election. Otherwise, it is very important that the minister guides. We do not leave it just for the purposes of just organising elections. We need to guide the Electoral Commission. When the minister issues this, it is for guiding the Electoral Commission and members of the public.

However, on (b) is where we shall harmonise with the position of Parliamentary Elections Act – (Interjections) - I was just giving information.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, what I have in mind is exactly what the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has said. As long as it is six months, we are very comfortable with it. However, anything beyond six months will create more confusion and giving space to people to begin stories that we do not to hear. Therefore, if it is six months, that is fair.

MS BINTU: Madam Chairperson, whereas it will be ideal that we create these structures six months prior to elections, I am wondering when the budget for those new structures would be passed. I am saying this because I presume that within six months, we shall have already passed the budget and if the new structures are not reflected, it means after creating the structures, they will not be operational because they will not have a budget.

Therefore, the committee needs to revisit this clause so that we come up with something, which will be easily implemented. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What I was thinking is that we may have to break the paragraph into two. We can say, “Where any local Government or administrative unit is created, after general elections, the local Government or administrative unit shall commence after the next general elections...” We can then create a separate provision for the minister to declare.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, we need to add this: “…where an administrative unit is created…” for example, if they create a district and constituency is created, it will be created and approved by Parliament because it is Parliament to approve constituencies. So, if we -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is given. Let us not confuse it. Let us sort out the issue of what constitutes commencement and the role of the minister. We do not want to lose the role of the minister but we also do not want to mix it with “starting before next general elections.”

MR BINTAGARO: Is the period of six months agreed upon? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable chairperson, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, just as hon. Bintu said, for the local governments, it will be an uphill task to demand that the creation be done within six months before the general elections because not only do you have to budget but also create the various structures. You can even see that for the parliamentary elections, for example, we brought it down to October from January, which is about four months. However, in the elections of 2021, the local Governments will have to go through nominations and elections much earlier, including the structures like persons with disabilities. Therefore, for the local Governments, it cannot be six months.  The proposal of one year is more realistic. Thank you.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, she is opposing the six months but it is in the same Bill that we are going to harmonise. The position is; creation of any administrative unit, the Minister of Local Government will first have to agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give them like a certificate of financial implications on whether they will be able to manage an administrative unit that is being set up.

Therefore, if the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have agreed, the issue of time cannot be a problem. We are giving six months to enable the Electoral Commission to prepare to demarcate constituencies, check on the number of voters who will form an electoral area, so that at the end of the day an administrative unit is cleared. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to suggest that we break this provision into two. We first deals with creation of the local Governments and separately deal with the power of the minister to issue an instrument creating the units.

MR OBOTH: We would have no objection to that but probably, when we look at the phrase “administrative unit shall commence,” I think we were generous to use the word “commencing.” We would use ordinary English words like “take effect” because “commencing” is used in legislative language when - but “taking effect”  - you know Parliament is free to create these districts or administrative units; except that that must be done a few years, for purposes of planning. This commencement or taking effect should be in six months.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would comply with your guidance and we see how we to redraft this to incorporate the two. I believe that we are into the same thing but we have used many words.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can we stand over it as the drafting is being done?

MR OBOTH: Yes, as the drafting is being done, Madam Chairperson.

Clause 2

MS BINTU: Madam Chairperson, Uganda Parliamentary Women’s Association (UWOPA) gave notice to move an amendment in clause 2, which reads as follows: “In clause 2, redraft the proposed paragraph (e) as follows: a woman councillor directly elected to represent an electoral area in the district.”

The justification for this amendment is that it will create uniformity to allow each electoral area in the district to be represented by a woman councillor rather than the current situation where some women councillors represent more than one sub-county in the council. That is the justification. I beg to move.

MR BITANGARO: No objection.

MR SEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I need to understand that amendment. First of all women also compete in the elections for direct councillors. In the area where I am a member of Parliament, we have women representing constituencies or electoral areas, but not on affirmative action.

I see us creating a problem because how many councillors will you have?  In future, you will also come here and say, “There must be a woman member of Parliament per constituency.”

Therefore, I am opposed to this proposal. Affirmative action cannot be for every sub-county. However, I need to learn from you the mischief that you are trying to cure.

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wish to concur with the amendment by hon. Bintu. A case in point is, we have been having a councillor representing two sub-counties but she must come from one of the sub-counties. She will concentrate more on the sub-county where she comes from and there is less time given to the second one.

Secondly, the area is becoming bigger. She is a councillor, like the male one but has to operate in two sub-counties while the male councillor only operates in one. 

Therefore, I concur that we create - if an area has two sub-counties, let each female and male councillor represent that sub-county. 

Mr nzoghu: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. Hon. Kibalya is my OB but at this time, I would like to seek clarification from him. 

Hon. Kibalya knows very well that even members of Parliament have particular sub-counties where we come from. You can have a constituency of 10 sub-counties like me. From the interpretation that you have given, it would imply that I would concentrate on the sub-county where I come from. 

Hon. Kibalya, how many sub-counties do you stay in your constituency to justify the amendment that hon. Bintu is moving, which you are supporting? We need to have a harmonised position on each and every electoral process. 

Mr kibalya: Madam Chairperson, he wanted clarification and I would like to give it. My OB knows very well that his mileage is different from mine.

Secondly, if the female and male councillors had different mileages, it would make sense. However, these are two councillors from the same area but one is disadvantaged. We are creating a situation where the female councillors are disadvantaged against the male councillors. 

Mr onzima: Madam Chairperson, my understanding of the situation where women were given opportunity to represent two sub-counties was based on the fact that it was affirmative action, such that women have an opportunity to appear. 

That does not stop them from contesting from the main sub-county, unless we are going to say that every sub-county must have representation of a woman and that, that will not be affirmative action. If we are looking at the affirmative action element, the status quo should remain.

Ms bintu: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information. It is not true that all women represent two sub-counties, as alluded to by my colleague. 

Even the method of bringing together the two sub-counties is not standard. It depends on the returning officer who gets sub-counties A and B and gazettes them that they should be represented by one woman councillor. 

It is happening. For example, in my district Masindi, Kimengo and Miirya are represented by one woman councillor but Pakanyi, Bwijanga and Budongo are represented by one woman councillor each. 

The Chairperson: I have not understood this. Does that mean that every sub-county will have one woman councillor?

Ms Bintu: Yes. 

Ms katali: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give is, Jinja has 12 sub-counties and every sub-county has a female and a male councillor. However, when it comes to Buwenge sub-county, Buwenge Rural and Buyengo, we have one female councillor. For other sub-counties, it is a female and male councillor each. Thank you. 

Ms lanyero: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give to my colleagues is, for purposes of equity and equality for the women councillors, there are sub-counties that are represented by male councillors yet there are those that have one female councillor. Others have two sub-counties for a female councillor or even three. For purposes of equality, we should allow every sub-county to have one female and one male councillor. 

One Member was talking about we, women members of Parliament not concentrating on our sub-counties. It is not the same because when you look at the women members of Parliament, they represent a district while female councillors represent sub-counties. We should allow every sub-county to be represented by a woman councillor. Thank you.

Ms amero: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the position that has been put up. We find it a challenge for the women councillors. You have a female councillor representing two or more sub-counties, yet, the men represent one. 

I do not want us to bring this argument to the issue of calling it empowerment because women councillors do not earn salaries like us in Parliament. They get allowances but you cannot earn a sitting allowance, which is equivalent to somebody who represents one sub-county. I think we need to be fair to these women. Thank you.

Mr ndeezi: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to very strongly support my sister, hon. Bintu. We have been talking about empowerment of women and effective representation in this country. This is the time to remember that when we talked about effective representation, we said we must also address the disadvantages, which exist against women in this country. Therefore, this amendment seeks to reduce these disadvantages and I very strongly support it. 

I am fully convinced that it should be backed by the provisions of the Constitution on empowerment of women in this country. I call upon all members of this august House to support this important amendment. Thank you.

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support the motion on the amendment, as moved by hon. Bintu. I am a victim of what is going on here. Butaleja Town Council is being represented by a women councillor, who is at the same time representing Butaleja rural area. 

We recently established Nabiganda Town Council. There is also another plan or it is in effect that that town council is going to be merged with another sub-county to be represented by a woman councillor. All these other sub-counties are being represented by one male councillor, which is very unfair. I move to support the amendment. 

MR OUMA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I stand to support my colleague. Last week, I had a lengthy discussion with the registrar of Namayingo District and I asked her why they make a woman councillor represent two island sub-counties. In the island districts, it takes you almost two hours in the waters and they are represented by one woman. 

Madam Chairperson, by now, you would be a woman member of Parliament representing two districts, which is impossible. Why do we make these women councillors represent two sub-counties? Therefore, I support the proposal that at least every sub-county must be represented by one woman councillor. 

MR BAFAKI: Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the amendment brought by hon. Bintu. I come from a newly created district of Kazo. Kazo has eight sub-counties but out of eight, six are represented by three lady councillors. 

When we came to forming an interim Government, it was trouble and this also happened to Rwampara. If we remain like this, even when we form the Government, the district itself and the council will not have members seat in all the committees? Now, what do we do here, honourable members? Should we form more sub-counties or allow representation of different people at different positions in a sub-county?

Instead of forming more sub-counties, I suggest that we propose that each sub-county be represented by a lady councillor and a man. Then, when we get to the district, we have more people fill in the committees so that they can deliberate on behalf of the district. I thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. As a member of UWOPA, we resolved in that manner and we agreed that each sub-county in the entire country be represented by a woman councillor. (Applause) Let us not coil around to pretend because the reality of the matter – by the way, this concerns women. Why should we favour men against women? This is where the matter is. I am saying that I support that amendment 100 per cent.

Secondly, when I was in Ngora last week, the women councillors of Ngora told me that they are tired of representing two sub-counties. They want to represent only one sub-county and I am in agreement with them. I thank you very much and I encourage my colleagues to endorse this amendment. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The procedural issue I am raising is under Article 93 of the Constitution. My understanding is that by creating electoral areas, we are infringing on Article 93 of the Constitution. 

The moment you create them, they are going to be paid a salary and allowances. In this very Bill we are handling, we also said that in the creation of administrative units, the ministries of Local Government and Finance must harmonise. Why are they harmonising? This is because you are looking at issues of money. There is no way we are going to contradict ourselves in the same law. You are saying before you create them, the Ministries of Finance and Local Government must harmonise because there is a financial implication. However, before we are even done with that, we are now creating electoral areas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not think we are creating electoral areas because they are already there. The sub-counties are already there. What the Members are saying is that they need additional representation. That is all. They are already there. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The House seems to be in agreement on the matter. My view is that we harmonise the formula in order to capture the desires of people in the cities. 

If you are talking about population, as a basis of representation and size, Kampala and Wakiso – I will give you an example of Kampala Central. Putting aside registered voters, you are talking about 1.2 million people who work and stay in the city. If we are talking about the use of fair representation, as a basis for creation of electoral areas, then, fairness, equity and justice must start from here. 

For example, Kasokoso Parish has about 40,000 registered voters. If you are making a measure for a sub-county based on population, it qualifies, even a district.

Therefore, if you are talking about fairness, then let us devise a formula that fits the entire country. Otherwise, we shall open up a Pandora box that we might not be able to close. It is a matter of logic. If you are talking of numbers, whereas we support the issue of fairness in representation, then capture the numbers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Point of Order.

MR NSEREKO: No, he is even smiling. The hon. Kibalya, the one I know, I was his campaign manager at the university.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is a friendly fire.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, what hon. Nsereko is saying could be true. However, we need to be very careful when advancing the argument about fairness and equity. 

In this same Parliament, we have people who have come here with less than 5,000 votes. We have hon. Ssemujju, whose total voter population is over 250,000. We earn the same salary and we are all honourable members. There is no senior honourable member here.

The woman councillor under Section 10 of the Local Government Act- the rationale given by the mover for this amendment, it appeals to me about moving from affirmative action to equality and equal representation. Definitely, in Wakiso, we shall have a market place for a district council.

However, if that is the position of the law, be it. In my own constituency, we have women councillors representing three sub-counties. 

Now the debate here should not be about population. We are here on constituencies, districts, sub-counties. (Applause)

MR NSEREKO: I thought the comrade was giving me friendly information but is detrimental. (Laughter) Honourable members, we are not saying no to your formula. We are saying, if you are looking for fairness, equity and win-win situation, you say it is because of proportionality based on size and numbers. Therefore, you cannot say your formula is the right one and ours is wrong.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if you have a formula present it. What is your proposal?

MR NSEREKO: That whereas I have no objection for the issue of fairness on representation based on sub-county because it is already here in the city - consideration should also be made that for every electoral area that has over 30,000 persons, shall have equal and fair representation as those represented on the basis of a sub-county.

That would mean in effect that Nakawa Division that has 800,000 people produces over 18 female councillors -(Interjections)- you do not just know. The justification is that where you have - you are talking of a sub-county because you are bringing size and the matter is that someone meets a bigger cost of representing people.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, a sub-county is a sub-county whether in the city or where, it is a sub-county and so, you have been catered for.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I agree but the issue here is; hon. Ouma said that he has a woman representative representing two islands. My question would be, assuming that island had only 400 people. 

You see, the issue is that when you do not balance the formula, you will find it very hard to convince people that every electoral area created as a result of size, shall be justifiable just because people impute that size will be the basis. We represent people not acreage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the sub-counties are already there in the country. They are already created.

MR NSEREKO: But Madam Chairperson, we represent people not size.

MR ARIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Like hon. Abala, I am a member of UWOPA. Madam Chairperson, I came to Parliament with 70 per cent of my support from women. The intricacies of talking about numbers do not arise. (Interjections) If hon. Nsereko would accord a little bit of -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Listen to your colleagues.

MR ARIKO: Madam Chairperson, the issue of numbers and population would not arise. I would like to give an example of Soroti Municipality. 

In the Northern Division of Soroti Municipality, we have one directly elected representative of the women at the District Council. Eastern Division and Western Division share one representative. East Division is the heart of the city of Soroti. The total population of voters of Eastern Division alone is 19,000. Both the Northern Division and Western Division have far less voters than the Eastern Division and yet, the Eastern Division shares a councillor. Therefore, it is not anything to do with population of a sub-county.

Madam Chairperson, the hon. Bintu has moved not only a pertinent amendment but one, which ensures that we have orderliness in the representation of our people in the district council and I support her. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the amendment that has been brought by hon. Bintu. Even in the Bible, Jesus went for that one lost sheep. That is exactly what a female councillor will go through to look for votes. Therefore, it is not about the number but the distance the woman goes through.

We already have a challenge to convince these young ladies to come to leadership positions but we are giving them a burden to run –(Interjections)- no, we are not using sentiments. It becomes challenging to get women to come into positions of leadership.

However, we are saying that we should combine the already big sub-counties. It is very difficult for a woman to move to two different sub-counties because they do not first of all earn enough and now the men are very comfortable with one sub-county. What do you expect a woman to do in two sub-counties? Hon. Nzoghu, you can give me the information as long as it is friendly. (Laughter) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Akello. The information I would like to provide is that the Electoral Commission has not helped Ugandans to clearly define what an “electoral area” is. If they had helped Ugandans to understand what an electoral area is, they should have set clearly what a sub-county population and size should be and then, these would be guiding principles for us to know and understand how many representatives a sub-county, a municipality and a city should have. For example, Rakai District has a population of 50,000 people. 

However, Madam Chairperson –(Interruption) 

MS LUCY AKELLO: That is not information. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, is a sub-county an electoral area?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is.

MR OKUPA: If a sub-county is an electoral area, then it must have leaders whether youth or women. It is simple logic. If it is an electoral area, it should have representation.  

MS LUCY AKELLO: I am concluding, Madam Chairperson. Thank you very much for the information. From the submission of hon. Nzoghu, he is supporting the amendment indirectly because he is also lamenting. I support this and I think that as members of Parliament, we know the challenges that we go through when looking for votes. What about that grassroots’ woman who has to look for votes in two sub-counties? Let us put on their shoes and see the challenges they go through. I support the amendment.   

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the proposal by hon. Bintu. This is the time for us to address gender bias in political representation. There are women representing two or three sub-counties, yet their male colleagues are representing only one. Women are beasts of burden. They have to transverse three sub-counties, while their counterparts are moving in only one sub-county. 

I would like to quote Article 33(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It says: “Women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and the right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities.” If this is a command from the Constitution, who are we to say that women should not have an equal treatment as far as political representation is concerned? (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, my neighbour, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give my honourable colleague and to also answer the issue of numbers vis-à-vis the geography, is that the answer lies in Article 181 of the Constitution. Article 181(3) is to the effect that the demarcation of electoral areas shall ensure that a sub-county, a town council or an equivalent part of a municipality is represented at the district council by at least one person. 

Secondly, the number of inhabitants in an electoral area may be greater or less than other electoral areas in order to take into account means of communication, geographical features and density of population. The information I would like to give is that it is not true that these electoral areas should be of similar size or that they should have the same population; the Constitution states otherwise. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to move on. Let me just give you a ridiculous situation in my constituency. My district councillor represents Bulamuti Town Council, Bulamuti Rural, Magogo sub-county and Kisozi sub-county. There are four and that is what we are talking about. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we move that the Bill is amended by inserting the following new clauses immediately after clause 4 as follows:
“Amendment of Section 102 of the principal Act -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you inserting something new?

MR BITANGARO: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us deal with the first one. Are you amending this or adding something?
 
MR BITANGARO: Clause 4 is amendment of Section 102 of the principal Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us deal with the first section. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can now move your proposal.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, what is proposed in clause 4, which is amending Section 23 of the principal Act, introduces clause 6(a) that the women councillors form one third. In light of the amendment that we have accepted from UWOPA, does this still stand on clause 4? Clause 4 may now need to be deleted in light of the balance that we have created for every sub-county to have one woman and one male councillor. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have the rationale for that section?

MR BITANGARO: Well, the amendment is immediately after clause 4.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me just look at the principal Act briefly. Isn’t there a problem with this law? How many sub-sections are there? In view of our last amendment in clause 2, we no longer need clause 4.

MR BITANGARO: I concede to the amendment

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, it means that is going to cause consequential amendments to several others, even in the principal Act because we still have many provisions in there, where the one-third was talked about. Now that we have it, it must be consequential throughout the Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, hon. Odur. I now put the question that clause 4 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, deleted.

Clause 5, agreed to.
Clause 6

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to clause 6 to read as follows: 
“Clause 6 is amended by: 

(a) Substituting for paragraph (d) the following: (d) by substituting for sub-section 4(c), the following: (c) has completed a minimum education of advanced level standard or its equivalent.”

(b) By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph 
(d) to read as follows: (e) insert a new sub-section 4(a), immediately after Section 4, to read as follows: 4(a) Sub-sections 3(a), 3(b), 3(c), 3(d) and 3(e) shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to a person who intends to stand for election as a chairperson of a municipality, town, division or sub-county under sub-section 4.” 

Justification

    i)  Appreciation of the functions of a chairperson of a municipality, division or sub county, to impose a minimum education qualification of advanced level standard on such a person. 
    ii) For uniformity to ensure all elective offices in the district and city have minimum qualifications just like the city and district chairpersons.
    iii) For completeness to require the establishment of the education qualifications of the chairperson of a municipality, division or sub-county before nomination. 

I give this justification because sometimes some municipalities are bigger than some districts yet, we have not provided for the qualifications. That is why I want to bring uniformity on the qualifications for these elective positions. (Applause)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We wanted women to be at the same level with us but now, we are looking at the qualifications. On behalf of the people of Uganda and indeed, the ideology of NRM, I would like to propose that the qualifications be left as they were. 

There are people in this country who have not gone to school but they are able to lead others. Imposing A level or even O level qualifications onto the office of the chairperson of a sub-county would be very bad. If the worse comes to the worst, let it be only for elections in municipalities. Otherwise, to come to a sub-county like Budumba and –(Interjections)– I am informed, please, sit down.  That can only be a qualification for elections in cities like Kampala. 

Otherwise, for us to sit here and lock down able elders in sub-counties who usually run these entities very well on issues of qualification, is a disservice and we should know where people are being targeted. (Interruption)

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and my colleague for giving way. We passed the KCCA Bill here. As we discussed it, most Members said that we should not put any qualification for elections of councillors in the KCCA Bill. We have already passed that there is no qualification for the councillors in KCCA. When you compare KCCA and our municipalities and sub- counties or divisions – I would like to support hon. Waluswaka’s proposal that we do not put any qualification for the election of councillors. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Chairperson, if we stick to the issue of qualifications, then we should state that the qualification for members of Parliament is a master’s degree. Why do we want A level for a chairperson LC III? I propose that we leave the issue of qualifications for chairpersons. The qualification should be just age and national identity card. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear the position of Government and the committee on the proposal.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, the committee has an amendment on clause 6 and it reads as follows: “we would like to amend section 3 of the principal Act in the following terms: (a) by substituting for sub-section 3(b) the following: “(a) is an ordinary resident in that district or city as the qualification; 

(b) 	by repealing section 3(c); 
(c) 	by substituting for section 4(b) the following: (b) is an ordinary resident in the municipality, town, division or sub county; and
(d) 	by repealing 4(c). 

That is the amendment, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what is in the Bill; it is not your amendment. (Interjections) You are saying that you are standing by the Bill. It is not an amendment.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I rise to support the amendment by hon. Okupa for the following reasons: The NRM Government adopted the UPE and USE programmes. From the recent data in the Ministry of Education and Sports, these free education programmes have performed very well and very many people have actually attained those qualifications. Therefore, for an NRM Member to stand on the Floor of Parliament and undermine his or her own Government would be undermining the President, to say the least. 

We are talking about the chairperson or mayor of a division, not councillors. This person presides over budgets. Madam Chairperson, in the Committee on Public Accounts, we once interfaced with a chairperson who told us that at the beginning of the financial year, the technical people give him something and he does not know where it comes from, yet he runs the local government. What we are saying is that the chairperson must understand the business of council because there are contracts to deal with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we proceed, I would like to get a clarification about what we did in the KCCA law. Is it true that we did not – What did we do about the urban mayors?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, as they look into that issue of the urban mayors – (Interjection) - I wish colleagues could listen –
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, let me start from the last Parliament. You may remember the petition that Uganda Local Governments Association (ULGA) submitted to the last Parliament. We adopted the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments Accounts) under hon. Reagan, with their recommendations. The committee said the challenge they got from local government accounting officers was the issue of not having qualifications for the district leaders. 

Therefore, there is nothing new in what I am submitting. It is based on the submissions of ULGA in the last Parliament. We only need to improve the service delivery in this country. 

Madam Chairperson, we have a situation where you have a town clerk with a master’s degree but the chairperson does not have any qualification. How do you expect them to relate? If Members feel that it is high, they can propose amendments but at least we should have a minimum qualification to address this matter –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. I would like to give the MP holding the Floor this information. You are aware that assistant chief administrative officers normally supervise the work of sub-counties. The qualification of an assistant chief administrative officer is a degree. That is what we need to take note of.

Secondly, as we move to the era of e-governance, it means that whoever we put in leadership must understand how e-governance communication is going to be done. Therefore, even an old person like me needs to catch up and understand how e-governance will work because that is dynamism. For a Parliament, which is as dynamic as this, to go in reverse gear – what are you talking about? We are talking about improvement in quality, not only at Parliament level but even at the local governments - district and sub-county.

We know that our governance starts at LCIII. Therefore, we must make sure that the people who are there are competent and can understand the concept of budgeting, auditing and all these things. If you are going to put somebody who may not even understand and articulate issues, how are you going to improve governance at the lower level? (Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: With due respect, Mama Cecilia, you have made reference to the fact that we are using e-governance. You know for a fact that when we came here, we had to go through an induction process to use iPads, despite the fact that we are educated. 

Yes, I understand that there are certain processes that we need to learn. Do you know that up to now, four years after the elections, our LCV councillors have not been inducted? Why should we blame them for a process that we ought to have undertaken – (Interjection) - Can I finish? Madam Chairperson, I need protection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! There is a lot of excitement in this House.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for Mama Cecilia to insist that councillors do not know what to do yet the process of induction, which they ought to have been taken through, has not been done and MPs themselves have done the same? If we are supposed to create a level playing field, whether for chairpersons or councillors, if we have had induction ourselves, why don’t we insist on those local government leaders undergoing the same process? After that, we can blame them for non-performance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what hon. Ogwal means is that in order to adopt e-governance, you must have a certain level of education. That is what she is saying.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, he was raising a point of order against me for nothing. I think there is also need for the minister to go through induction. (Laughter) We are now better equipped to induct you.

Madam Chairperson, you are presiding over a very prestigious institution and it is important that we pass the quality of governance that we want for the future down to the lower levels. Therefore, I wish for the ministers to help the Government and the people of Uganda to catch up with the dynamism of the world. We cannot remain stuck in history when people are moving forward. You should, by now, make sure that all the primary schools have iPads. Councillors must have iPads. How can you have an iPad when you don’t even know English?

Madam Chairperson, that is the justification for having a minimum of A Level education. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This Parliament gave me the privilege to chair the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government Accounts). As part of the experience I have got from the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments Accounts), we have realised that it is very difficult to get information, especially from the lowest level. 

We have the sub-county accounting officers, for example, who we used to call sub-county chiefs previously. Now they are called sub-county accounting officers and their qualification is a minimum of a bachelor’s or master’s degree. 

There is also a category of staff at the sub-county called the Community Development Officers (CDOs). Madam Chairperson, the minimum qualification for CDOs is also a first degree. In fact, the minimum qualification for most of the sub-county staff is a degree, yet they are supposed to be supervised by councillors who do not have a single qualification. Madam Chairperson, we are not doing a service to this country. I support the proposal moved by hon. Okupa that we – (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, there are two pieces of information I would like to give to the House. The first piece of information is that the Uganda Local Governments Association, which comprises of the elected councillors, sat in their annual meeting and petitioned this House to put some academic qualifications as a requirement. They did that and we have a record.

The second piece of information is that in one of the sub-counties in Serere District, the sub-county chief appeared before our committee and said, “I was disrespecting you because in my council, I cannot even talk to any councillor. I just tell them what to do and they sign. They cannot supervise me.” This means that our councils at the local government, especially at the sub-county where the Government is pumping money -

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much. In summary, the sub-county chairperson must understand each and every aspect of the budget of a sub-county. If they do not have minimum qualifications of just A Level, how will they understand the budget of the sub-county? How will they understand the language of the sub-county chief, who is a degree holder? I would like to beg that we adopt this proposal and support it for the betterment of this country. (Interjections)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think our rules are very clear that we have a national responsibility. The responsibility we have is to improve the quality of leadership in this country. The path we have taken, for example, is that even basic equipment like a computer should be at a sub-county level. How do we communicate? Sub-county chairpersons are in charge of policies and so, they should have minimum capacity to appreciate Government’s policy. How can we have an illiterate? How does central Government communicate policies, except through documentation?

Madam Chairperson, why do we glorify illiteracy? We are here glorifying illiteracy. Are we serious? Government took a deliberate decision to have universal primary education and universal secondary education so that we can equip all our citizens with capacity. Only the other day, our own said “if there is controversy about my education, I have gone back to school” and we have to salute that courage. Even our leaders at the local government level have a chance to upgrade because there is universal secondary education. Are we asking too much to say that our leaders should have some minimum level of education? 

I would be very surprised - this cannot come from a professor, but if a professor stood up to say that we need illiteracy for leaders, we should look at the professor squarely (Laughter). No reasonable professor should stand up and glorify illiteracy. If that ever happens, I will look into the qualifications of that professor. Having said that –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. I need some clarification from you. I am not a professor from an academic point of view but I am an academician. I would like to request you to substantiate whether there is a relationship between academic qualifications and ability to lead -(Interjections)- Honourable members, first hold on. Let me give my information. 

We are grappling with academic qualifications for leaders because we use a foreign language in our country. In the United Kingdom, there are no academic qualifications for leadership, not even in America or the Arab world. In Uganda and in some African countries, the academic qualifications we have put are at the level of understanding and communicating in English. If we were communicating in the local language, I need to be convinced that there would be need for academic qualifications for leaders. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I want to ask whether the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government writes to you in Lutagwenda, when he is communicating to your sub-county.

MR KATUNTU: The Floor is still mine and so, I am not going to give it to the Member. Okay, you can answer that and then I can resume the Floor.

MR AGABA: Madam Chairperson, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government communicates to me and other Ugandans in English since English is the official language. He is even at liberty to communicate to me in Kiswahili since it is also an official language. If we were not using English or Kiswahili as official languages, he would have used a local language like Luganda, Runyakitara or any other language to communicate to me. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, official communication can only be in an official language. It is provided in the Constitution and it can only be in English.

We have leaders who are supposed to supervise civil servants but they cannot even write their names. How do they supervise these civil servants? What we are creating is leadership, which is being supervised by the civil servants. This is what we are creating here.

I would like to conclude by supporting hon. Okupa’s proposal. I would like to also request the Chairperson that we have had enough debate on this matter, we need the question to be put.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, there might have been a mix-up of conceptualisation of hon. Okupa’s amendment. Currently, hon. Okupa is dealing with the chairpersons of sub-counties, divisions, mayors of municipalities and city divisions and district chairpersons. That is the level at which we are. It should not be confused with councillors. These are not the same clauses we will be dealing with.

Needless to say, yesterday, the minister laid before this House a Treasury memorandum in relation to the value-for-money audit of municipality accounts for the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) programme. I happened to have been privileged to attend several meetings of the Committee of Local Government Accounts in relation to the value-for-money audit in USMID. Most of these municipalities, including my own, had fundamental problems with adherence to the World Bank guidelines on the utilisation of this money.

When the committee interrogated the local government officials, one of the key issues was the disparity between the levels of political supervision vis-à-vis the technical one. Therefore, it is prudent for us as Parliament to ensure that we set a standard so that as we think about reviewing the quality of the Uganda public service schemes of service, we must also look at ourselves as leaders.

Indeed, the Members of Parliament here have been talking about qualifications for sub-county chiefs. A sub-county chief is at the rank of a senior assistant secretary. A senior assistant secretary must have a bachelor’s degree. He or she must have a Certificate in Administrative Law, a postgraduate diploma at the minimum and a master’s degree is desirable. That is at the sub-county. 

Also at the sub-county, you have the agricultural supervisor, the community development officer, the fisheries officer, the environmental officer, and now we have the accountant, who is a degree holder. The accountant must also have ACCA in full. Now, we are talking about having somebody picking a national identification card and simply walking there and getting nominated and that person supervises these people!

Parliament and Uganda must reach a level where our leaders measure up to quality. I would like to support hon. Okupa and enjoin the honourable colleagues here to let Parliament set quality leadership for our country. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Let us be careful as we proceed with this amendment. First of all, the reason we failed to get the right people with qualifications for these offices was because of remuneration. When you talk about councillors or an LCIII chairpersons, kindly think about their remuneration. As we speak now, the chief is earning around Shs Shs 1.7 million but the LCIII Chairman is earning Shs 250,000 per month. How do you attract a degree holder to that office?

Secondly, not everybody who goes to school will always know how to speak and express themselves in that particular language you are interested in. Recently, I was in one of my constituency schools and I asked one of the S.3 students the difference between a mosquito and a fly. He said that a mosquito can fly but a fly cannot mosquito. Interpretation of the language – reading it – is not necessarily about qualifications -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, which amendment are you addressing?

MR SSEWUNGU: I am talking about qualifications, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Concentrate on the qualifications then.

MR SSEWUNGU: Let us look at the qualifications of these people very carefully -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you address the amendment; do you support it or not?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I do not support it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are speaking about service delivery and the sub-county is one of the critical centres of power were most of our Government activities, like services, are executed. That makes the LC III chairperson a very critical person at the lowest level. 

If you critically analyse, most of the sub-counties that have problems with service delivery have LCIII chairmen who are not educated. At the level where service delivery is crippled, it is because the technical team and the LCIII chairpersons are not at par because of the difference in the levels of education and understanding.

Is S.6 something that is very difficult to get in Uganda? Look at the contribution of the Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes; these people are available. Let us save ourselves from embarrassment. We have always listened very closely when these people are being sworn in and you hear somebody saying, “I solomonly swear”. These are the things that we need to avoid. 

I support hon. Elijah Okupa’s amendment; we need people who are educated to be able to execute these services to the satisfaction of the locals. We cannot leave the technical people to supervise the politicians. I support this amendment.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we are debating this matter at the right time. I would not be speaking good English now if I had no qualifications. Therefore, it is very pertinent that anybody who seeks leadership at the level that we have just talked about should have some qualifications. 

We cannot pretend as a House that represents all Ugandans to be doing the correct duty when there is a problem in our backyard. We must rise up. We must speak the truth. This is the time we must have some qualifications where they are supposed to be, so that this country becomes sane.

Madam Chairperson, we have a problem. One time I went to one of the sub-counties and I was told that an LCIII chairperson asked for a bank statement. Sometimes these statements have the words “credit balance” and “debit balance”. This person thought that credit balance meant that the clerk had borrowed money and he said, “Now again you have acquired another debt for us!” (Laughter) When they brought the one which said debit balance, eh said “so we have a debt”. You know that those two terms have specific meanings in accounting.

It is very important that we have people who have attained a certain level of education. It is not because we do not want to have them there but it is a necessity now; we cannot do away with it. 

Finally, before he gives information, I have another point. Madam Chairperson, I really think that in future, this House might have to upgrade the level of education. (Applause) Time is coming. I can tell you, most of the technocrats have very high qualifications. People have master’s degrees and PhDs. They now abuse us that we only have S.6 qualifications. One time, we might also need to upgrade. Let me take this information from my friendly neighbour –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank my colleague for allowing me to give this very important information. 

I would like to appeal to our colleagues on the other side that they should not fear. Right now, in each and every parish, at least you will not fail to find someone who has completed either O level or A level. Currently, people are highly educated. In the past, there were no set qualifications because we feared that we may fail to find somebody to be an LCIII chairperson but currently, they are there.

MR AOGON: Thank you for the information. Let me take information from hon. Nsereko. He begged for this, Madam Chairperson - just a small piece of information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members.

MR ABACACON: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The truth is that education is put there for competition - for quality education, not quantity education. I have been reliably told that somebody in P.1 in 1940 was equivalent to somebody in P.7 today and somebody in P.7 in 1940, which was Junior 1, is equivalent to somebody in S.4 today. In the same way, those who were in Junior 2 are now almost equivalent to someone in S.6.

When you go down to the sub-county level, even the parish chiefs have the qualifications of S.6 and then they have to go to the Law Development Centre to improve their capacity to run a parish. We have also found that the sub-county chiefs’ qualifications give a very big challenge to the LCIII chairpersons. If we allow the LCIII chairpersons to have qualifications of S.4 or equivalent, or even below, then there is no quality in what we are trying to do in this country.

It is, therefore, mandatory that A Levels or S.6 should be the best qualification for anybody who wants to be a chairperson LCIII, even at the division level, so that things match. These technical officers have been giving our leaders and LCIII chairpersons a very big challenge and they fear them. So, I think this would ensure that they match, walk together and cooperate at a level of no fear. I, therefore, support hon. Elijah Okupa’s motion.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, if everybody who was not educated was to be left out, even our own parents would not have moved this country to where we are. So, if we are only looking for educated people - The council is there to assist the chairman. The chairman does not work in isolation; he works with the council. Whatever he does, he does it with the council. So, what qualifications are we talking about at that level? What are you going to pay a chairman who is highly educated? –(Interjection)– Did he say “motion”? No, wait a minute. 

I am not for the motion because we are trying to raise these people to a very high level and yet the wananchi themselves elect these people, knowing they are not highly educated. There are people who dropped out of S.3, S.2 who are even much better than those who finished S.6, I can assure you. So, I do not support it –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, hon. Mutonyi, for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is that on the ground while people are choosing leaders, they have different considerations. They have different interests as to why they want those people to lead. 

It is a bit dangerous for us to make democracy elitist, that it is only the elite who can participate in democracy. However, Madam Chairperson, it is persuasive that the leadership at a certain level, like for municipalities, towns and town councils, need to be in tandem with the communication from the Government because it is in English. We can maybe consider it at that level. However, for sub-counties downwards, I think we had better leave the people to choose the leaders they want and let democracy evolve over time. Time will come when the people find that they maybe need holders of bachelor’s or master’s degrees at sub-county level. However, if we pass it now, it is a bit like imposing a big burden on the people on the ground. Thank you.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whereas the issue of going to school is very important, I think the level is high. We have some parts of this country where getting that level of education is likely to be a problem. 

I would like to propose that maybe we leave it at certain levels. We could agree on a level for the municipalities or town councils but for LCIII, I would propose S.4. Senior 4 would be better off for a start and then we move on from there.

I have moved around this country and I have found some places where people do not know the English language. I would like to beg the House and the mover that we harmonise and come to at least O level. We cannot bring them to the same level of a Member of Parliament who is earning a bigger salary. This is a person who would be having A levels but earning very little allowances.

I really beg my brother, hon. Okupa, that let us agree to S.4 as the benchmark, so that it covers the whole country - for the leadership, not for the councillors. Thank you.

MS AMERO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with hon. Grace Asamo that we put it at O level. I think the essence is that somebody should be able to understand written communication and should be able to also write back. Even if you say that they are not working in isolation, they should be able to understand what the technical people are telling them.

As it is right now, you cannot simply get somebody because he has an identity card and enable him to become a leader, even when he can become a chairperson of a malwa group. I would like to request that we go by Senior 4, as we give time for them to understand that education is needed in this and with time, the qualifications will be raised. 

We cannot simply wake up now when we are heading towards elections and then we say it should be S.6. I would like to agree that in some places, there are some people who have never reached S.6. So, let us take S.4 for a start and then when we are amending the Constitution in future, we can change. Thank you.

MS NAMOE: Madam Chairperson, I am do not support the proposal to have qualifications for the lower local councils. In Karamoja, it is just recently, with the introduction of UPE and USE, that people managed to access education. The majority of the Karimojong are not educated. 

We have issues of insecurity, which do not need qualifications –(Interjection) – Yes, issues of insecurity. Therefore, Karamoja is a bit complex when you talk about qualifications.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Allow the Member to speak.

MS NAMOE: We have always been left behind; we are just coming on board and we shall get there. Therefore, this particular amendment has to be stayed until a time when we reach that education level, so that we can also have people with those qualifications to compete. The minimum we can have now is P.7. We can for now have the Primary 7 qualification for the parish and LC III councillors and then maybe for the LC V chairpersons, we can have Senior 4. That is what I can submit.

MR OLEGA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to oppose the amendment. While I attach great importance to education, when it comes to the issue of democracy, let us go slowly. It appears that those who understand and have gone to school are trying to suppress those who did not go to school.

There are many factors here, and one of them is there was war in Uganda for some time. When you look at our history, you realise there has been turmoil in Uganda that has caused many people to miss out on education. Therefore, when we move fast to oppress people who have not gone to school, it will be something bad. 

Madam Chairperson, there are countries with a bicameral system of Parliament, where they have a senate and a lower parliament. If one is a member of the senate and the senate -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Olega met the requirements for a Member of Parliament and that is why he is in this House. He comes from an area, which he is purportedly indicates does not have people who can meet the qualifications of even Senior 4. 

Madam Chairperson, is it in order, therefore, for the honourable member to embarrass himself and indicate that there are no people who can meet those qualifications, when he is here and he is qualified from his area?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Olega, you need to explain to us how you came to qualify alone and other people from Aringa did not qualify. 

MR OLEGA: I am one of those who struggled after the Idi Amin war ended. I was in ordinary level and I continued from there. What I am trying to say is that if we had a bicameral system in this country and our senate came up with a law that they want only PhDs and lawyers, would you pass it in this House? You would not pass it because you know it would affect us. So, why do you impose this on the people? (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information. This kind of debate has ever happened in this very House; it went dry and we never succeeded. We were accused of being elitist by the same people who are in the same leadership – (Interjections) – Yes, I am telling you this.

I also want to give more information to the effect that all these debates and transactions at the local government level are done in the local language – in Runyankole, Rukiga –(Interjections)– Yes! 

Madam Chairperson, I want to insist that we are not going to sit here and isolate people who are doing a very good job. I am not going to be party to this resolution –(Interjection)– There is no point of order. We have technocrats at that level, who will interpret and ensure that they understand and analyse the local issues –(Interjections)– I am not going to be part and parcel of this kind of motion. Thank you.

MR OLEGA: Finally, Madam Chairperson, my prayer is that although we know the time – (Interruption)

MR LOKWANG: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Most of my colleagues here always ask whether I am the only educated person in Ik County, yet you want to lift the standard. 

You have brought this amendment to Parliament late because we are now going towards elections. You would have brought it earlier so that the councillors without qualifications would prepare to go back to school. When you bring it at this time, what are you going to do? You should first amend the qualifications for a Member of Parliament before going for that of the councillors. What we should do is to first harmonise with the qualifications for one to be elected as a councillor to the KCCA before we go through this amendment. Thank you, Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, would you be happy if we did not touch the sub-counties?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. While we legislate, we must be consistent with our Constitution. We should not legislate and keep adding mistakes. The Constitution clearly stipulates that the people have the power to decide their leadership.

As you are aware, we already made a mistake by setting a qualification for one to contest for Member of Parliament. Why would you make another mistake that requires people contesting for LC III to possess a certain level of education? English does not supervise or show you that a road is good - (Interruption)

MR ARIKO: Madam Chairperson, I thank you so very much for the opportunity. Hon. Patrick Isiagi Opolot is a person who is very close to me; both our fathers worked in the same government - in the UPC II Government. Hon. Patrick Isiagi Opolot, at the fore of Parliament, raised a Bible and swore that he would protect and abide by the provisions of the Constitution. 

That legal instrument provides for the minimum qualification for a Member of Parliament; more so, in a situation where there are certain Members of Parliament struggling with the idea of S.6 or its equivalent and today the honourable member stands up and says that it is a mistake that Members of Parliament passed a law that provides for qualifications. Is he in order, having sworn by the Bible to protect the Constitution, to state in this House that he does not abide by the same Constitution? Thank you.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the issue of qualifications for Members of Parliament is a constitutional command. It was not this House but the Constitution, so you are out of order.

Mr PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the Member just interrupted me. When you are at LCIII level, you have to supervise many sectors. Speaking English will not determine whether you have seen a good road done or not. It will not show you that a hospital or health centre is well constructed and that drugs are in hospitals. After all, English is taught right from primary school. Even a Primary 7 leaver can speak English, so he can be an LCIII chairperson. 

Therefore, let us not deny people a chance. Some people are born leaders and they can mobilise wananchi. This is mobilisation. As long as somebody has leadership skills, it does not require him or her to have “A” level qualifications. Some people even got them yesterday; does it qualify them to be good supervisors?

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I asked you whether we should deal with the others and leave out the sub-counties.

Ms avur: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity. I do not agree with the proposal that we should have an LCIII chairperson with a qualification of Senior 6. 

Some Members here are insisting on the issue of supervision. Political supervision is different from technical supervision. Supervision is not a one-man job; there are several people in the chain. Even as Members of Parliament, in doing our oversight work we are supposed to supervise and the district leaders are supposed to supervise. There are auditors and technical people. We cannot say that because they cannot understand budgets - What is the use of the technical people at the sub-county level?

What we need to do in this country is to make sure that we bring back sanity so that the technical people do the right thing that they are employed to do. Thank you.

Ms Bigirwa: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable colleagues, as the Parliament of Uganda and as a nation, I think it is very important for us to move progressively. Year in, year out, this Parliament and Government has been injecting money in the education sector. We have educated the young people of this country, both boys and girls. 

It is very important to understand that these monies that we appropriate every year from this House go to the lower levels. It requires people who have got some knowledge to understand what is supposed to be done. The issue of oversight of these Government programmes needs men and women who can be able to understand and articulate what is in these papers.

We go around this country doing our oversight role as Members of Parliament but we encounter a lot of challenges when we interact with these people. It is very important for us, as Members of Parliament, to understand that there is need for minimum qualifications for all these lower levels. I therefore support the amendment by hon. Okupa. (Applause)

Mr kahonda: Madam Chairperson, I oppose the amendment. When we are doing this, we need to be conscious of the law. We are aware that the law provides that in the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson can act. Unless we put qualifications for even councillors, we cannot debate about qualifications for the LC III chairpersons and the municipal council leaders.

Hon. Okupa proposed that sub-counties, municipalities, town councils and LCV leaders should have qualifications. Article 186(3) and (6) of the Constitution state that in the absence of the chairperson, it is the vice-chairperson who acts; how is the vice-chairperson appointed? They are appointed from the council by the chairperson, yet we are not putting qualifications for councillors. Therefore, for us to say that we are putting qualifications for chairpersons and we leave out councillors, we shall not be following the law –(Interruption)

Ms EGUNYU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. First of all, I agree with the removal of qualifications for LC III chairpersons. However, if we maintain the qualifications for mayors, that should also be in the municipalities and cities. Any rural district must have a mayor. The mayor in a rural district like Buvuma and others is equivalent to the LCIII chairman of that same district. Therefore, if we are maintaining qualifications for the mayors, the same should apply to the mayors in the municipalities and cities.

If we are to buy the idea of hon. Okupa, making LCIII chairpersons and mayors have A level qualifications, it beats my understanding and I start thinking about how this country will perceive us. If we agree that an LCIII chairperson should have A levels and then a Member of Parliament, who makes the budget for this whole country, who supervises all entities in the country and whose biggest role is law-making, also has minimum qualifications of A level, I do not know. The qualification is A Level –

The Chairperson: What do you propose?

Ms EGUNYU: I would like to propose that the LCIIIs are left out. The mayors that would need qualifications should have O level qualifications but those should be mayors of municipalities and cities, not mayors for rural districts. (Interjections)

I would also like to propose that - I do not know the law; maybe for Members of Parliament, this is something that we have already passed. However, I also would like to propose that since education in the country has improved, the minimum qualifications for a Member of Parliament also be extended to a bachelor’s degree. I beg to propose. (Applause) 

The Chairperson: Honourable members, unfortunately, we are dealing with the Local Governments Act. We cannot deal with Members of Parliament in this law. 

Mr ofwono: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support the amendment of this motion. I represent a municipality where we have so many projects – the Road Fund, USMID and so on. If you have a mayor or a division chairperson who cannot understand these technical things, it is very difficult to implement these projects. (Applause) I appeal to Members to support this amendment so that we have qualified people and effective service delivery. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I thank the Member for giving way. In local government, audited reports are only discussed by the executives of the councils. The town clerks and sub-county chiefs read the reports and they know that there are mistakes and a lot has to be done. They actually negotiate with the auditor’s team because audited reports are not discussed by the full council. 

The moment you have a chairperson, who is not knowledgeable, without any qualification - We can talk of councillors but the chairperson should at least be knowledgeable because the audited reports, equivalent to billions of money, are to be handled by the executive. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wish you could be specific. Are you talking about the chairpersons for the municipalities or the sub-counties? 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we talk about leadership, there are leaders who have executive powers and there are those who may have not. This issue has been brought forward by hon. Okupa. Many times, when we look at ministerial policy statements, we have engagements with ULGA. When ULGA gives its submission, the issue of academic qualifications for councillors is always a repeated issue. They always say that there should be minimum qualifications for LC III chairpersons, mayors and councillors. This has been a view from ULGA that represents the rest of the local governments. 

Madam Chairperson, when we also went for oversight visits, this issue of qualifications was seriously raised by members. They said that in some districts, even sub-counties, councillors just look at everything in abstract; they do not know what is going on. The idea that everybody should be brought on board in the element of leadership may be a good thing but whether they will be useful to the community is the question. 

Madam Chairperson, when the motion by hon. Mukitale on regional governments was brought to the House, some colleagues from our committee carried out consultations in Kenya and other areas. When they went to those areas, these leaders, even at local council, had issues to do with academic qualifications. If we are saying we should leave it just like that, I think we are not fair to ourselves. 

The argument might be that S.6 academic qualifications for LCIII chairpersons might be too high. If we had not passed the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, then we should have said that probably, the minimum academic qualifications for Members of Parliament should be a degree and then these others can come down. That would have made any sense.

However, as of now, my submissions are two: One, since we maintained the academic qualifications for Members of Parliament at the level of S.6 or equivalent, we should make the one for LC III chairpersons S.4. Like hon. Muyanja said, we are trying to look at the issue of corruption at the lower local governments. When we tried to look through all those things, we came to realise that most of those audit reports are not subjected to rigorous scrutiny, just because it is only the chairperson who has the prerogative to look at them. 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable member. First of all, I agree with you when you say that Senior 6 is too high for Local Council III chairpersons. However, I wanted to be sure that since municipalities are at the level of constituencies that Members of Parliament represent, could we just also adopt their minimum qualifications as A level? 

MR ONZIMA: Madam Chairperson, I would look at maintaining Senior 4 minimum academic qualifications for LCIII chairpersons. Mayors of municipalities can be at a Senior 6 because they are almost equivalent to LC V chairpersons. 

MR KAHIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have heard colleagues argue that sub-county chairpersons are supposed to supervise technical people. Fortunately, I worked with a local government. At the district, we have district internal auditors who technically supervise the sub-county chiefs. The idea of having LCIII chairpersons and their councillors is to help generate ideas from the masses for planning purposes.

I, therefore, stand to oppose the proposal. We can have academic qualifications for mayors of municipalities at Senior 4 but for sub-county chairpersons, we do not need any academic qualifications.

MR KUMAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support the amendment, but it should be handled in a manner that is actually appreciable. We know that it is deliberate effort to have most of our sub-counties have educated staff. It was a deliberate effort of all of us that we should have educated and properly qualified staff in every sub-county. 

It is also known that in our districts, because of that liberalisation that we left, that anybody can become a district councillor, there are issues in our districts. District issues are discussed and decided by few people who may be knowledgeable but most of these councillors who go to districts merely just go there and sit and continue with – 

Therefore, I would suggest that the minimum academic qualifications for LC III chairpersons should be Senior 4 and the rest of the councillors can come as they are. If the chairman is knowledgeable, he will be able to bring them on board. I suggest that we upgrade LC III chairpersons to Senior 4 standards. That is my proposal. 

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would have no objection to what hon. Okupa has said. My main issue is when you want to look out for education and qualifications, it should move together with someone’s pay. When you talk about A level qualifications for a mayor and they are earning Shs 300,000, and as a Member of Parliament you earn more than that, are we being realistic?

Madam Chairperson, I think -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, we have Ugandans who join police, the teaching service, and some of them have qualifications up to degree level and they earn the amount of money that the Member is now belittling. It cannot be this Parliament to belittle the money that you give to people who are educated. 

Is the Member in order to belittle the salary that we give to policemen, teachers, nurses and insinuate that LCIII chairpersons are people from heaven and they cannot earn like policemen? Is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you substantiate?

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, allow me reply hon. Ssemujju. I am not happy with the salaries of even those others that you are talking about; I do not say that it is good. However, my issue is, if you want to get mayors who are educated, make sure that they earn well and they will vie for those positions. I am not happy to see that a policeman earns Shs 300,000! 

Therefore, as I conclude, I want to say that let us look at this issue technically, understand it and give a chance to those people. We might look at them as if they are not educated. However, I think the only challenge they face is because they are not inducted. If they were well inducted, the way they induct us here at Parliament, those people would be very good. I pray that they are inducted and given full support and we see whether we will not get good leaders.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clearly, the whole House is in unison - (Interjections)– Let me make my point. The whole House is in unison on the matter of good governance. I am surprised that hon. Byarugaba, on the matter of good governance, says “no”, but I know he did not mean it.

The whole House is in unison on matters of good governance and that to get good governance, you need people who can not only lead their people but also understand why they lead their people and where they must lead them. We do not say that education should be only to benefit those that can communicate. Indeed, communication is one of the tools you harness from being educated but it is not the mere end in all of it; it is only a means to earn your ability to communicate maybe mathematically, historically or even as a mode of transaction.

What are we talking about here, honourable members? The proposal that Madam Chairperson put up for us, I think in a way helps us heal and come to a conclusion of this debate. Do we drop qualifications at sub-county or we relax them? The proposal that we have here now is to deal with chairpersons, and the issue is chairpersons of municipal councils, town councils, urban divisions and then sub-counties.

The current proposal streams those with Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education. My proposal is that for a win-win situation - We have heard debate from hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga who was a Division Mayor of Mukono Town Council then. Our view is that at sub-county, we can settle - if we all agree - for O level, which is -(Interjections)- Wait and listen to my justifications.

A chairperson is presented with audited reports. From 1995 to date, we have equipped our sub-counties with at least a secondary school. We have the Universal Secondary Education programme and the Government of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), even now, educates or gives scholarships to over one million children at secondary school level. Therefore, there has not only been increased literacy but also academic qualifications. 

I would like to appeal to my colleagues and the mover, hon. Okupa, to accept that he relaxes the qualifications, for the matter of sub-counties, to at least O level. (Applause) I would like to appeal to the mover that he complies with the proposal of the Uganda Local Governments Association, which proposed that at least - You have all witnessed, during the different interfaces with different leaders at local governments, that they can hardly even interpret the different reports that are presented to them. Therefore, I am of the view that -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I know the Members have really enriched the debate and we seem to know where this debate could be going. I believe it has come to an end and it is time to make a decision.

I would like to raise a procedural issue. The honourable member there is a member of the committee where I am a humble chair. We have been debating freely because this is a matter that was never been processed in our committee. However, we are about to make a decision and in this House, the only person empowered by our rules to guide us in making that decision is your good self, the Rt Hon. Chairperson.

Is it procedurally right for hon. Nsereko to usurp your able powers to start directing debate and apportioning which areas we should do when you are here and he is taking over? Is he proceeding well?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is not. Honourable members, I had made a proposal which I would want the honourable mover to speak to us about. I had thought maybe we could leave out the issue of the sub-counties and continue.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the colleagues for the very vibrant debate and enrichment of the amendment. Madam Chairperson, I concede and drop this issue of the chairpersons of sub-counties and I do request that you put the question.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I want to draw your attention to Chapter One of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - All power belongs to the people who shall exercise it through their representatives. So, the issue here is, what does “representativeness” mean? (Interjections)– Friends, we are discussing a very fundamental matter, which touches on representativeness of a number of people. 

If power belongs to the people and they exercise that power through their representatives, you would really want to ask, “Who is this that represents the people and what type of people are they representing?” In statistics, a representative should be like the sample out of which is picked. Consequently, if you have a sub-county where there is no Uganda Advanced Level Certificate holder and you insist – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the mover has removed the proposal for the sub-county.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make my point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first, I put the question that the proposal be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I wish the Members could pay attention so that they do not miss the words. On the amendment that I presented, there is a second amendment to clause 7 of the Bill.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, before clause 7, we have an amendment to make.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it a new one?

MR BITANGARO: It is a new amendment. Madam Chairperson, we have an insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 6 of the Bill.

The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause immediately after clause 6:

“Amendment of section 113 of the principal Act
Section 113 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for sub-section (1) the following:
“(1) Where, after the close of nomination and before closing of polls, a candidate dies, the election in the electoral area shall be postponed and the Electoral Commission shall declare another nomination day giving reasonable time to enable new candidates to be nominated.”

The justification:

    a) Consequential amendment arising from the proposed amendment of section 127 in clause 10 of the Bill.
    b) To expand the provisions of section 113 to allow any other person to be nominated in circumstances where a candidate dies after nomination.
    c) To specifically require that where a candidate dies, such election is postponed and fresh nominations are organised by the Electoral Commission rather than the returning officer since it is the Electoral Commission with the mandate, under Article 60 and 61 of the Constitution, to organise elections in Uganda.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the proposed amendment and we do not oppose it.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have a concern. Don’t you think that it is proper that we pronounce ourselves on the time - how long it should take? Yes, I am aware that the Electoral Commission is the one which is mandated to conduct elections but I thought that it is proper for us to prescribe the time and say maybe in two months. Should we leave it really hanging like that? If there is something in the Constitution, let us transplant it here in the law because we are activating the Constitution. That is my opinion.

MR BITANGARO: The expression we used here is “reasonable time” but I have no problem if you suggest what that reasonable time would be.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson’s proposal is for where a candidate is nominated, but we have also had these problems in the districts. In my district, Lira, we have had this problem; where a councillor dies, we do not have any provision. I thought that if it pleases the chairperson, you could make the amendment take care of both - the candidate and where a member of the district council passes on – such that that gap is also bridged.

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a challenge in my constituency; the district councillor passed on in 2017 and the Chairman LCIII of the same sub-county also died in 2018, but up to date nothing has been done. We kept on pushing the local government and the Electoral Commission but nothing has been done. The sub-county has just been there like an orphan. It is actually the Members of Parliament and Chairman LCV who have been providing leadership in that sub-county. 

Therefore, we need to be specific. There is no law that we could use to push the Ministry of Local Government and the Electoral Commission to fill the gaps. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I, therefore, propose that at least in a period not exceeding 60 days, the nomination should take place so that there is some kind of clarity as to when the elections can be held. If we leave it in the hands of the Electoral Commission, anything can happen. Members have already testified and I would really urge the committee to go back and look at what the Constitution says. Let us borrow something from the Constitution for purposes of putting some life in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, in principle, it is agreeable and you only want refining of the time; isn’t it?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For any election to take place, one has to organise logistics and personnel and reasonable time. 

In my opinion, 60 days is too short a time for elections to be organised. Therefore, I propose 90 days. Three months is fair time for elections to be organised.

MR AOGON: If we take that position, it would mean that is applied across the board; it would be for Members of Parliament and LC V; the same principle should apply. That is what I think. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chair, when you look at the number of constituencies we have in this country, you realise their numbers are less than the number of LC III elective positions. 

Therefore, the coincidence of having deaths at LC III and other lower local governments is much higher than it can happen in Parliament. That is why we are saying we must give reasonable time to Government to organise this so that it becomes a success. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think then the proposal would read as follows: “The Electoral Commission shall declare another nomination to take place not later than 90 days to enable new candidates to be nominated.” Is that okay?

These are also councillors. It says electoral area. Do you want it to be very specific?

MR BITANGARO: 90 days is okay, Madam Chair. 

MR SEMMUJJU: Madam Chair, the trouble I have with this – for example, nominations for local governments is in July. If one of the candidates dies, why do we say 90 days have to go by? You are in an election cycle - they can have that person nominated and elections go on in even one month because you have an election going on. 

You are now asking the Electoral Commission to organise another election for that particular area? You are now telling them, after general elections, they can go and organise – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are a member of the committee. You people are now battling your committee on the Floor.  

MR SEMUJJU: This is an amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even then. 

MR OLANYA: Madam Chair, I thought what we are discussing is after the election. When replacing someone who passed on -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is before elections; it is about a situation where someone dies after nomination and before elections take place. 

Honourable members, if you agree with the change that has been made, then we can move on. We shall delete the words, “given reasonable time” and substitute them with the words, “to take place not later than 90 days” to enable new candidates to be nominated.

I put the question that – 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chair, I beg the indulgence of the chairperson to pronounce himself on the councillors who are in office because the same provisions can be married together –(Interjections)– he was still working on something. Could he put on record some provision for councillors who die in office; there is a provision for replacing them. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does 114 say? Hon. Odur, 113 refers to all candidates, any candidate in local government who is nominated but they die; it is general, for all.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I think the chairperson has not understood me. I am talking about the problem that the district and sub-county councils are facing. We have councils that are fully constituted, but once a member of the council dies, there is no express provision in the law to replace them; it is happening across board. 

I was begging the indulgence of the chairperson, that this would be the best opportunity to address that matter. For example, in Lira, we have a councillor who passed on but up to date, no by-election has taken place to replace him. My brother has also given the same example. 

Since we do not have that provision in the law we should use this opportunity to say that once a member of the district council passes on, a by-election should be organised to replace that person within the same period. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the provision deals with candidates. There is a proposal that we deal with councillors because they are already elected. 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chair, I have no objection. We could push another clause to take care of that situation. Could we stand over it so we can draft it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have understood in principle. We were dealing with candidates who are not yet elected but die and now we also have to deal with the situation where the elected councillor dies and there is no replacement.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: There is also another challenge, which you have to address. If somebody dies within the last year of their term of office, must we stampede an area with a by-election for someone to serve three months or six months? We have to trade carefully on this issue because it has a huge budget implication. That is why the Electoral Commission has been waiting for when there are may be parliamentary elections and alongside it, they organise such by-elections. 

We have to ensure the Electoral Commission is funded in this kind of scenario. It will require a huge amount of money for standby to address all these many councillors that may die in this situation. It is a provision that has a lot of implications, going forward. 

My humble view is that those who are drafting should capture those sensitivities to ensure we make a law that can be managed financially and secondly, that takes note of the time of the last year of term of an elective office. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether it is a principle or a practice. For instance, if something happens six months to the election, we cannot have a by-election here in Parliament. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I am of the view that we provide, in the last sentence, a clause that says, “except for those who die six months before the next election.” 

I remember in the Eighth Parliament, a Member of Parliament died in the last six months to the next election but a by-election was conducted –(Interjections)– no, within the last year. There was a by-election that was conducted within the last year. Was it in Pakwach or something like that? He served for less than a year. In this case, we can take care of six months before the next elections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is anyone helping us to draft the amendment?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, given that we have provided for two councillors per sub-county, the amendment that we are drafting could not be stressed by the six months. If a vacancy falls one year to elections, the remaining councillor can handle. If it is in the first two or three years, that is different. However, if it is in the last year, I believe the remaining one councillor can fill in the gap.

THE CHAIRPERSON: As you draft, put in a proviso. Hon. Mbabazi.

MS MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are looking at instances where positions fall vacant as a result of death. However, there are also instances where people leave and get other jobs. We need to be clear and have it in the law; we should provide for all vacant positions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t we have a section dealing with where a vacancy has occurred in the local government? 

MR AOGON: I propose that we deal with the first matter. Let us dispose of that one before we move to the second one. I propose that we put the question on the first one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the first proposal be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Provision, as amended, agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us now have the new provision.

New provision

MR BITANGARO: The new provision, which will be sub-clause (2), reads: “Subject to Article 81(3) of the Constitution, whenever there is a vacancy in the council, the Electoral Commission shall hold elections to fill the vacant position within 90 days of the occurrence of the vacancy in the council.”

The justification is to take care of filling the position whenever it falls vacant in the council, ahead of the six months, which is provided for in the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have aligned it with the provision for Parliament. In the Constitution, you cannot hold an election six months to a general election. That is why we are subjecting that part of the Local Government Act to the Constitution. They are now aligned.

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(New clause, agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment to clause 7 of the Bill. Clause 7 is amended by inserting the following new paragraphs immediately before paragraph (a) as follows:

    a) In sub-section (1), by inserting immediately after paragraph (b) the following: “(c) Has completed a minimum education of Ordinary Level standard or its equivalent.”

    b) By inserting immediately after sub-section (1), the following: “(1)(a) A person is not qualified to be elected a member of a city division, municipal council, municipal division council, town council or district other than chairperson if that person -
(a) is not a citizen of Uganda;
(b) is not a registered voter;
    (c) has not completed a minimum education of Ordinary Level standard or its equivalent.”

“1(b) sub-sections 11 (3)(a), (3)(b), (3)(c), (3)(d) and (3)(e) shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to a person who intends to stand for election as a member of a city division council, district council, municipal council, municipal division or a town council under this section.”

Madam Chairperson, I have dropped the issue of the sub-counties. They remain without qualifications because there is no way you can have a chairperson without qualifications then you want to have the councillors with qualifications.

The justification is, in appreciation of the functions of a district or city councillor, to impose a minimum education qualification for a district or city councillor and for uniformity; to ensure that all elective offices in the district, cities or municipalities have a minimum qualification; for completeness- to require the establishment of education qualification for chairpersons of municipalities, divisions, councillors before nominations. We have dropped the sub-counties. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think I see some difficulty in the words “other than a chairperson”. I think that one should not be there. Let us say “… a town council, unless-

    a) is a citizen of Uganda;
    b) is a registered voter.”

MR OKUPA: I agree with you. Let us drop that. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have a concern. When we talk about the sub-county, for us in the municipalities, the divisions are the equivalent of the sub-counties. I do not know how this matter has been handled there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is here as municipal division.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Chairperson, much as the colleague is saying sub-county is equivalent to a division, I think they are totally different. Sub-counties are lower local governments in rural district areas while divisions are at the municipal level. So, the two are totally different. 

MR OLANYA: Honourable member, in the town councils, there are LC III chairpersons and sub-counties also have LC III chairpersons. The town councils are urban areas. What is the difference about what you have talked about –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Chairperson, a town council is self-autonomous while a sub-county is under a district. The two are totally different. In fact, you cannot transfer a town clerk to a town council like how a Chief Accounting officer (CAO) can transfer sub-counties chief anytime. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I am just seeking clarification –

THE CHAIRPERSON: From who?

MR KIBALYA: From the chairperson of the committee. I need to be guided so that when I am done there, I can explain properly. Otherwise, I might be confusing the two.

Let me give an example of my town council, Namwendwa. We are going to have qualification for councillors of those town councils and I do not want to confuse information at the ground, when they expect me, who is here, to give the right information. I would like to know whether we are going to have qualifications for the councillors of town councils, when we do not have qualifications for district councillors, who are above the town councils. This is the clarification I am seeking.

MR NSEREKO: What you are saying is true but the amendment hon. Okupa has put forward is to the effect that district councillors should have a minimum qualification of “O” Level. For the chairpersons, it is already within the Constitution and it is “A” Level.

We already answered the question of municipality chairperson. We are now treating the issue of councillors. You have asked about town councillors but from the amendment that has been presented, unless you want to come up with another amendment, a chairperson of the town council shall also have a minimum of “A’ Level”. (Interjections) The town councillors shall have a minimum of “O Level”. That is why it is a town council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what is the rational for having no qualifications for the councillors of KCCA, when you have qualifications for the smaller councils?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, for purposes of conducting election within the city, they refer to the Local Government Elections Act. The law we are making is for purposes of conducting elections.

A question came up in the Constitutional Court as to whether hon. Nabila, the Woman Member of Parliament for the city, was legally elected. The answer was that the laws of elections in case of Kampala are inferred from the Local Government Elections Act. They are not different in any way. They are inferred from the Local Government Elections Act. 

In this case, when we talk of city mayors and city divisions, we are talking of Kampala as well, since Kampala is a city. If I heard well, hon. Okupa, was very clear, when he said districts, cities, town councils, municipalities and division urban councils. If members do not think they are comfortable with town councils and think they are smaller units, then they can move an amendment to say that a town council is still growing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, KCCA councillors in the authority have no qualifications.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, when we came to the issue of representations in the divisions, we all agreed that those sub-counties and divisions should be represented by one female and one man. This also applies to – since you are not going to come to the council and say the woman can represent three sub-counties.

Madam Speaker, in essence, we are amending even the KCCA Act by affection. What we will agree here will automatically apply in the KCCA Act, since we already have the principle that divisions must be represented equally.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I need this clarification. If it was deliberate that there would be no qualifications, why are we effecting it now? 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the question you have put is whether Kampala City Councillors, after passing, this law will be required to have qualification. The answer is yes - (Interjection)

The law is talking about cities and Kampala is a city. If you talk about municipalities, Entebbe is a municipality. So, if we are capturing cities, that means Kampala city is part of this Act. (Interjection) In future, if you come up with Jinja or Arua, definitely it will be captured. For purposes of elections, we have one electoral law and for purposes of administration, we have the KCCA Act, which talks about that.

The law that creates KCCA is derived from the Constitution. It says that administration of Kampala as a Capital city shall be in the hands of the central government not elections. It talks about administrations. So, for purposes of elections, we refer to the Local Government Elections Act. That is why we are stating clearly that for elections of city leaders; whether a new city is created tomorrow like Arua or a new municipality is created tomorrow, the same law shall apply.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The point hon. Nsereko has raised is captured under the KCCA Act, in section 78, which talks about application of other enactments.

When it comes to elections under the Local Government Elections Act, KCCA is very clear. You can refer to the Local Government Elections Act for purposes of elections. That is what KCCA Act says.

Madam Chairperson, we could read it verbatim. 

The application of section 78 says: “Matters of the Local Government Act shall apply where you are dealing with elections of parishes, sub counties and other local governments.”

The point he raised when it comes to other cities still the Local Government Act shall apply so this idea that the chairman raised of the fact that there were no qualifications for councillors under the KCCA Act - When it comes to elections under the city, the parent Act is the Local Government Act. Once we create qualifications under the Local Government Act. They will automatically apply to the city and that is what the KCCA Act says. That was the clarification.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Chairperson, that time when we were looking at the KCCA Act the reason we did not include qualifications was based on the fact that in the Local Government Act there was no qualifications. Therefore, we could not put qualifications in the Local Government Act and I remember that debate well. Now that we are putting qualifications here it equally applies to the KCCA Act.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to read the provisions under the Local Government Act section 78 under the title “Application of other enactments”; 78(2) “…first the minister with the approval of Parliament by statutory instrument modify provisions of any enactment.”

We are interested in (2)(a) “The Local Government Act shall with the necessary modifications apply to the authority and to a village, ward and division urban council under the authority.”  I do not know whether it covers -

Mr OPOLOT ISIAGI: Procedure, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you want to speak, stand up.

Mr OPOLOT ISIAGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are now inserting these qualifications in the law for an election that is coming in a year or less and yet somebody has been a councillor performing very well but does not have these qualifications.

Are we really inclusive enough trying to insert a clause for purposes of knocking out some individuals? I hope we are not targeting particular individuals in this law. Are we proceeding right?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson has been on record since we were sworn into this august House. After the constitutional amendment on Article 102 (b), Madam Speaker clearly stated and urged Government to present the amendments; so, is it in order for the hon. Isiagi Patrick to input that this Parliament is stampeding people with laws when we are well aware that elections are soon?

The Speaker has been on record and this august House has been demanding from Government the necessary electoral reforms. We are rightly proceeding.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, you ably guided and looking at section 78 of the KCCA Act, it gives us the leeway following information from Bugiri I believe that you could put the question and we proceed on the matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me just hear hon. Asamo she might have an issue.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, members are debating but are not considerate of certain groups of people. When you put those qualifications to include people with disabilities then you are throwing away all of them from the councils and yet our electoral colleges are beginning in April.

Are we fair for these people who have been in the council who dropped out in senior one and two but we bringing O level for councillors? 

This one cannot work for councillors especially persons with disabilities who have struggled up to senior one or senior two. We cannot have all of them with O level. 

Our issues are very unique –(Interjection)– I am giving you the issues of our needs. It will be unfair for us to make a blanket statement and we do not see them at that level. We need to be considerate and by April we are able to have these people come on board –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Let us take this particular institution we are serving. We have Members of Parliament with disabilities and yet they are here with the same qualifications with those who are not with any disability. 

You are not here because you are just disabled; you are disabled but with the qualification of being a Member of Parliament so the same should apply to the lower level and the motto is, “Disability is not inability.”

MS ASAMO: Thank you, for your clarification but I do not agree. We have young people like in Masindi there is a blind boy who was in senior two or three but he is a very good councillor. He did not go to O level because of the challenges of education.

Nobody can pay their school fees because the councils have been an open cheque people with disabilities have been there. Now when you close them out where do we get their qualifications? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal to remove the sub county council and concentrate on the city division, municipal council, municipal division or town council.

MS ASAMO: Yes, but even at that level can we give affirmative action for people with disability? When I look around the councillors that we have, a majority of them have not gone up to senior four but they have been there in councils. If we block these people they might not be able to access that level of leadership.

I would like to beg that give people with disabilities affirmative action to be there. It has created jobs for these people in the councils. 

Madam Chairperson, Joy who is in your municipality has not got an O’ Level certificate is a very good leader but she has some education. So, if we put O’ Level, we are really going to make our people get out. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Asamo. Madam Chairperson, the honourable member representing persons with disabilities brought up a very important point. However, it should be noted that we only have two councillors representing persons with disabilities in every district. For town councils, they are two; the same applies.

I do not think we shall fail to get those two councillors for persons with disabilities who are educated. Let us be realistic. Honourable member, I think your fear is justified but it applies to the past. Currently, we have Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) and so many people are educated.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, the issue raised by hon. Asamo is very important. In my district, during the last election, we failed to get people to turn up for those positions. People had to look for them. People, on their own, had to give money for nominations and even for photographs. That is how serious that matter is. I think we need to do something as far as that category is concerned. I thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have done away with qualifications for other councillors. We are now moving to urban areas and town councils and saying that we need qualifications.

Madam Chairperson, I stand here to support hon. Asamo. Article 180 talks about local government councils and it gives this Parliament, under 180(2)(c) mandate:

“Any law enacted by virtue of this article shall provide for affirmative action for all marginalised groups referred to in Article 32 of this Constitution.” 

When you go to Article 32, this is where we get the persons with disabilities. 

Madam Chairperson, a town council or urban council is a very small area. If we say that we are going to put qualifications, there will be lack of candidates in some of these urban town councils.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MS EGUNYU: Madam Chairperson, before we debate the urban areas, let us have a distinction between the municipalities, cities and town councils that are in the rural constituencies. (Applause) We have municipalities and you know how those municipalities look like. We have cities and we have these cities of Uganda; the old one and the one you know - [Mr Nsereko: “Order!”]

Madam Chairperson, he is lucky that he comes from Kampala and I come from Buvuma; so we have differences. So, let me speak from my point of view.

We have three urban places that we are debating here. We have municipalities, we have cities and we have town councils; those town councils of the rural districts. There is a big difference – (Interjections) – Yes; there is a big difference. Madam Chairperson, I beg to be protected so that I can explain my point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, order, order! Honourable members, people are approaching this from different perspectives. Allow her to speak.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Chairperson, the difference that I would like to draw here is that a district like Buyende has a town council called Buyende Town Council. A district like Buvuma and any rural district each have a town council. The councillors who come to that town council come from places that they call wards. These wards are equivalent to a parish in a sub-county – (Interjection) – They come from the would-be –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry I had to call the member to order but it is very important that we understand the subject we are debating. Creation of a town council is a process of urbanisation; so there is no way you can be talking about a town council in a rural setting. Therefore, let us be very open- minded when we are discussing this issue. Madam Chairperson, is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in my sub-county – I am now in a town council but I used to be in the sub-county; so it is a rural town. (Applause) I think let us remove the “sub-county”. Let us remove the town council because in the city, there are wards. They are not sub-counties; they are called “wards”. Let us remove the “sub-county” and the “town council”.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Chairperson –(Interjection)– Please, I am the one on the Floor, honourable member. I am the one still on the Floor. I beg to agree with you and I really concur with you that for all conditions that we are putting up, the town councils and the LCIII in their sub-counties – whoever is leading a sub-county as LCIII chairperson – should be excluded from all these conditions of academic qualifications. I will settle because a rural place is different.

A person coming as a councillor to the town council is a person coming from a ward. This ward is the would-be parish in a sub-county. So, how would you give someone coming from a ward to have a qualification and yet earlier, we left out someone coming from a parish to have a qualification of O-level? 

Madam Chairperson, I beg that –(Member timed out.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we move on? Let us move on. Honourable members, first take your seats.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. With your guidance – (Interjection) – I wish you could listen. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR OKUPA: With your guidance, Madam Chairperson, we are dropping the sub-counties and town councils so we can remain with the district, municipal, division councils and city division councils.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You have guided this House and the essence was to make clean and smooth operations of the local governments. Once you have a town council whose technical head is a degree holder - at all these town councils - because a town council in a rural area bears the same qualifications with a town council in the urban area. So, if we are to remove the qualifications, it is even more incumbent for the councillors at the district. If we are now shifting the goalposts –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the honourable member who is neither a mover nor seconder of the amendment to insist on a matter that the mover of the amendment has even made further amendments, and conceded to the popular view? Is he in order to continue insisting on qualifications for town and sub county councillors as if he is the mover of this amendment? Madam Chairperson, if you rule that he is not in order, I will move that you put the question.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is out of order. Honourable members, a number of amendments have been made to the proposal, namely, the removal of the sub-county and town councils and also remove the words “other than the chairperson” and replace them with the word, “unless.” Therefore, the rest I will have to put the question -

MR KAHONDA: Madam Chairperson, when we are doing amendments, we must be curing some issues especially in the existing laws. I would like to refer to Article 186 of the Constitution, which talks about the district executive committee and particularly clause (3) which says thus: “The vice chairperson shall be a person nominated by the district chairperson from among members of the council….”

I also would like also to refer to clause (6) which says, “If the chairperson dies, resigns or is removed from office, the vice chairperson shall assume the office of the chairperson….” If we say that the qualifications for the district councillor is senior four and then you say the qualifications for the chairperson LC V is senior six but you go ahead to say that if the chairperson dies, any councillor who is chosen to be the vice can act as chairperson LCV, under which law shall that person be acting?

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I move that the qualifications for the district councillors be put to the same level as of the chairperson LC V. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, the information I am giving hon. Kahonda is that that is the same problem that has paralysed Tororo District Council. We had a situation where the LC V chairman then appointed a person not qualified to be a vice chairperson – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the point of order?

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, we are debating issue relating to sub counties and town councils but members are busy talking about district issues. Is the member in order to bring district issues in a debate regarding town and sub counties?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is part of the amendment.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for the wise ruling. When the chairperson died, because he picked a vice chairperson from the pool of councillors and given that they did not have qualifications, the person could not become a chairperson and that is why the district is paralysed. Because the argument then was that this person without qualifications would not act as a chairperson.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, the information I am giving is that in support of the provision of the argument by hon. Kahonda that all councillors should be people who are capable of acting or becoming vice chairperson, or being in executive so they can actually become chairpersons. In effect, they need to have qualifications that are vested in the office of the chairperson, which is a minimum of A’ Level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if that was the position, the law would have had to say that the chairperson and vice chairperson should have similar qualifications. That would have been in the law but it is not.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, can we have some bit of order? The debate about qualifications in my opinion, has taken us back the reason being that our Government has pursued relentlessly, a policy of universal access. There is no discrimination geographically in this country. 

We are trying to deliver Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education across the country regardless of the constraints that we face. This is an attempt to ensure that we are able to upgrade the levels of leadership in this country.

Madam Chairperson, even if some sub counties do not have seed schools as my honourable colleague has alluded, it does not stop people from travelling to study elsewhere. Therefore, the argument that geography –(Interruption)

Ms naMOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Is the honourable member in order to say that Universal Secondary Education (USE) covers all the sub-counties in this country? In some regions, we do not have seed schools and other schools where people can go and study.

Is he in order to say that we are all at the same level when some regions have had insecurity for more than 40 years, and they did not have an opportunity to send their children to school?

The Chairperson: Honourable members, there are still disparities in many parts of this country.

Mr acidri: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My honourable colleague who said that Universal Secondary Education is not across the country, I think, lacks information – (Interjections) – This is my opinion. 

I would like to give an example. There was a debate going around that urban areas must be treated differently from rural areas. We just had hon. Peter Sematimba, a Member for Parliament for an urban constituency, who went and acquired a certificate. That shows that access to education is not necessarily based on geography.

Therefore, in my opinion, as we move towards middle income and want to modernise our economy and improve governance, we must put certain basic minimum qualifications for education in leadership. We cannot run away from the fact that the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government has invested heavily in education. We must tap into this investment – (Interruption)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I wish to give to my colleague is that we must be seen on the road to creating incentives for people to go to school. 

The education programme that we have should not only encourage those that want to contest as members of Parliament to go back to school. We must create a situation where even those who are planning to contest for councillors should also plan to go to school.

We have educated people already existing. We must create a situation where those that have felt going to school is very important are seen in the field having some privileges. They can say, “If I have to contest for councillorship, I must attain this level.” Education must make somebody access something that somebody who did not go to school cannot.

Mr acidri: Thank you. Let me conclude –

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I have reported here many times about places where I have gone and there are no secondary schools - in some districts. I reported to you that seven sub-counties in Mayuge have no secondary schools. Uganda is not homogeneous.

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, we need statistics from Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) for us to be able to tell what is happening. 

Ms bintu: Madam Chairperson, I would not like to see us legislating a law, which will leave some Ugandans out. Hon. Asamo raised a pertinent issue concerning the interest group of people with disabilities. We do not have special needs teachers at secondary school level; not even materials. 

Madam Chairperson, remember that at one time we were discussing braille for the people who are blind. A set of braille costs millions of shillings. These schools do not have them.

Hon. Asamo referred to one of my councillors who is blind. He dropped out in senior two because he could not read. We do not have special needs teachers at secondary level so he could not continue.

I am of the view that as we move to middle income status, we should not leave anybody out. Let the Government pick out these issues, which are coming out and make sure that we inject money in those areas that will get everyone on board. 

I know that two of my sub-counties do not have any secondary school. That is Masindi; an old district – (Interruption)

Mr JOHNSON muyanja: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I am giving is about – (Interruption)

Ms bintu: I gave a chance to the honourable member from Ntungamo.

Mr kahima: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I do not know what is worrying everybody here. Our passing this law does not bar any person with academic qualifications from contesting for these positions. 

Therefore, we should not pass a law that will create a crisis in some areas. Let us ignore academic qualifications for town councils and sub-county councillors. Those with academic qualifications will freely contest with those who do not have. They will explain to the electorate, which will decide. 

Ms bintu: Madam Chairperson, the moment we pass a law, which leaves out some groups, we shall be challenged because of discriminating against certain types of people. 

Madam Chairperson, I know that you are the centre of protecting the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I know this Parliament is supposed to protect the Constitution and all Ugandans. I would rather propose that we allow everyone to participate, especially the councillors. Thank you. (Applause)

Prof. kamuntu: Madam Chairperson, the position we would like to take is that representation should be on the basis of choice of those who vote. Consequently, we should try, as much as possible, to avoid putting barriers for people who would be popular but do not have the written qualifications – I said, “As much as possible,” so I did not eliminate it.

For instance, to require that the chairperson of a town council, which has emerged out of a sub-county, should have advanced level of education before he can contest which is equivalent to the qualification required for a Member of Parliament, I think it is very discriminatory! 

If he wanted the proportionality, surely, if a Member of Parliament qualification requires advanced level as a minimum, how can we require the same for a town council? I have the amendment proposed by hon. Okupa. Our position, Madam Chairperson, is not to put qualification that would disfranchise a lot of people. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think the professor is taking us back. We have already passed that. You asked him on my proposed amendment on clause 7 and I have considered that we drop the issue of qualification from sub-counties and town councils. I beg that you put the question to that. I conceded to that. This is in order for us to leave it to the district councils, municipal councils, division councils and city councils.

If the honourable minister has issues with what we have passed earlier on, he can recommit it but he cannot bring it when we are on another clause. There is a procedure to which you bring a matter if you feel the clause has been passed and you are not comfortable with it. There is a procedure to bring it back. 

Madam Chairperson, that is why I conceded that we drop the issue of the sub-county and town councils. That is why we are asking you to put a question for that. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have a big concern. I represent an urban constituency. This House needs to give me a listening ear. In Kumi, I have two divisions; north and south. They are headed by LC III chairpersons. Why do they call them LC III chairpersons if they are not equivalent to a sub-county? 

In my opinion, we shall be discriminating against them if we eliminate them from the list. If we say that we do not require qualifications for sub-counties, then, the same should apply to the division councils, which are headed by LC IIIs. That should be the equal treatment. People will ask us whether we were in the House or not if we do not say it. 

I, therefore, move that the mover of the amendment includes the divisions of the municipalities amongst the list for purposes of uniformity. Otherwise, we shall be lost. 

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Chairperson, is hon. Silas in order? He is the one who wanted qualifications and now he is selfishly debating for his division, yet he was in support of qualifications. Now, he is changing his position because Kumi is there. Are we here for Kumi? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Honourable members, initially, hon. Elijah Okupa moved an amendment covering several layers of local government. However, I listened to hon. Kahima of Ruhaama Constituency and I think we have since moved away from the rigid amendment the member presented. 

In view of the fact that these layers – the one with qualifications is not stopped. If one has a bachelor’s degree and wants to be a councillor, then, that is fine and wonderful. If one has O’ Level, fine and wonderful but again, at the same time, let the people choose. 

For that matter, if we have shifted away from the original position hon. Elijah Okupa moved, may I move that now we remove the issue of qualifications for councillors? That is okay for chairpersons but as far as councillors are concerned, let us leave them out of the net from the bottom to the district level so that it can be harmonised and uniform. After all, you have punched holes in that net you had initially cast. You have moved it from one position to another. After all, all the people shall be able to stand. Those who have qualifications and the people will see them as useful councillors. Therefore, they will be voted. 

For those who do not have qualifications, by virtue of that, let them also be tested; if they are popular, they will be voted and if they are not, they will not. It will be a win-win position, honourable members. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. I would like to provide information to hon. Ssekikubo. Yesterday, we discussed at length whether we should have provisions that prohibit people who are popular to contest. One such was nomination fees so we agreed that there must be some prohibitions put in the parameters of the law; nomination fees being one. 

Therefore, if it is the opinion of this House that anyone who wants to contest must be allowed freely without any qualification, it must be stated clearly so that we deal with it at once. This is because we cannot debate the principles we discussed in this House one day and we come here and change as if we were not here yesterday. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for the information but the reason all of us sit here is to hear from each other. That is why when hon. Asamo was presenting, she moved us to another level. When hon. Jalia Bintu also moved, we were equally convinced. That is why if we are to standby what we said yesterday, we would not enrich our debate. 

As we all come from different constituencies and backgrounds, probably now, we would set the standard that come in the next five years, all those who are aspiring at that time should prepare. However, if we move right now, we shall be disenfranchising many more who are popular and able to represent. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that we have partially satisfied the ULGA by addressing the qualifications of the chairpersons but I think we might have to abandon the one of the councillors. We have made some progress somewhere; maybe at the next – 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, you have clearly guided this House on that matter. It is indeed true that it may create a lot of anxiety in the public and it needs time. 

Since we have addressed the matter of chairpersons and we want to move in unity, as a House - I can see that our colleagues from the ruling side, like hon. Ssekikubo, are very much bothered about the councillors having qualifications. 

However, comrades, honourable raised a question of the impasse in Tororo. When it comes, we shall address it, like he said; that there can be a scenario where all those that appear in the council may lack qualifications but it is rare. 

Since there has not been any question on matters of councillors, I think, for councillors, at the moment, we had suggested O Level but if the House does not believe that this, as a principle is bad, then, we can all at least limit it to the district and then, at municipalities, divisions and lower urban councils, we can agree, as we grow. However, for the district level, Madam Chairperson, if you say we move in unity even at district level, we may have to concede.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would to speak from experience because I have risen from parish councillor to district councillor to Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to tell you that even the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA) presented a paper proposing that the qualifications for district councils be improved. 

In the proposals, I would wish that this law improves the governance style of our districts by improving the qualification of councillors –(Interjection)– allows me to submit. Madam Chairperson, with your guidance and experience, it is clear that senior four - because we first cleared for Parliament where we set the minimum qualification at senior six. 

When we go to district level, at least let us make it senior four, then we leave divisions, sub-counties and town councils such that we also promote education. When we get to a level where we feel that at least we have improved education in the sub-counties, then we can come to that.

Let me tell you that this Parliament is a platform where we need to solve problems because the Public Accounts Committee - Local Government has recommended to this House that the problems they found at the grassroots in the districts, are mostly because councillors are alienated from the debate and they do not know what is transpiring. Madam Chairperson, the minutes are recorded in English, and there is no interpreter.

Madam Chairperson, I beg that we resolve this lacuna. There are some sub-counties without vice chairpersons. At one time, Madam Chairperson, there was a problem -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members!

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this is information from the Committee on Legal. During the processing of the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, the Minister of Local Government then, Col (Rtd) Tom Butime, wrote to this committee and gave us information that the Ministry of Local Government is in the process of processing a comprehensive amendment to the Local Government. 

We should not debate here as if this is the final –(Interjection)– I am giving information. Given the concerns that have been raised here, we could have other councillors who are already campaigning and that this law, as it is now, does not stop those with qualifications or without qualifications.

Madam Chairperson, as you have guided, I think we could put the question that we move on; this matter could be handled much later.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think that is speculation when you say that the minister is going to propose amendments yet we are now in the business. Let us deal with this business and finalise it.

Madam Chairperson, I concur with the mover that there is a problem and the law is supposed to solve the problem, if we wish, because we should not seem not to know the problem.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to be on record. I was on the Budget committee and I remember when we talked about improving the remuneration of the councillors, people said that if we empower them, they will come and compete with us. Let us empower them so that they become competitive such that we evolve this business. Councils are decaying because we have remained local and we want to localise this thing.

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for the opportunity to make a contribution on behalf of the people of Maracha. Those who say that there must be no qualification are literally saying education is useless.

Everywhere in our Government structures, there is some bit of qualification, which is the minimum standard that we require to move this country and develop it as provided for in our laws. Therefore, when we say that there must not be qualifications and yet the data available indicates that the literacy level in this country is now at 72 per cent, I think we will not be legislating from an informed point of view.

There are those who argued that PWDs in this country are disadvantaged, I agree. However, data from UBOS says 55 per cent of PWDs are literate people. Therefore, for us to be able to arrive at a logical conclusion, I pray that we stand over this matter and go and do research. Let us get appropriate data and then come and discuss. Thank you.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us look at the environment in which we are. There are people who are already planning to contest. I think they are organising money, their teams and are planning to contest; to put a break now might be a problem.

However, at the local council, no one has been stopped from contesting. I know that I have graduates in the District Council of Kamuli. We have made progress on the leaders. Let us leave this one for now. 

If there is going to be another amendment, then we can discuss it. If this had come maybe three years ago, people would prepare. However, now, we would be hurting people. We have made progress on the chairpersons; so, let us move slowly.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, we shall concede with your wise ruling on this matter since we have made progress at chairperson level. In headway to preparation for elections, we shall accept that councillors – but we shall also encourage councillors outside there that they go back and upgrade their education as we await the next elections.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you. I think the point, as guided by the Chairperson, is very important. In future, Madam Chairperson, you may need to prevail over the Ministry of Local Government to bring the amendments early such that in 2021, we prepare as you have guided. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, just for the record, I have just got statistics about secondary schools in Uganda. There are 330 sub-counties without secondary schools. So, you can see - but we made progress. Let us move slowly but steadily. 

Honourable members, we agreed on an amendment on clause 7, which hon. Okupa first made. I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, we had an insertion to make of new sections 119(b), 119(c) and 119(d) in the principal Act. The committee would like to implore this House to adopt the position that was adopted in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, which was passed yesterday, and delete this one.

The justification is to align and create uniformity in legislations. 
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we cannot insert this one because we have already rejected it in the other laws. So, the position of the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections Acts will apply now to clause 8; so, it will be deleted. 

Clause 9

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the Bill. Should we delete clause 9? What is in clause 9? Is clause 9 also about Independents or what? Clause 9 is about candidates’ meeting.

MR BITANGARO: No amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, clause 11 deals with the number of voters present. We have been mentioning 10; so, instead of the five here, we should be consistent and move it to 10.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, right from the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, we agreed that the number of voters present at the polling station should be 10, not five. Therefore, the clause should be amended accordingly. I, therefore, put the question that Clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we had stood over clause 1. Has it been formulated? Chairperson, I think you are supposed to make a proposal. 

MR BITANGARO: Clause 1, which was stood over, is now amended in these terms:

    a) Sub-section (9)(a) where a new local Government or administrative unit is created after a general election, the local Government or administrative unit shall take effect six months prior to the next general parliamentary elections and local government council elections.

b) 	Sub-section (9) (b); a new local unit or a local government shall commence by a statutory instrument issued by the minister and the current sub-section (9)(b) becomes (9)(c).

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether this reflects what we – Okay, honourable members, you have heard the amendments. I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.39
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House do report there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report there to. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.40
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed the following clauses: 1, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13 without amendments, and clauses 2, 6, 9 with amendments, and deleted clauses 4 and 8. A new clause has been inserted amending section 113(1) of the principal Act immediately after clause 6. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.42
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

6.45
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read a third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: You said that you had something to recommit?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I had something to recommit. 

THE SPEAKER: This is the stage for you to do that. 

MR BITANGARO: Madam Speaker, there is an insertion to be made after clause 4 – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister told me that he wanted to remove the word, “town”. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I requested for a re-committal of hon. Elijah Okupa’s amendment, particularly the amendment he moved in clause 6 of the Bill relating to qualifications for a person who intends to stand for election as chairperson of – then he enumerated the following; municipality, town, but he did not specify whether he was referring to town council. 

If it is town council, I beg to move that town councils are too small. They are almost like sub counties, which you deleted. To require a chairperson of a town council to have a qualification of Advanced Level Certificate of Education is too high. I would want the town council to be treated as sub county and be deleted from the list.

THE SPEAKER: Just delete the word “town”.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a clarification. I would like to make a distinction because when hon. Nsereko conceded on the amendment in clause 7 for councillors, that happened when we had already passed amendment of clause and that is why I am recommitting it. 
Otherwise, if the spirit of the debate on clause 7 applies to clause 6, I would have no objection as long as the chairperson of a town council is treated in the same manner as that of the sub county. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister but we moved down in a bi-partisan manner and with the guidance of the Speaker, the movers conceded on the matter of councillors. 

However, on matters of leadership – and the Speaker wisely guided that if the leadership is okay and stable, since it affects a few persons, it is okay that we maintain – and only now if you want to include in re-committal, just put town council so that it is clear. If he says it was only “town” and you had missed the word “council” then let us include the word “council” so that it is clear. 

However, for the A ‘Level qualification, we have all agreed and conceded that it doesn’t apply to councillors but we maintain the one for leaders so that there is a one-eyed amongst the blind. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, what hon. Nsereko is saying is true to the extent that it applies to city divisions and municipalities but if we adopted the same argument, which was moved during the committee stage to apply to the town and sub county councils – by the way, on matters of local governments, I can say I have bragging rights. I worked with local governments and I advised on this same Local Government Act for nine years. 

Therefore, I know that a sub county is the same as a town council only that the other is an urban council. What you were saying and what the minister is saying is that if you look at hon. Okupa’s proposed amendment, you realise it was taking care of town councils too. 

His proposal for re-committal, which would now be in line with this, is that the chairperson of a town council should be exempted from that qualification. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what we should do is to just delete the word “town” because it is standing there by itself. I think we should ask the drafts people to remove the word “town” because it is standing by itself. The rest is okay.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I think the explanation you gave here that people are already campaigning and there are some sub-counties without schools – I think that also puts sub-counties and town councils are at the same level. Therefore, if we are to move by your guidance, the words “town council” should also be deleted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I am saying. Please!

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, if we are going to take a decision in this House, we should be very clear about what we are deciding on. It is not true that a town council is the same as a sub-county. Even when you go to the Ministry of Local Government, you will find different departments: one for urban councils and one for local councils. 

This House cannot sit here and we misinform ourselves that the sub-counties are the same as town councils. If we do not want a qualification for chairpersons of town councils, we should expressly state that but we cannot say they are the same because they are not the same, legally and otherwise. 

I think we would be making a big mistake if we allowed the chairpersons of town councils to go without a qualification. The way town councils are run are different from the way sub-counties are run – (Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Odur, for allowing me to share this information. Colleagues, I was a member of the district council for eight years. I became a member of the district council when we were actualising the decentralisation process. I can tell you that sub-counties are not at the same level as the town councils. Town councils are called urban authorities.

To show you that a town council is even bigger, they are self-accounting. They will even tell you that when you mention a district, automatically where the district headquarters are, becomes a town council. That should let you understand that a town council ceases to be a sub-county and an ordinary village unit. 

I feel uncomfortable that we want to treat town councils as sub-counties. It would mean that the self-accounting aspect of a town council is removed and it, therefore, gets its mandate – like a sub-county – from a district local government. 

Even when I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, sub-counties were treated differently from the town councils. We even said here that maybe we need an additional way of handling the Auditor-General’s report; that town councils and municipalities should be handled by the parliamentary Committee on the Local Government Accounts, while the sub-counties can be handled by the district local governments. This indicates that a town council is at an upper level and is a better unit than a sub-county.

I, therefore, would like to ask that if we are continuing with the same law, let us leave the autonomy of the town council as it is provided for by the parent law. It would also be very prudent for us to provide qualifications for the leadership of these units. Leaving them as sub-counties would be dangerous to growing towns, which need some level of planning and organisation.

THE SPEAKER: What is your proposal?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, like most Members here, I chair a district road fund committee. A sub-county is not at the same level as the town council; that is why a town council receives the road fund, which sub-counties do not get. Therefore, it is wrong for the Professor to come and say, they are the same. 

THE SPEAKER: Shall we say that you just missed the word “council”? That it was just typographical. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the Professor is only looking at the text but when I was reading – because I corrected mine – I did put the words “town council” there. If you check on the Hansard, you will find that in my presentation, I said “town council”.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the principle you guided us on – (Interjection) - I seek your indulgence. First of all, we were of the view that the district councillors be – 

THE SPEAKER: We are not dealing with the councillors. We are trying to check whether it was “town” or “town council”. That is what we are checking.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the guidance you gave – if this one remains a town, there is even a town board, which is lower at the parish level. I was of the view that, as you guided, the town council is lower than a district. If we have given affirmative action to the councillors of the district, why don’t we –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kaberuka, you came late. (Laughter) Sit down.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Speaker, I seek the indulgence of the House to consider the amendment by insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 4 of the Bill and for it to be amended in the following terms:

“Amendment of section 102 of the principle Act
Section 102 of the Bill is amended as follows: -
a) By substituting for sub-section (1) the following:

“(1) The Commission shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for each electoral district; 
(b)By inserting immediately after sub-section (1), the following new sub-section (1)(a) as follows:
“(1)(a) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the Commission may, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for a municipality, city division or any other area in an electoral district as the Commission determines necessary.” 

“(c) In sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), by inserting immediately after the words “returning officer” wherever the words appear, the words “or an assistant returning officer” respectively.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think at this stage you should just tell us why you want us to go back to Committee Stage.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Speaker, this matter had been discussed between the Government side and us but at the time we presented this, they had not arrived. Therefore, we decided to stand over it.  

THE SPEAKER: How did you stand over it without me?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, hon. Okupa’s amendment is responsible for all the confusion. (Laughter) There is confusion on when the chairperson was supposed to bring this. It was immediately after clause 4 and he was supposed to insert it. That was immediately when hon. Okupa came in –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I would like to correct the chairperson of the committee. Hon. Bitangaro moved under clause 4 while we moved before clause 6.  He even inserted an amendment before clause 6. Hon. Oboth, do not say that I came after clause 4. It is wrong. I came after clause 5 and after inserting another section.

MR OBOTH: You have confirmed that you came after clause 4 and the chairperson was supposed to come immediately, after clause. You have confirmed that.

When they processed your amendment, it generated some debate and you came very fast. Madam Speaker, this is a very important amendment since it talks about Electoral Commission Gazetting, changing from the registrar to returning officer, which will be in line with other legislation in the Electoral Commission Act.  Besides, it is not very controversial.

Hon. Katuntu, I know those are the explanations you wanted to give. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that, that proposal be recommitted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am rising on the sitting arrangement of the House.

Madam Chairperson, you are entitled to make sure that we sit comfortably but I see hon. Kaberuka seated exactly where - Is it in order. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I believe hon. Kaberuka is consulting the Minister of Public Service. (Laughter)

7.04
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Madam Chairperson, I would like to move for insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 4 of the Bill. 

The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause immediately after clause 4 as follows: 
“Amendment of Section 102 of the principle Act”

Section 102 of the Bill is amended -
    a) By substituting for sub-section (1) the following -
“(1) the commission shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for each electoral district.”

b) 	By inserting immediately after sub-section (1), the following new sub-section (1a) as follows-
“(1a) notwithstanding sub-section (1), the commission may, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for a municipality, city division or any other area in an electoral district as the commission determines necessary.”

(c) in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), by inserting immediately after the words “returning officer” wherever the words appear, the words “or an assistant returning officer,” respectively.

(d) In sub-section (3) by-
(i) 	substituting for paragraph (a), the following-
“(a) has been found by court to have to have participated in election irregularities or illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.”
(ii) 	Inserting a new paragraph (f) immediately after paragraph (e) as follows -
“(f) 	is transferred from the district for which he or she was appointed.”

(e)	By inserting the following new sub-sections immediately after sub-section section (3)- 
“(3a) Where a returning officer vacates his or her office in accordance with sub-section (3), the assistant returning officer shall perform the functions of returning officer until a substantive returning officer is appointed in accordance with sub-section (4).
“(3b) A returning officer may, in writing, delegate any of his or her duties to the assistant returning officer.”

Repeal of Section 103 of the principal Act
Section 103 of the Principal Act is repealed.

The justification is to –

    i. To align the provisions of section 102 with the proposed amendments in The Electoral Commission (amendment) Bill, 2019, specifically section 30 of the Electoral Commission Act wherein, the appointment of the returning officer and assistant returning officer is done by the Electoral Commission and can be appointed for a municipality, city division or any other area in an electoral district as the commission determines necessary.
    ii. Consequential amendment arising from the amendment to section 102 of the Principal Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I reject the proposals because they are provided in the proposed amendments in sections 21, 22 and 23 of the Electoral Commissions Act, relating to appointment of the district election’s administrator and assistant district election administrators.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Attorney–General is right but that is a general provision, which covers and mandates the Electoral Commission.

For parliamentary, we have similar provisions. This is not deterrence unless you want to tell us that it is causing some mischief. Madam Chairperson, when the Electoral Commission was before us, they proposed this to be put under the Local Government Elections Act. Otherwise, this is a government Bill.  If the Deputy Attorney -General says that was made in error – it is a government Bill and so, it dies right here.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, from the justification I was given, it appears to be a superficial appendage but in the event that you deem it fit to maintain it, especially coming on the hills of the information given by the committee chairman who interacted with the Electoral Commission and that the Electoral Commission made this proposal, we can maintain it because it would have no negative effect.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me just check the Act - 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, we should not waste time. The requirement to be President of this country is in the Constitution. When we amended the Presidential Elections Act, he did not oppose it because we still imported and provided it there. Therefore, using the same principle, you could have said that do not put it in the Presidential Elections Act because it is already in the Constitution. So, I do not see any harm having it as long as it is the same text.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I remember the chairperson here said that he had consulted the minister and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs gave the chairperson the authority to present his matter but I am now surprised that the Deputy Attorney-General is bringing more danger. My opinion -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are referring to a law which we are about to make. There other one has not yet come; so, is there any harm?

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, this provision was carried in the earlier Bills that we passed; that is the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections Acts. Therefore, for the sake of uniformity in legislation, I see no harm in it.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, it is true that the proposals do not have any mischief but professionally speaking, it is not correct to double or triple legislate. If there is a law that has provided for it and it caters for both situations – whether we have provided for it in the Parliamentary Elections Act or another law, why should we enact laws, which we have already done? It causes confusion even to the people practising it.

Look at the Law Reform Commission; these are the sort of cases they are dealing with. You have a law here then the same law here and in another place. It does not make sense, though as it is - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: The information I would like to share with the House and hon. Abdu Katuntu knows this for sure, is that if we are handling matters of election of local Government, the Electoral Commission and its lawyers would be pursuing this under this particular section. The Electoral Commission is given specific mandate under the specific law.

When general powers under the Electoral Commission Act would not stop this specific provision from being executed and multiplying it for no good reason; but as I said, if it is in the interest of the Government, we do not enjoy enduring arguments here –(Interjection)

MR KATUNTU: Can I reclaim my microphone? The specific law that the Electoral Commission uses first to define its mandate is the Electoral Commission Act. It is the operating law. Of course it could have other provisions in other laws but it is their parent law and if it has provided for it, why should we now duplicate laws in other legislations?

It does not make either legal or common sense though it does no harm legally. However, we are just duplicating laws and having bulky books, which do not serve a purpose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, our situation is a bit different in that the Attorney-General was referring to the Bill we are going to consider after. We have not passed it. He said that it is in another law which they are going to bring. It is not there now; it is also a proposal -

MR KATUNTU: Even if that were the case, the law where this should rest is in the Electoral Commission Act.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the law that we are talking about is as old as 1997 in our statute books. The proposal being made here is purely to amend what already exists. Section 102 is about a returning officer of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243. 

This is not a new matter, we are just aligning it to make it compliant with the current changes that section 102 - you can refer to it in the Local Government Act.
“The Electoral Commission shall, by notice published in the gazette and local media, appoint a returning officer for each district.” We are trying to amend to purely polish it; we are not reinventing the wheel but modifying it.

If you consider amendment of section 102 of the principle Act; section 102 of the Bill is amended by

    i. A commission noticing the gazette -

What is there is, “The Electoral Commission shall, by notice, published in the gazette.” If you look at the amendment here, “The commission shall, by notice in the gazette…,” the word “published” is removed - “Appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for each electoral area.” These are things that exist in our law. If they were relevant then and it is not duplication, why is it now –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, for giving way. The true story is that we have made so many laws for one thing and if we had made one law specifically for elections, all these problems would not have arose. 

Article 60 of the Constitution of Uganda clearly states that it is the Electoral Commission that is supposed to organise elections. Having known that, we would have known the law which we were going to work on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which Article?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is Article 61, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson of the committee is looking at me. It is Article 61; functions of the Electoral Commission. No, it is Article 61 (b), (d); even publishing is there. They are supposed to publish.

Now, because of that, the operating laws will not be the Local Government (Amendment) Bill; it should be the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, where we should take everything in relation to elections and other functions. If we make it like this, we are going to make a mistake. There will be another law where we might forget a word “and” and it brings us an issue.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the Attorney-General that we shift this issue to the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill because it is the one which does that. I do not see any problem with that. I would like to ask my chairman –(Interruption) 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the committee has tried to explain that these laws exist in the Bill we are handling. Those that want to delete it – because their proposal is to delete it but have nowhere they want to place it.

If we were discussing the other law – which is in anticipation and we are proposing that let us remove this law from where it is and bring it here – then it would be appropriate. Once we simply drop it here and yet we have not even discussed the other one, I do not know whether we will be proceeding well.

The honourable member, who is a senior colleague and who sometimes, can even intimidate someone putting him to order and we always listen to him very carefully, is asking us to ignore amending a law which exists. Madam Chairperson, is he in order to ask us to ignore amending an existing law and talk about an anticipated law, which we are yet to handle?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the dilemma I talked about; that there are proposals in the law, which has not been handled yet. However, what has come first is the Local Government Act. Anyway, you are the owners of the Bill; tell us what you want.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I am making a proposal that we take the position of the committee. First of all, we were very clear with the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. We handled the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. At the very end again, we are knocking heads. What is the issue? Let us clear this: It is now the people who are in the committee who are fighting. They have left us, who are supposed to debate this matter, out.

The issue is that we want to move. Madam Chairperson, now that it has been declared that there is no harm, indeed it is not harmful. Let us have it passed, according to what the committee has proposed for now and we move on. We shall make it better next time; we still have the opportunity. If we want to delete, we shall delete it in future.

Therefore, I move for an amendment to delete.

MR BITANGARO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to implore the House because the amendment being done is that at first, the returning officer would appoint his or her assistant. Today, the amendment we are proposing is that the assistant is also appointed by the Electoral Commission. Is that a big deal?

Therefore, I beg the House that we approve this; that is it.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General can help us now. Having proposed that you want this law to go to another one, why don’t you now propose to repeal this section of the law? That would be the best way forward. Move and repeal this section from the Local Government Act and then we move on. If we do not, it will still remain in the Local Government Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What harm does it do?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, allow me to concede. Let us have it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is another new clause; repeal of section 103. He presented it. It says, “Insertion of a new clause in the Bill” by the chairperson. 

Honourable members, I put the question that section 103 of the principle Act be repealed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 103, repealed.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.27
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and passed the new clause and the new insertion is passed.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It was an amendment to section 102. We amended Section 102. First, we amended section 102 and then repealed section 103.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I beg to move. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we are going to give the people in the Hansard difficulty because at some point, the microphone was off and at another, it was on. So, it keeps capturing parts of his speech. Can he repeat for clarity and for avoidance of doubt? We do not want to give them problems.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the new insertion in section 102 was passed and section 103 was repealed. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.29
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

7.30
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass?

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Honourable members, you remember we had a general debate on these laws. However, I do not recall that we touched the Electoral Commission Act. Therefore, I would like to ask Members to read overnight, the Electoral Commissions Act, and also the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill so that we can handle both tomorrow.

On the Judiciary Bill, I do not know whether you are ready. Okay, tomorrow, we will do the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill and the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill. 

The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
