

Friday, 17 March 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting, which is specifically convened to pay tribute to the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, Member of Parliament for Toroma County, Katakwi District.

Honourable members, I wish to thank you for sparing your time, especially on a Friday and after recess has just been announced, to attend this special occasion when we see off our dear colleague. Thank you for your messages of condolences, sympathies, understanding and cooperation. I pray that we should always support each other like this, whether in good or bad times. That spirit of solidarity is vital for all of us.

I would like to further thank all the honourable members who have gone in large numbers to keep vigil in the deceased’s home in Kyanja and for attending the requiem mass this morning at Christ the King Church. I am informed that yesterday night, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was at the deceased’s residence to be part of the vigil. Thank you, Right Honourable.

My appreciation is also extended to all the honourable members and especially the Teso Parliamentary Group who have actively participated in making all the burial arrangements. I wish to recognise Mrs Amodoi and the family who are seated right behind me at the technical bench. We continue to pray for the family and may journey mercies accompany them and all the mourners as they travel to Katakwi. Fare thee well, hon. Amodoi and may your soul rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, on a rather sad note too, this morning we received news, when we were in church, of the death of the Assistant Inspector General of Police, Andrew Felix Kaweesi, the death of his bodyguard and that of his driver. This was caused by unknown assailants at about 9.00 a.m.

On behalf of Parliament and my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to their families, to the Inspector General of Police, the entire Police Force and the whole nation upon the loss of these three police officers who were on duty serving the nation. Let us stand and observe a moment of silence.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just as part of my communication, before I close, I would like the Rt hon. Prime Minister to take two minutes to inform the House. I see the minister here but Rt hon. Prime Minister, you could inform the House about the situation briefly.

2.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to formally inform this August House that as you have rightly said, this morning, our brother Andrew Felix Kaweesi, the Assistant Inspector General of Police was brutally murdered in Kulambiro just near his home by assailants and he died on the spot. 

The Police and other security agencies are actively following and investigating the matter. Let me use this opportunity to appeal to members of the public that anyone with information that would help the Police to reach its logical conclusion of nailing the assailants are encouraged to pass on this information to the Police.

Mr Speaker, in spite of this tragic and brutal loss of our brother, the country is secure and the security forces are on heightened vigilance to ensure that both the people and property of Ugandans are secured.  

Let me also take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to convey to the family our late brother Kaweesi our deep and sincere condolences on this very tragic loss of this very able and dedicated servant of the Police Force and of the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Right honourable. Honourable members, Andrew Kaweesi, his bodyguard and the driver are the three people who died.

Honourable members, yesterday, I communicated that this House will be sitting for this special sitting until 4 O’clock. That was the request from the family so that they are able to travel to Katakwi this afternoon. The target of 4 O’clock is going to impress on us a time constraint and I will ask the movers and seconders of this motion to keep it brief so that the Members can give their tribute to hon. Amodoi. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat)

National Anthem.

East African Community Anthem.

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CYRUS AMODOI IMALINGAT, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, TOROMA COUNTY, KATAKWI DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before the Rt hon. Prime Minister moves that motion, let me make some recognition of members in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery. I have hon. Maj. Jessica Alupo, former minister and Member of Parliament, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Lilly Ruth Akello, hon. Bernard Mulengani, hon. Mariam Nalubega, hon. Charles Oleny Ojok, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Rose Akol, hon. Paul Musamali, MP-elect of EALA, hon. Milton Muwuma, hon. Iddi Isabirye, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Jacob Wangolo, hon. Rebecca Otengo and hon. Christine Acayo Cwinyaai. Those are the ones that I have for the moment. If I notice others, I will recognise them.

Allow me to also read some of the condolence messages that have come in. I have one from the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Rt hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga. It is addressed to the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and it reads:

“Condolences upon the tragic and untimely death of hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat of Toroma Constituency. It is with great shock that I learnt this morning of the tragic death of hon. Amodoi in a motor accident. It is extremely sad that death has not given him the opportunity to effectively represent the people of Toroma. 

I do recall that in the Ninth Parliament, the honourable member of Parliament was involved in an accident that incapacitated him for several months. I was so looking forward to seeing him take up his responsibility in the Tenth Parliament. This is another blow to the parliamentary family, less than a month after the death of hon. Logiel. 

I express my very sincere condolences to his family, the citizens of Toroma, colleagues in the House and all those who knew him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Member of Parliament and Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.”

We also have a condolence message from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Dr Bernard Mutambi. 

We have also received a condolence message from Operation Wealth Creation signed by hon. Lt Gen. Charles Angina and they have enclosed Shs 500,000. 

We have a condolence message from the Secretary General of the National Resistance Movement signed by hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba and she has enclosed Shs 5 million. 

I have a message from the National Resistance Movement, Office of the National Vice Chairman, Eastern region, Flight Capt George Mukula. 

I have a condolence message to the family from all the members of East African Legislative Assembly-elect: Paul Musamali, Rose Akol, Denis Namara, Mathias Kasamba, George Odong and Mary Mugyenyi. 

I have a message from the Chairperson, Bunyoro parliamentary caucus and they have enclosed Shs 500,000. 

I have a message from hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Chairman, Lango Parliamentary Group and they have enclosed Shs 1 million. 

I have a message from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme signed by Dr Francis Epetait, Chairman of the Board. 

I have a message from the Buganda parliamentary caucus and they have also enclosed Shs 500,000 and signed by Johnson Muyanja, MP. 

Those are the messages we have received and we will pass these to the family.     

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Lt (Rtd) Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, Member of Parliament for Toroma County for his diligent service to the people and Republic of Uganda. I move the motion under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
 
“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the untimely demise of hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, Member of Parliament for Toroma County, which occurred on Tuesday, 14 March 2017 in a motor accident at Kitigoma, Njeru, Kampala-Jinja Road;
 
AWARE that hon. Amodoi has been the Member of Parliament representing the people of Toroma County, in Katakwi District in this Parliament, a constituency he also represented in the Ninth Parliament; 
 
RECOGNISING that hon. Amodoi served this country in various capacities including as a teacher, army officer and Member of Parliament;

APPRECIATING that hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat has been a diligent legislator who has served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Toroma County in Katakwi District and the entire country upon the death of hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat. 
 
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat to Uganda.
 
    3. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, hon. Cyrus Amodoi eternal peace.” 
 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Anthony Akol, hon. Roland Mugume, hon. Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Jovah Kamateeka. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as a justification to the motion, the death of hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat in a gruesome accident at Kitigoma along Kampala-Jinja highway on Tuesday, 14 March was deeply saddening. We have lost a gallant son who diligently served this country as an educationalist and military professional. His aspiration was to see a harmonious, peaceful and better society that is empowered in all spheres of life.

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi was a man of simplicity, humility, generosity and a down to earth leader. He encouraged and implored the community on how to improve their household incomes through venturing in various economic activities. He walked the talk. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi was born on 1 June 1979 to Imalingat Alfred and Isinge Imalingat in Kanapa Village, Magoro Subcounty, Toroma County, Katakwi District. He attended Magoro Primary School, Gaddafi Primary School and Nakama Primary School from where he joined Kings of Kings Secondary School in Iganga for his ‘O’ level and later Iganga Progressive Academy for his advanced level. He later joined Makerere University, where he graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree in Education. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi first served as a teacher and later joined the Uganda People’s Defence Forces in 2005. Due to his dedicated and outstanding performance in service, he was commissioned as Second Lieutenant in September 2006 and promoted to the rank of full Lieutenant in October 2008. 

After attending several professional courses in the military, he was assigned the role of platoon commander and later as Political Commissar of the Presidential Guard Brigade. 

Hon. Amodoi retired from the army in August 2010 to join politics. In 2011, hon. Amodoi contested for and won the election to represent the people of Toroma County in Parliament, a mandate they renewed in his favour in 2016. 

During his tenure in Parliament, hon. Amodoi served on various committees of this House including Defence and Internal Affairs; Human Rights; Government Assurances; Tourism, Trade and Industry. His contribution on these committees was impressive. 

Mr Speaker, we are all walking today with a deep sense of loss and disbelief. It is difficult to believe that Cyrus’s sincerity, simplicity, humility, calmness and dignity will no longer enrich the national debates. 

We grieve with the family, the people of Teso sub region and the country at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? Let me also recognise hon. Johnson Malinga, hon. John Emily Otekat, and hon. John Ewuku. Seconder of the motion? 

2.51
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat, Member of Parliament Toroma County.

Mr Speaker, it was extremely shocking and unbelievable to hear of the untimely death of hon. Cyrus Amodoi, just a month after the death of hon. Annie Logiel. My heartfelt condolences go to the family of hon. Cyrus Amodoi and the people of Toroma County. 

As a country, we have lost a patriotic down-to-earth but courageous and faithful servant. As we are all aware, hon. Amodoi died on Tuesday, 14 March 2017 when the taxi he was travelling in got involved in a fatal motor accident. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of the designs of highway roads in Uganda has been raised repeatedly on this Floor. It is very sad to note that the Member lying before us was greatly concerned about the bad state of roads. In one of his deliberations in this august House, he responded to the State of the Nation Address by the head of state where the President stated that the road coverage in the country was at 70 per cent. However, hon. Amodoi wondered and he gave an example of the Mbale-Soroti Road, where one is forced to drive on the wrong side of the road due to its poor state. In most cases, accidents would occur and it has cost us many lives. It is very unfortunate that the exact problem he complained of has taken his life. 

Honourable members, I have highlighted how the narrowness of the highway roads, coupled with inadequate signage, have led to increased occurrence of accidents in Uganda. Unfortunately, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government continues to construct narrow highway roads and later returns to Parliament to request for additional funds to work on these roads. It is upon such a justification that corruption has become rampant in Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) so one wonders why, from the onset, the Government cannot construct wider roads. 

It is reported that the late had given his official car to women leaders of Katakwi District who were to use it during the preparations of International Women’s Day celebrations. He instead used a taxi as an alternative means of transport. This highlights the spirit of servanthood and the profound support to women empowerment that he stood for. (Applause)

His generosity also highlights the continued mobility needs for women in this country. Most pregnant women, especially in rural areas, are not able to access reliable and affordable transport to distant health facilities for antenatal care and delivery hence increased incidence of maternal mortality. 

Mr Speaker, mobility consequence in the health sector, particularly inadequate number of ambulances of health facilities, continues to contribute to deaths of accident victims due to delayed response. It is a common scene in this NRM regime to see accident victims packed under seats of police patrol vehicles as if they are commodities. 

As we consider the budget for the Financial Year 2017/2018, honourable members, may we prioritise our position of more ambulances to health facilities along highways so as to improve response time along our accident prone highways. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi loved peace and he always worked towards achieving it. As a soldier, he participated in the fight for peace in northern Uganda. He also served his people diligently as a Member of Parliament. He was always concerned about insecurity and poverty in the area. 

Commenting on the State of Nation of Address 2016, he remarked, “In this country, it is in Katakwi District where we still have camps. It is in Katakwi that people cannot afford the basics of life.” The people of Katakwi have lost an advocate of development.

Hon. Amadoi wondered why agriculture was not the most prioritised sector in Uganda yet it is the highest source of livelihood for Ugandans. It is funded with only three percent of the budget yet it supports and employs 80 percent of the population.

On the 23 August 2016, he informed this House that it is disheartening that the Ministry of Agriculture could not hastily curb cassava virus in Katakwi yet it is the staple food in the area. It is our plea to the Government to increase the budget for the sector of agriculture, so as to revamp and boost food production to adequately handle the prevailing food shortages in the country. 

Hon Amodoi was a human rights defender too. He strongly condemned the act of exporting young girls and boys abroad that ended up being exposed to prostitution. He urged the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to undertake stringent supervision of companies exporting labour. To date, the challenge still exists.

This is a reminder to the ministry to take the recommendation of the late seriously, to avoid shattering the prosperity dreams of Ugandans who seek employment abroad. Hon. Amadoi, your commitment to serve this country shall be missed. You always struggled for opportunities that enabled you to serve for a better Uganda and humanity. May your soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have the seconder of the motion?

2.58
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion of paying tribute to the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi, MP Toroma County. I would like to express my profound and sincere sympathies to all those that knew hon. Amodoi Cyrus, as a great friend. Please take comfort in knowing that the Lord that gives, is the Lord that takes at any time He deems fit.

As deep and personal sorrow fills our hearts at this sad moment, I cannot help but remember that we have just bid farewell to another Member of this House just last month. There is no doubt that hon. Amodoi has made many contributions on the Floor of Parliament. He has made contributions that have brought change to our nation. Just as the Leader of the Opposition has said, hon. Amodoi Cyrus was the man that talked about how roads are in a poor state, and it is still the same roads that have claimed his life.

Today, we are saying farewell to a man with many talents and abilities; a soldier that served in the army in the Special Forces and then in the Presidential Guard Brigade and later on turned into a politician. He has diligently legislated in this Parliament for the people of Toroma and indeed the country at large. I believe that this is no mean achievement.

I have had the pleasure to sit with hon. Amadoi in both the Ninth and Tenth Parliament until his untimely demise. I can attest to his dedicated calling as a Member of Parliament, as I am sure the people of Toroma County, who indeed re-elected him, can also attest to that.

There are a few good names in politics; I can attest that Amadoi is one of them. All the people that knew him will miss his high intelligence, his rare friendliness, quiet sense of humour and charm. He donned a personality that you would never go without noticing a good and friendly man.

More often than not, whenever we would meet in the canteen, he would tell you on how you need to work for your Constituency. He would share with you the things he is planning to do in his constituency and you would also copy a leaf and do the same for your constituency, with anticipation that you would be liked just like him. 

He was an independent minded fellow that always reasoned issues devoid of unnecessary bias. He was a respectful legislator that was dedicated to serving his country. He dedicated his life to the people of his Constituency. Little wonder that he died on his way to his Constituency.

On another really sad note, we have lost yet another gallant son of Uganda; the AIGP, Felix Kaweesi who was brutally gunned down today. We really demand of Government to guide us; to show us the way as citizens to see how our security can be more uplifted and improved. We would like to see our security not only through these terrorist that are killing us, but also our security on the roads.

The road worthiness of the cars that are moving on the streets in Uganda is appalling. They are not road worthy; they are DMCs (Dangerous Mechanical Conditions). These are the same vehicles that are carrying very many passengers; buses and taxis. We therefore call upon Government to put down its feet and make sure that these cars that are on the road are indeed road worthy. If we had that, maybe we could achieve something better.

More often than not, we have seen trucks in the night moving with no light behind, no brake lights and all very dark. If at all the painting would reflect it would be better, but there is usually no paint on these cars to reflect. In anyway, there are no reflectors for these big trucks.

Mr Speaker, let it not be the talk of Parliament alone but let it be a practical talk to this Government, to make sure that the citizens are protected, be it on the road or in their homes. Hon.  Amodoi Cyrus was a very good man indeed. My friend, you have truly gone too soon. We will meet some day, rest in peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have received a message from the Acholi Parliamentary Group and they have enclosed is Shs 1,000,000. I have also received a message from the Independent Members of Parliament as A-Z Group. They are giving Shs 1.5 million. The UPDF have sent a message too and have enclosed Shs 1,000,000.
Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Lieutenant (Rtd) Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat, the Member of Parliament for Toroma County, for his diligent service to Uganda, specifically that –

    1. Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Toroma County in Katakwi District and the entire country upon the death of hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat;
    2.  Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat to Uganda;
    3. this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grants the departed colleague and friend, hon. Cyrus Amodoi, eternal peace.

That is the motion which I propose for your debate and debate starts now. We need to agree on how much time we will take. Can we do three minutes each? We will extend the time to 5 o’clock. I will start with the Member for Budaka District.

3.07
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My thoughts are with the family of the late Cyrus Amodoi. Similar sentiments also go to those families that lost their dear ones in the same accident.

Mr Speaker, the late Cyrus Amodoi has been a very humble legislator. I lack words to talk about him. In the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to which he had been a member, he exhibited distinguished integrity. His dedication and selflessness will be greatly missed.

Mr Speaker, the same accident claimed my daughter-in-law. She was buried yesterday. She was the wife to the personnel officer of Budaka District – the late Azida. She has been a woman of character and full of potential. If a reverse were possible, I would ask God to recover the lives of the deceased. However, since God’s plan is above human appeal, I pray that their souls rest in eternal peace. 

Cyrus, you have been a friend and brother to me. May your soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.10
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to a colleague with whom I served on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs both in the Ninth Parliament and Tenth Parliament. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi was a humble servant of this Parliament. All you can recall is that he had deep knowledge in the field of defence, having served in the Presidential Protection Unit at whatever level.

Hon. Cyrus used to sound very modest in our meetings, but he was a useful Member because all the time he would give us the insight and the thinking of the military, which some of us lacked. I remember as we used to travel with him across the country and outside the country, we used to call him our intelligence officer. He would tell us how to go through and around airports and all the nitty-gritty that we may have missed as ordinary members.

I must add that hon. Cyrus was also an adventurous person. I can lightly recall that when we were in Zambia, a menu was brought to us. There was the usual menu, but there was something called “kapenta”. All of us did not know what “kapenta” is, but the soldier in Cyrus said, “For me, I am going to try kapenta”. He did not know “kapenta” was a meal of this small fish (mukene). They brought him a plateful of mukene. From then, in our committee we have been calling him a kapenta and he took it very lightly.

Hon. Cyrus also grappled with the current trials of a Member of Parliament; how to square out to an MP and people’s representative. He died in that course. Today, the role of a Member of Parliament has drastically changed from what there is on our books and statutes to what the people expect. Hon. Cyrus has been doing service delivery in his constituency to the extent of giving out his personal car to meet a constituency obligation. (Applause) 

It was saddening for people in the media, especially on the social media, to go out of their way to curse a dead man because he died in a taxi. What is wrong with a Member of Parliament boarding a taxi? (Applause) What is wrong with a Member of Parliament boarding a bus? (Applause) 

The former Vice-President of America under Obama, Joe Biden, travelled to Washington by train daily to go and work. Wasn’t he a Vice-President of America? David Cameroon travels by train. What is wrong with Members of Parliament travelling in a minibus? Why should it be a big concern?

I would like us to be firm as Members of Parliament in our roles. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, where the Government has failed in service delivery, the responsibly squarely lies on Members of Parliament as a first call. (Applause) 

Where the Government has failed to deliver, Members of Parliament are sacrificing too much, including their lives now. Hon. Cyrus has died in that kind of endeavour. It is a call to Government to ensure it does all it can and make sure service delivery in this country is efficient.

Mr Speaker, let me make a humble call about Cyrus. He reminded me that he was a former Uganda Young Democrat (UYD) member in his days of Makerere, who later went on to join the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and served in the national army. I think that was a good precedent that a former member of the Democratic Party went on to guard the President of this country. That is also very meaningful and a milestone in this country. 

I salute him and wish him rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.16
MS HELLEN ASAMO (PWD, Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Amodoi. He is like a brother to me and we have been very close.

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Amodoi was a man who did not want cliques. He was very sober in his decisions. I recall when I came to Parliament, he asked me, “How do you manage your security?”  I asked him, “What type of security are you referring to?” I did not know that he was an army man. He said, “My sister, the way you manage yourself not everybody around you will love what you are going to do”. He gave me some tips on how to manage my own security.

One time, I asked him, “How do you get all this knowledge?” He told me he was a retired lieutenant from the army and he was in the Presidential Guard Brigade (PGB). Hon. Amodoi could advise on issues of improving customs; he also loved livestock. 

Mr Speaker, one time, we were travelling together in my car in Kyankwanzi and he asked me, “You know this place here?” I asked him, “Which place?” He said, “I know all the villages here because I buy cows from here.” He then asked me, “Why don’t you start a farm? I will get you connections for buying a farm.”

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Amodoi was a simple person but again very developmental. He guided us on issues of development and he would say, “You are not going to be a permanent Member of Parliament, you need to plan ahead”. I found that interesting because there are very few people who can guide in that kind of direction; this son of Teso lying down here did. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi loved his tribe. He wanted Iteso to be united. Whenever we had problems in the Teso Parliamentary Group, he would ask, “Honourable members, what is the problem? Why are we fighting each other? We came here from different constituencies. If we are fighting to be ministers, that is a different story. We just came here as Members of Parliament.”  That is what he advocated for.

Mr Speaker, it was a surprise to hear about the death of hon. Cyrus. At first, people thought it was hon. Aogon Silas not Amodoi. I would like to call upon the family - Amodoi has been looking after a big group of people. Please, remain united - (Member timed out.)

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kinkizi in Kanungu, I would like to convey our condolences to the family, Parliament and the people of Toroma.

Mr Speaker, today is 17 March 2017 and in Kanungu, it is a day of death because today, we are marking 17 years since Kibwetere killed people in my constituency and people were from all over the country.

Mr Speaker, one of the most difficult times I have been in was when we were making a decision in the Parliamentary Commission where you also sat; we were making a budget for Parliament and we had to decide on how many Members of Parliament we should budget for in terms of their funeral expenses. We had taken a decision and I do recall, we put five Members. I was scared because I could be a victim of that decision when we were making that budget. 

Shortly after, the first Member of Parliament who died in the last Parliament was from Usuk County in Katakwi District. Today, we are also paying tribute to our colleague, the second Member of Parliament to die, again from Katakwi District. It is very unfortunate that we have lost a colleague whom I agree with the description that has been given of him; a very humble, down to earth Member of Parliament and someone who cared for his people. It is indeed very unfortunate that he has died at an early age.

In Kigezi, we had bad experiences after independence to the extent that we grew up fearing the army. We would never get near to the army because the army was seen as a very bad institution. I would like to thank the UPDF for turning Ugandans into very good army officers. You could hardly believe that hon. Cyrus was an army officer because of the past experiences where the army officers were seen as hostile, aggressive, not approachable – his character was of a humble, down to earth and approachable person. I would like to thank the people of Toroma who voted him to be their Member of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, last night, when were at the vigil, we were told of his good work. One of the points that was raised was – like many Members of Parliament said, he was looking after over 25 children, paying for their fees. I would like to thank hon. Ssebaggala, who offered to continue the education of one of the children who is in his school. We also got a testimony from the LCI Chairperson of Kyanja of how the honourable Member of Parliament was helping him on how to improve farming especially, growing of mangoes. How many of us are able to guide the communities where we live here in Kampala, other than our constituencies?  We would like to thank him and applaud him for having been a very progressive Member of Parliament. 

Lastly, there is nothing wrong with a Member of Parliament traveling by public means. I must confess I am one of those who have travelled by public means to Kanungu. Sometimes, I drive my vehicle; park it in Rukungiri and board a bus to Kampala. So, the members of public who vulgarise this that a Member of Parliament died in tax are wrong. We come from the public and there is nothing wrong with travelling using public means.

Mr Speaker, this shows the pride of Members of Parliament. Members travel at night to do all sorts of things; to nurse the constituencies. We would like to appeal to the public to know that Members of Parliament go an extra mile to serve the people that they represent and we would like to thank the late for doing just that. He died on duty like we heard. He left his vehicle in the constituency to help with the mobilisation because yesterday, Katakwi District was supposed to mark Women’s Day Celebrations. That is why he left his vehicle and he was out traveling to go and join his constituency to celebrate Women’s Day. 

It is unfortunate that he died but we continue to pray for the family. We also pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

3.25
MR SAMUEL ODONGO OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I think I am one of the closest people to the late hon. Amodoi Cyrus. He confided in me. I was his lawyer at the trying moment when he was arrested in my constituency in Pader and conned of unspecified sums of money in Awere Sub-county in Pader District on allegations. He was subsequently arrested and taken to Kinene Prison in Pader. I was the lawyer for his bail application.

Mr Speaker, allow me to say that when hon. Amodoi Cyrus was in prison, he refused to eat any liquid food even when I instructed my family members to cook and take food to prison. When my people called me that he was not eating food, I drove to the prison and requested to meet him so that I could ask him the reason as to why he was not eating liquid food. He told me he did not feel safe; he is more comfortable with dry rations like biscuits. The first bail application failed. We travelled back to Kampala and mobilised more Members of Parliament and in the second application, he got the bail after he had stayed in Pader Prison for eight days.

We would like to thank the offices of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for making that bail application possible. It was a very complex matter that almost cost me an election. People were asking how a Member of Parliament can represent someone who had come to allegedly vandalise bridges in his constituency. 

We are paying tribute to a nice man, Mr Speaker. I wish God would ask me on who to kill. I do not know why good people die early. There are very many bad people and they are at large out there. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi told me that when he wanted to leave the army to join politics, the army refused. He waited when all the junior officers were called to have a dialogue with the President in Entebbe. When the President addressed them and was about to leave, he raised his hand. All his seniors were surprised wondering why a mere lieutenant would not brief them and instead address this question to the President. 

He asked the President some questions which were political in nature. The President responded and shook his hand. He immediately called his senior officers to be investigated as to why a junior officer could question the President without going through the channels as if intelligence had failed. However, he told me he did that deliberately because he knew it would be easier to leave the army in that way other than following the normal procedures, because there is no way they would retire a lieutenant. (Laughter)

When we last met at the burial of the father of hon. Anite, he promised to give me a cow after I succeeded in the case. The case was dismissed because it was baseless. Unfortunately, he has died. 

Mr Speaker, we will be there with hon. Amodoi. We love him. He was young and I am two years older than him. We will miss him. I think this is getting too much for Teso. May your soul rest in eternal peace, hon. Amodoi. Thank you.

3.29
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to, first of all, extend my condolences to the family of the late Cyrus Amodoi. 

Today, we are here to mourn our brother who has lived a very short life, but very purposefully. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi died in Buikwe District on the road that has claimed very many lives. As we mourn his life, I would like Government and this House to examine the causes of these accidents that are so rampant in that stretch of the highway. I also would like to ask Government to be a little more serious because this is not the first time Parliament has gathered here to talk about the carnage of accidents along that road. 

It was against that background that alternatives were provided to improve the state of the road to and out of Kampala. One of these routes is the Jinja Express Highway and the famous Katosi Road. However, in spite of all the assurances given that there is money to build this road, little has been done. Today, as I speak, the work that has been going on on Katosi Road has come to a standstill on account of lack of money to pay the contractors.

Mr Speaker, the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway which is another alternative has also been talked about. The survey was carried out about three years ago, but up to today, nothing is going on. 

Mr Speaker, you have talked about Mbale Hospital which should be the rescue centre for most of the accident victims. As we talk right now, this hospital has never been given a life support machine. The one that is available is limping. It was acquired in 2007- (Member timed out.)

3.32
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the chairperson of PTA Nakama Primary School where the late colleague went to school up to primary seven. It is only befitting that I also add my voice to the many voices we have heard in this House today as we pay tribute to him. He is a very wonderful character we have lost today. Right now, as we stand here, we only pray to the Almighty God to give us a proper replacement.

As a new Member of Parliament, I have only known hon. Amodoi for about eight months. I met him in Kyankwanzi and probably it was chemistry and his character that we became very good friends. Hon Amodoi is a person that you would want to make friends with because of his character.

Mr Speaker, my first experience here in Parliament has shown that it is not very easy to have so many friends in Parliament. When we come here, we see a lot of people from various backgrounds. Therefore, we, as new Members of Parliament and particularly me, took time to and still study all of us. However, looking at the people we work with, there are those you can confide in. Whenever I had a problem or wanted to share something with anyone here, he was one of those few I always confided in.

Looking back at his life, he is one person who has always been down to earth and sincere. I remember one time I was traveling to my constituency and as I approached Jinja, I saw hon. Amodoi’s ambulance. I immediately called to congratulate him for buying an ambulance - (Member timed out.)

3.36
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for granting me this opportunity to pay tribute to my fallen brother. On behalf of the people of Kalaki County and my behalf, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of the late Cyrus Amodoi.

I last met Cyrus Amodoi last week as we were checking our pigeonholes. He invited me for his belated Women’s Day Celebrations, which should have taken place yesterday. I told him I would not be able to make it and that if he could postpone the celebrations to Friday, which is today, I would be able to attend. Little did I know then the prophetic nature of our conversation - that we would not be together on Thursday but we would meet on Friday, as we had agreed. 

It is very unfortunate, more so that the significance of the death of hon. Amodoi has been missed by our friends from the fourth estate. Just as Jesus Christ died between criminals to save us from our sins, the death of Cyrus in a public service vehicle shows this country very vividly the plight to which hundreds of thousands of our citizens are subjected to every day when they use commuter taxis.

It does not matter how wide or straight our roads will be, until we streamline the operation of taxis - who drives taxis, where they stop and which direction they go to - we will continue losing people on our roads. I have used taxis and from the moment you step into a taxi, Mr Speaker, it is the closest thing you can ever be to purgatory. You are driven at breakneck speeds; the taxi may stop right in the middle of the road or in front of an oncoming trailer; they can even reverse in the middle of the road. You would be compelled to confess all your sins before you reach your destination. (Laughter) We need to streamline the operation of our taxis in terms of who drives them and to which destinations they go.

We also need to work on the manner in which our roads are used by heavy trucks at night. These trucks park by the roadside, making the narrow roads even narrower and causing more accidents. I would like to appeal to the Government once more; we have said this here and I say it again, taxis-(Member timed out.)

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. On behalf of the people of Tororo and on my own behalf, allow me to convey condolences to the young family of the late Cyrus Amodoi. 

Mr Speaker, Cyrus’ first born son, who is seated right there, was born of a mother from Tororo, who happened to be my relative. Therefore, on behalf of the people from Kamuli Parish, Mukuju Subcounty in Tororo, allow me to convey condolences to the people of Katakwi.

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi Cyrus was a very humble and simple legislator but in his humility, he was a very effect mobiliser. I recall in the previous Parliament, as many of the independent Members of Parliament were trying to cross over to other political parties, he said, “I will be elected by the people as Cyrus; therefore, I am not going to move to any political party”. Little wonder he won overwhelmingly in the last elections.

Mr Speaker, I would like to mention one thing; we have talked about road accidents and it is very unfortunate that the late talked about road accidents and the state of roads in this country and it is a road accident that has claimed his life. In the previous Parliament, we lost a Member of Parliament, the late hon. Namaganda, as a result of a road accident. In the Eighth Parliament, the late hon. Balikowa died along that same stretch between Jinja and Kampala still due to a road accident. Now, in this Parliament, we have lost Cyrus.

Mr Speaker, the majority of the road accidents in this country are majorly as a result of human error, and most of these road accidents occur during the night. I would like to appeal to colleagues to guard their lives. Let us avoid travelling at night as much as possible. I want to repeat, the majority of road accidents happen in the night. Therefore, that is one –(Interjections)- Yes, the constituents are demanding but please, you can leave very early in the morning and still reach. This is what Members of Parliament often do, but it is a caution that we need to take seriously.

Mr Speaker, I would like to state that the late Amodoi was a very generous man. Although he has left two biological children, the late cared for a number of orphans and the ones that I was told of are about 25. All these were his children - the children of his late siblings but also orphaned children within his constituency.

It is very unfortunate that he has died at a very young age of 40 years. It is a pity that these children are still young and in school. I hope that we, as Members of Parliament, will stand in to try and see how to support these children because they are still young and need to complete their education. Cyrus was their father and the only parent they knew. 

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, my condolences once again go to the family and to the people of Katakwi. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.43
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand here to convey my deepest sympathies and condolences to the family of the late Cyrus Amodoi. 

I served together with him on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs and indeed like most honourable members were saying, he was a humble person and very resourceful in our committee. He would advise us all the time. I took some months off to go for maternity leave but Cyrus was the one person who would make sure that I did not miss anything from the committee. He would send me all the material in the evening about what had been said in the committee. He was a friend and we will really miss you, Cyrus. 

I take this opportunity to appeal to the traffic division and other police bodies; this programme that was on Masaka Road called Fika Salama helped us a lot. Accidents were very rampant on Masaka Road before that. If that programme could be extended to Jinja Road, it would help curb those accidents. 

Most of these drivers of trailers are very tired and always sleepy. One time I travelled in a taxi to Mbale and it is so unfortunate because the driver who took us from the park got off near Buikwe and the conductor took over. By the time we reached, we were all quarrelling in the taxi but there was nothing we could do. All these things need to be taken care of. 

We are very saddened. To the widow, we pray that God gives you strength to raise this very young family and more grace to carry through this very difficult time. May the soul of our fallen comrade and honourable member rest in eternal peace. My condolences to you on behalf of the people of Sheema and my entire family.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just go through my list so that we do not miss it: Soroti Municipality, hon. Kefa, Padyere, Bugabula, Agule, Kawempe, Bulamogi, Ajuri, Budadiri West, Mbale Municipality, Ruhinda County, Samia Bugwe North, Kapelebyong. That is where I have stopped so far. So let us finish with them and then you can rise. 

3.46
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I rise to join my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to my fallen brother, the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, of Toroma County.

It has already been mentioned on the Floor of Parliament that the late Amodoi was a man of humility and simplicity. I stand to give testimony that hon. Amodoi was a man whom anybody and everybody would get along with. In July 2001 when hon. Amodoi came to South Sudan as part of a delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the independence of South Sudan, he did not pull the normal airs that delegations usually do. 

Because at that particular time Juba had several visitors, there was literally no space in the hotels. When I asked hon. Amodoi, in my local language whether we could all stay in my apartment, he replied, “You are me and I am you; what is the difficulty in that? Why should we run around looking for a place where we can stay?” 

Throughout the evening and even before the Independence Day celebrations, it was as though I was associating with somebody who was not a Member of Parliament. I was not an MP then but I was running around doing the things that we used to do there. We went to different places and hon. Amodoi would associate with everyone as a down-to-earth person. 

Hon. Amodoi was a unifying factor; he took no prisoners. We know that we come from different caucuses and sometimes you find that within the same caucus, there are MPs who do not talk to each other. With hon. Amodoi, all of us in the Teso Parliamentary Group would not raise reservations because to him, everyone was a brother or a sister.

You also did not need an appointment to see him. You would just find him in the lobby, the canteen or in the corridors and you would speak about what was going on. Needless to say, this week I have seen one of the unique elements of somebody bringing people together. This is because the Teso Parliamentary Group has not stopped having everyone on board from the time we lost him. This demonstrates how much a unifying factor hon. Amodoi was.

Hon. Amodoi kept on telling us, “Lo obuka”, which means the one of my home or the one with whom we come from the same place. Those were always the first words he would tell you when he met you, regardless of whether he viewed you as a new colleague or one who had been with him for a longer time. He was always jolly, happy and at peace with himself and with everyone else.

Mr Speaker, today in church, you mentioned something that I thought was worth repeating here. You said that sometimes you can read the signs of the time. You can be able to read the signs and you do not have to be a prophet. When I returned to Parliament and joined you in receiving the body of the late hon. Amodoi, when we were signing the condolence book the television screens telecast the submissions of hon. Amodoi regarding the nature of our roads, the risky driving and the nature in which Uganda has lost several people on the roads. This was during the debate on the State of the Nation Address. Mr Speaker, it is indeed true that one can read the times and tell what is likely to happen. No wonder his spirit had feared what happens on our roads.

Uganda is probably one of the unique countries where the road signs cannot be trusted. It is only in Uganda –(_Member timed out.)

3.51
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kiboga, I would like to express my condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the people of Katakwi and Teso region in general on the loss of their dear one, who has been claimed in an accident. It is very sad indeed.

I worked with the late in this Parliament for a short period of time – about six months or so. I will always remember him first as an easy person to talk to, somebody who was always patient, a listener and very enterprising. He always had solutions to whatever issues you would present to him as an elder, since he served in the Ninth Parliament.

One thing that I have found disturbing is the question about an MP taking a taxi. On this, I would like to thank the late hon. Amodoi because somehow, he has died a martyr. He has brought it out that even us, MPs, use public transport - the boda bodas, buses and commuter taxis. The late hon. Amodoi was using public transport but was very aware of the risk that it poses because he had clearly talked about it here in Parliament. 

The other very interesting thing is that we have always been attacked, as Members of Parliament, as being greedy and not caring about the public. However, here is a good example of one of us taking a taxi. We should be asking ourselves: As MPs, should we consider these taxis as transport of the poor? Definitely not! If they are the means of public transport that we can all use, then we should trust in the public transport system and work on how to improve on it.

The key question here is: How is Government going to react to the deaths that we perpetually have on our roads? One example that I would like to bring out, and which is a demonstration of negligence, is Hoima Road. Hoima Road was under construction and when COSASE started investigating who the contractor was, the Chinese run away and they did not care about tidying up. There are no signs where road works are ongoing. There are humps but no warning signs; you hit the hump suddenly and the vehicle swings. This road is prone to accidents at the moment. 

Can Government make that commitment that at least they are trying to work on improving road safety -(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, the name Cyrus is reflected in Isaiah 44:28, where God commanded and said, “He is my shepherd, and will accomplish all that I please”. God said that Cyrus was going to accomplish His work. The funny thing is that Cyrus in the Bible is mentioned over 30 times but he was not any closer to God. He was actually a pagan who came to help the Jews in three things: First, he was the King of Persia, who allowed the Jews to go back to Israel after 70 years of captivity; the second was to build Jerusalem; and the third was to furnish it with God’s furniture.

Mr Speaker, this exactly fits into the man we are talking about today. In the Bible, Cyrus was talked of as Cyrus II and indeed, this man was serving his second term. He was also called “Cyrus, the Elder”. Indeed, the man that we are eulogising today is an elder, not only in terms of political work but also in terms of understanding the dynamics of this country. 

I got close to him when I was making fun of him in 2011. The Woman MP of Katakwi at that time was a military officer and the one of Usuk County was a police officer. I told him that he was amidst people who once served in the forces and yet he was a civilian. He told me, “You are joking; I am actually much better than them.” He mentioned that if there was to be transparency in promotions in the army, he would now hold a senior rank. He said that because of the glaring injustices – he was much more brilliant than most of the army men – he decided to quit. His mission was to fight for the rights of the army officers in terms of good pay, especially when on deployment for both internal and foreign operations - (Interjection) - I think your opportunity will come.

Mr Speaker, I asked him why he did not stand as an army representative and he said that he would not have the chance. We need such people who come out of the army and become civilians and come to this House so that they can speak the truth other than the men in uniform who are here as MPs; they cannot speak the truth because they are honestly deployed here –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MR MOSES KIZIGE (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, you might have realised from his profile that the late Amodoi spent most of his pre-university education in Busoga. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, many people were displaced by the insurgency in Teso and they settled in Busoga. This brought us good teachers like the late Amodoi’s brother but also young children who had their education in Busoga. Therefore, on behalf of the many friends the late Amodoi made in Busoga while studying at Gadaffi, Nakalama, King of Kings, Iganga and Iganga Progressive Academy, we wish to pass our condolences to the people of Katakwi and the people of Teso in general.

I had the opportunity to work with him closely in 2007, during the preparations for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) and the conferences that followed. These included the Afro-Arab Youth Conference, the Smart Partnership International Dialogue and the 21st Ordinary Summit of the African Union. We worked closely with many officers in the Presidential Guard Brigade (PGB). These are officers whose sacrifice is not seen when we are preparing such conferences. 

We shall miss him as a dedicated officer, but this did not stop him from participating in national politics. Someone has observed that he had to use tricks to get himself out of the army. However, when you join the army, you are aware that you must serve diligently and you only exit through certain procedures.

We thank God for the work he did for this country and we thank him for the service he has given to this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.00
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The rate at which Members of Parliament are dying is very sad; it is like a rate of 200 kilometres per hour. 

The late Amodoi was a brilliant, reserved, down-to-earth person and very intelligent. Personally, I have been benefitting from him. He had great political ideas. One time he found me crying in the canteen and asked why I was shedding tears. There was a notorious young man disturbing me in the village and after campaigns, the notorious young man continued de-campaigning me as though elections were to be held the following week. (Laughter) 

Hon. Amodoi consoled me and asked, “Mukula, what is you plan?” I told him that I was planning to go and physically fight the young man. He told me, “No, let me give you an idea. Does he have a mum?” I said, “Yes”. He advised, “Make the mum your best friend; when you are in the constituency, buy sugar, bread and meat and visit his mum. That way, when he comes back home at night, the mum will serve him the meat that you have bought and in the morning, the mum will serve the bread you bought and she will keep saying, ‘I have a second son called Mukula’.” That is what I did and I never saw the notorious man de-campaigning me again. (Laughter) I know that by 2021, I will be unopposed. He has gone too soon.

My humble appeal to Members is that when we lose colleagues, we should keep a record of our dead colleagues and then probably, every year, we could rise and observe a moment of silence in their honour. 

There is also a tendency, after burial, to forget about them. As colleagues, let us keep in touch with families of our fallen colleagues, even if we just made a phone call or send airtime or contribute Shs 5,000 to keep the candle burning. Otherwise, it is really sad. To the family, keep strong and keep praying. My brother, may your soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.04
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My condolences and condolences from the people of Kawempe North constituency and the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus go to the bereaved family.

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi has been a colleague and a friend. We met during the Ninth Parliament. I used to sit on this side and he was an independent MP sitting on this side. Since then, we became friends with him and the entire family. 

In the Ninth Parliament, as he was looking for where to rent, he came to Kisaasi. Kisaasi is my ancestral area and also a few metres away is my school, Kisaasi College School. Since then, Cyrus has been a real brother.

During the Ninth Parliament, I asked him why he was an independent MP and I asked him to join the Democratic Party. He said, “No, I want to be an independent.” Little did I know that in the Tenth Parliament, I would end up as an independent MP like Cyrus. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, Cyrus was a young man with a big heart. He would tell me how he was looking after orphans and children of his late relatives. At my school, he enrolled two students in O’ Level and A’ Level and three weeks ago, the late hon. Amodoi had brought them back for another term. I asked why he had brought them back late and he said that he had many challenges and that he looks after many children. He came past 9 o’clock and we sat together for almost an hour.

Hon. Amodoi would move with a stick; he was a disciplinarian in as far as our cultural customs are concerned. At school, he would pull out his stick and ask why Dorothy did not perform well. He once threatened to cane her in my presence and I advised that we use other methods; indeed, we discussed and he did not cane Dorothy. He was very critical in as far as the upbringing of children is concerned. 

Mr Speaker, last week, I was with other colleagues trying to put together the Parliamentary Forum on Islamic Banking and Finance. The late Amodoi was No. 8 on the list and he said, “We need to acquire knowledge in Islamic banking and finance –(Member timed out.) 

4.08
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the people of Toroma County and particularly to the family of the late hon. Amodoi, Teso community and to the whole nation, my deep condolences; our thoughts and prayers are with you. 

Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament, the late hon. Amodoi and I were both independents and we would sit just on this row. At that time, Katakwi had two Members of Parliament and two counties - Toroma and Usuk. Both Members of Parliament from Toroma and Usuk were independents. Unfortunately, at the beginning of the Ninth Parliament, the Member of Parliament for Usuk County, hon. Oromait, passed on and we had a by-election because of his death. It is now saddening that at the beginning of the Tenth Parliament, the Member of Parliament for Toroma County has passed on, leading us to another by-election. This is a very sad moment.

Mr Speaker, I am glad that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here. I have noted that many of our roads are not properly marked. In situations where you find a road has three lanes, especially climbing lanes, most of the drivers do not know who should use the middle lane. Many times you find vehicles sloping down and others coming uphill all struggling for the same lane. I think it is very important for us to sensitise the people on how these roads should be used and who has the right of way on the climbing lane. This could have also contributed to the deaths that we are witnessing today.

I must emphasize that the late hon. Amodoi, being an independent Member of Parliament, was indeed independent. He spoke his mind without bias or fear. He spoke what he thought was right. He could not be compromised on his ideas. I am glad that he never crossed to the party where he was being convinced to go because he thought he needed to speak his own mind.

Finally, death is a very painful thing to witness but I would like to inform the Members who are present that on the –(Member timed out.) 

4.11
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise with great humility to pay tribute to a colleague, a friend and a contemporary. 

I know that in the African traditional society when death strikes suddenly the way it did with our colleague, it is natural that we would retreat. In that retreat, many theories would be developed and many things would be said. However, I would like to particularly pick on a cross-section of our fellow countrymen and women, who upon the demise of our colleague, took to social media and for lack of a better word, Mr Speaker, you will permit me to describe them as uncultured, uncivilised and sadists. They took to social media to ask questions that are not literally asked of a dead person in the African traditional society.

Mr Speaker, much as this country is still healing, there seems to be a generation that is reaping from bad things. Why would you celebrate the death of someone, speaking as if once you are elected as a Member of Parliament there is a certain way you are expected to pass on. We are human and born of women just like them and we are part of the Ugandan society. If Ugandans are dying in our local hospitals, we also die; if they are dying on the roads, we too die; if they are dying in their private cars, we do die; and if they are dying using public means, we do die. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to them through this tribute motion. Fellow countrymen, especially those who took to social media, may the good Lord forgive you for all your tweets; may the good Lord pardon you because you do not know what you are doing. 

Nobody wants to die; in fact, if I asked a question here how many of us would like to go to heaven, all of us would say we want to go to heaven. However, if you asked who is ready to die now such that you go to heaven, the possibility is clear that none of us will rise up to say, “I am ready to die”. That is the dilemma of death and why would you now celebrate –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2011, I was the Leader of the Opposition and I am the one whom you requested to allow the independents to sit this side. It was a negotiation but because of the late hon. Amodoi who I had seen, I accepted. All of you who are independents are sitting here because of the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi.

Mr Speaker, nobody knows when they will die and I am sorry that the Woman Member of Parliament for Tororo has advised us against using public transport at night or day. I am sure there are people who die in the morning and those who die at night, like Felix Kaweesi who died during the day.

Mr Speaker, I married from Teso region and he would call me ekamuran, meaning my brother-in-law, but to me he was a brother. You are all aware that when you marry, you pay dowry and indeed I paid cows but he was the one who took me to Teso region to do farming. In 2015, he gave me 120 hectares of land in Kolir. Tomorrow, if he were still alive, he would have given me two cows and the reason was that he believed the easiest asset to get money from when you are broke is from cows because you may take long to sell land or a house. I was therefore going to start rearing cows tomorrow; unfortunately, he has died.

Public transport is allowed. I am aware, Mr Speaker, that you have a lead car but whenever you travel from Entebbe to other destinations, you travel in a plane; do you own it? (Laughter). It is public transport! I think we should define public transport; it is transport which you do not own. I am sure that you do not own even the lead car that you are using; it is a public car.

Therefore, those advising us not to travel by public means are making a mistake. There is no businessman in Uganda whom I have seen going out of the country with a private jet. They always use public transport. The only difference is that it is air transport. Many of us use trains, taxis and buses while abroad, despite the fact that we are Members of Parliament, Prime Ministers or Speakers. Therefore, those saying that it was wrong for my brother to use public transport are making a mistake.

What I know about hon. Amodoi is that he was down to earth. He took all the money he got to Toroma, Katakwi. (Applause) The people of Toroma have lost a man who loved them with all his heart because he could even go to the bank to borrow - (Member timed out.) 

4.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues who spoke before me, to pay sincere condolences on behalf of the people of Mbale to the wife of the late Cyrus Amodoi, the family, friends and relatives and to you, Mr Speaker, and colleagues in Parliament. 

What a tragic death that has taken our colleague! A lot has been spoken about Cyrus but the people of Mbale are going to miss Cyrus because Mbale is where he used to stop and do business. 

Recently, the Ministry of Works and Transport commissioned SGS, a Swiss company, to inspect vehicles at a very high cost. However, one issue which we should look at is who the people manning those vehicles are. When you consider the way in which people get driving licences, there is a lot to demand. I am glad the Prime Minister is here; if you went to Naguru and witnessed how these driving licences are given out, it is terrible. 

I got a driving licence from Sweden and I sat in a class for three months, where I did both theory and practicals. With that system, Mr Speaker, you must answer 100 questions and if you get seven wrong, you cannot get a driving licence. It is so shocking that in this country, you are just shown a few road signs, you are asked if you can drive and if you know how to park a car and then you are given a driving licence. 

Even turn boys who open doors in those taxis are driving; we have just heard from one of our colleagues here that a turn boy took over a vehicle. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my request is that you recall all driving licences from taxi drivers and those who drive public vehicles like trucks, section by section, so that we take these people for lessons again. 

Mr Speaker, the United Nations came here to test our policemen who were going for peacekeeping missions in Liberia and other countries. Many of the policemen that were taken to Namboole failed; they could not even drive and so they failed the test. 

Therefore, we are getting problems on the roads because of drivers. They do not know how to drive and that is why they are causing all these accidents. They do not know which one is an overtaking lane or a climbing lane. They overtake in corners where they are not allowed to overtake and yet they are driving these vehicles without licences. Hon. Prime Minister, can you draw this to the attention of Cabinet so that you recall driving permits for drivers of taxis and public vehicles from section to section. You can start with Kampala, Kabale –(Member timed out.) 

4.21
MR DONONZIO MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, the late honourable Lt Cyrus Amodoi served with me when I was an administrator at the Chieftaincy of the Political Commissar and he was the Political Commissar attached to the Presidential Guard Brigade.

The late Cyrus was not only a peace builder but he was a peace lover. He always wanted peace to be transferred to our individual homes. He fought for the rights of women and children. We have really lost a freedom fighter. 

In 2010, we both applied to leave the army and join Parliament but some of us were blocked, including Cyrus. He was determined to leave the army and he used his trick and asked for permission directly from the President while he was briefing them. He was released and he advised me not to lose hope. I did not lose hope and in 2011, I also contested to represent the UPDF after being blocked the other side. My name was removed from the contestants but he still insisted that I should never lose hope. 

Mr Speaker, I remember as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, we travelled to the east and when we reached Kirinya, I was carried by the prisoners. He said, “Thank God you survived”. Little did I know that the late Cyrus was once a prisoner, until today when hon. Odonga Otto raised it here. When we reached Mbale, he was so concerned about the lives of female prisoners and their children. He was so passionate and he was so touched. We have therefore lost a great man. 

Mr Speaker, for any member of the public to come out and wonder how a Member of Parliament can die using a taxi - it is as if once elected –(Member timed out.) 

4.27
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen friend, hon. Cyrus Amodoi. The late Amodoi is an Old Boy (OB) of Iganga Progressive Academy, where I also went to for my A’ Levels. As OBs and OGs of Iganga Progressive Academy, we extend our condolences. We have lost our friend. Iganga Progressive Academy boasted of four Members of Parliament in the Tenth Parliament but it is unfortunate that today, we are paying tribute to one of our own. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Amodoi has been an outstanding character in this House. He has been a mentor to most of us who have just joined this House for the first time. When we met as a group of independent Members of Parliament before swearing in, he is one of the people that stood firm to guide us and show us the way forward. His emphasis was on living a free life - a life free of debt and pressure. It is unfortunate that at a time like this, we are paying tribute to him. 

My condolences go to the family. Mrs Amodoi, we pray that the good Lord that gave you this mighty fallen friend of ours will not leave you and the children. Truly God gives and He takes. 


There is a common saying in our communities that good people do not live long and indeed, hon. Amodoi has lived a very short life. However, we thank God and like we all have echoed here, he has lived a profitable and beneficial life. We shall live to remember him. I extend my condolences to this country for losing –(Member timed out.) 

4.27
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to my brother, the late Amodoi. Hon. Amodoi was an independent Member of Parliament like me. When I came to this Parliament, hon. Amodoi was the first MP from Teso region to take me through the details required of a Member of Parliament. 

My late brother lying here was a man of rare character. He has been a human rights advocate, right from his Constituency in Toroma County. Hon. Amodoi has been standing with his people that were deprived of their land in Angisa, even when the Uganda Wildlife Authority demolished Angisa Primary School; he stood firm and said that he will rebuild it because he could not abandon them.

As we speak, the late hon. Amodoi brought a petition to this Parliament on the question of land that has been robbed from the people of Angisa by UWA. That petition is in your office, Mr Speaker. This week, I put it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure that they should follow this matter and it was agreed that it would happen this week.

Mr Speaker, due to inadequacy of service delivery of this country in the health sector, hon. Amodoi procured an ambulance to help the women in his Constituency to access health services during child birth. 

My brother lying here has died because of exposing the truth and fighting against corruption in this country. [HON. MEMBERS: “How?”] When hon. Amodoi was deployed in Congo when he was still serving in the army, he came back to this country and a report was brought in the Ninth Parliament to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, alleging that mineral water and other materials were supplied. He stood firm before the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and said that he never saw mineral in Congo while serving as a UPDF soldier.

After the meeting, some people never looked at him well. Since then, – I would like to testify before this Parliament that he had never carried a smart phone in fear of being tracked. Another reason he had to change cars from a taxi to a “boda boda” was the fear that he was being tracked. I would like to be very honest; my brother lies here in state and there is nobody to speak about the demise of brother, which is the reason why he met his death in public taxi –(Member timed out.)

4.31
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak about the late hon. Amodoi Cyrus. Allow me pass on my condolences to the bereaved family, to Ugandans and to the honourable colleagues.

I have worked with hon. Amodoi for less than a year but what I can say about him is that he has been a quiet, determined and courageous man. During the committee meetings, he would put up spirited arguments with whichever agency that would appear before the committee.

I would like to recall that during one of the sessions, we went to Kabamba. Gen. Katumba took us there but hon. Cyrus Amodoi told us that he remembered going through the same military training and he really wanted to talk to the junior officers that were undergoing training. He asked them what challenges they were facing and also gave them confidence that being part of the Defence and Internal Affairs committee, he would be in position to push for their issues.

Mr Speaker, whenever we went to visit the various prisons, hon. Cyrus Amodoi was a committed person. He was always there to ask what was transpiring in the prisons. We would proceed as a committee but he would remain behind to get to the gist of the matter. He made meaningful contributions and indeed his discussion with the prisoners would make them happy. 

He would share with them that he was also once in prison and he knows what they were going through; that the situation was not permanent and it would change. “We are going to make sure, as a committee, that we put your issues on the Floor of Parliament.” He said.

Mr Speaker, the man lying before us today has died at such an early age. We are going to miss him as a committee. To the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, today is a double tragedy. We have lost Cyrus but also one of the people that were due to appear before the committee - AIGP, Andrew Felix Kawesi. May their souls rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have 20 minutes left and I have more than 15 people on my list. Can we reduce the time to two minutes? If we do not reduce, we will stop at 5.00 p.m. and whoever will have not spoken by that time – it is okay with me. I wanted to accommodate as many people as possible but if you want three minutes, it is fine with me.

4.34
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of my family, I would like to express my condolences on the death of my brother, hon. Cyrus Amodoi. On behalf of the district, I would also like to send our condolences to the family and to the Parliament of Uganda.

Before I say much, I would like to request you to allow me some time because I am the chairperson of the organising committee for the burial of our late brother. There are issues which I would like to point out to the people of Katakwi and as a colleague - which the late Amodoi has been handling on behalf of the people of Toroma.

To begin with; to Government – for us we remember the late Amodoi. The people of Toroma will be very happy if the Angisa land question is solved between Uganda Wild Life Authority and the community of Magoro Sub County. That was his own subcounty where he is born.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask you and to urge Government; can you help us reclaim our land? It is our land and not the land of UWA. (Applause)  As the people of Teso, we have never heard of a park called Pian Upe. It is not even in our culture. As the people of Katakwi, we have never heard of that village anywhere in our district. I would like to ask the people in Government to, please, help Cyrus. He has gone but on his behalf and his children, that land will help the people of Toroma to remember our brother.

Secondly, in 2010, Katakwi District Council passed a resolution to create Angisa sub-county. When UWA begins to think that, that land belongs to the national park, yet the district council passed a resolution to demarcate it as a sub-county, it bothers us as leaders of Katakwi. There was another resolution passed by Katakwi District Council in 2016 urging Government to make Angisa a sub-county. I urge Government to help us in the memory of our fallen brother hon. Cyrus Amodoi.

Mr Speaker, if I am to speak on the personality of Amodoi, I can take a whole day. While campaigning, hon. Amodoi and I knew we were going to win elections. This was because of the way we conduct ourselves while with our people. You will never get Peter Ogwang or the late in a suit or tucked-in shirt while in the constituency. For those who knew Amodoi, that is who he was. Why? We know the issues of our people. We know the suffering they have gone through. Therefore, you cannot take a suit – the way I am now – to Usuk or Toroma; you would be lying. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi moved door-to-door. 

Because of his professional training as a soldier, he did not look for votes in a car or motorcycle. I would like those who are abusing him; please, save us. He looked for votes on foot and that is how he defeated my party candidate. It was because of his character.

The International Women’s Day was supposed to be celebrated in a parish within my sub-county. It is a pain. It showed the late loved his people. You will come to his area; honourable members, do not expect to see much because he loved his people more than himself. He served his people more than his family. That is why when you come to his home, you should not expect to see a big family – support of a Member of Parliament but you will see a family of an ordinary person. That is who the late was. The media, please, you will come to his home. 

I know what he has done for his people. For the women in Toroma County, it is true that he bought an ambulance. I am also struggling to buy an ambulance because of that. I urge Government; we are on the coast with the Karimojong. We come from very hard-to-reach sub-counties. For instance, that very Magoro where he comes from is a hard-to-reach area. Is there an ambulance in such an area? No, it is not there. This is how the Member of Parliament could try to please his people – buying an ambulance at his own expense.

To colleagues, on behalf of the organising committee, thank you. I would also like to thank Parliament and the Members of Parliament for the contributions you have given us to support the decent send-off of our brother, hon. Cyrus Amodoi -(Member timed out and pleads for more time.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, Cyrus is a Member of Parliament and these are parliamentarians. If you take all the time, what will they do?

4.41
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In Parliament and outside, people are known by their brands. Other Members are known because of their voices. Even if you have not seen them, you just hear the voice and say the other person is the one talking. Others are known by their dress code. You just see and if the dress code is not like that, then you know there is something wrong. Others are known by their hair style. 

However, hon. Amodoi was known by his character and the way he had been interacting with Members. We have not taken long in Parliament but very many people are talking good of what hon. Amodoi had done and was doing for the people in and outside Parliament.

I have learnt very good things about hon. Amodoi. When someone dies, we should not think that a person is dead and we do not learn something out of such a person. I know there are very many good lessons that hon. Amodoi has left in this world. Because of that, I would like to put a word of condolence and counselling to the family of hon. Amodoi that once your relative or close friend is dead and people say these good words, it means that person is not dead. He is just resting but the spirit and actions of that person will remain in the family members and children. This should consoled your heart and you know there is life even after the death of Amodoi.

Mr Speaker, much as we are talking about the accident, which has killed our Member, there are very many honourable members and others who have been getting accidents, although they are still alive. Last year, Members of Parliament who were coming from State House had an accident. We thank God they survived. I am one of the victims of an accident. Hon. Joy Ongom had an accident. Recently, we had a Member from Kitgum who had an accident. Even the Minister of State for Health was admitted at Kiryandongo Hospital.

What I am saying is that the way our garages try to fix cars calls for scrutiny. Who are the kind of mechanics that we have that work on the vehicles? (Member timed out.)

4.44
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity on behalf of the people of Katakwi to thank your office for the support you have given us during this trying moment. Allow me, on behalf of the people of Katakwi, to thank all the MPs for the support given to us. 

It is true that I have lost a brother. I last talked with hon. Cyrus Amodoi on Monday after the celebrations for International Women’s Day in Katakwi were confirmed. I called and told him about it. He confirmed to me saying, “My sister I will be there”. Most of you read what I had posted, inviting all of you to join us in commemorating the International Women’s Day in Katakwi, which we should have celebrated yesterday. It is quite sad that we have lost Cyrus. 

For the few months I have worked with Cyrus, it is not even easy to say how much we have done together. Sometime last year, hailstorms destroyed one of the parishes in his constituency. I was out of the country but when I returned, he briefed me saying, “my sister you were not around but we had a disaster”. 

He mobilised all of us – hon. Peter Ogwang and I – and we visited and supported that community. Most of the churches and houses were down. Most of the crops were destroyed but hon. Cyrus mobilised all of us and we visited them as a team. That was very unique of him. Even his people said they have never seen all Members of Parliament in the region come together to visit and sympathise with them.
 
My brother, hon. Peter Ogwang has talked about Angisa. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi again mobilised us to go to Angisa together with the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. During the time of floods - he said we are going to have this meeting in Angisa. We had to swim the cars across - Mr Speaker, that is the character of Amodoi. Again as a team, he mobilised all of us regardless of the constituencies we come from and the district council to have a meeting.

I would to make an appeal to the Government like hon. Ogwang has alluded to that the issue between the Angisa Community and Uganda Wild Life Authority was not resolved. It was hon. Amodoi who was spearheading even on the Floor of Parliament here. It is my appeal to the Government that to make our brother rest in peace, you should resolve the issue between the Angisa Community and Uganda Wild Life Authority – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us recognise hon. Florence Ekwau Ibi, former Member of Parliament. She is up in the distinguished stranger’s gallery.
	
4.48
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand in unison with colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen comrade, hon. Cyrus Amodoi. On behalf of the people of Bugangaizi East Constituency,   I would like to convey our deepest condolences to the family of the late hon. Amodoi, the people of Toroma Constituency and Katakwi in general.

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Amodoi was independent Member of Parliament. He used to sit this side where I am, near me. For some of us the independents who won these elections, it was not easy. It was like going through a ventilator to reach here. We suffered very much, Mr Speaker.  To win as an independent Member of Parliament was not easy. We really suffered twice. It is very saddening to see our comrade gone from this world very suddenly.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is among the African countries with the highest rate of accidents like Nigeria and South Africa. The Government of Uganda needs to attend to this because it is becoming more and more. Why should we been having all these accidents in Uganda? I believe the country can do something to solve this problem.

Mr Speaker, the Bible says in II Timothy 4:7 “I have fought a good fight; I have finished the race, I have kept the faith”.  Verse 8 says “Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness which the lord - the righteous judge will award to me on that day and not only to me but to all who have longed for his appearing.”
Mr Speaker, the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi has fought a good fight. He has been in the military; he has served in governance by being the Member of Parliament for Toroma for all that time. He has – (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR KOMAKECH LYANDRO (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality, I send our condolences as well as on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. It is very sad to speak because when we were in West Nile with hon. Cyrus Amodoi, that is when you could see in him the level of leadership especially, on human rights defending when we were at Adjumani Prison Farm. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi said to bring these prisoners on board and to make use that they go through counselling, we go and share with them lunch in their kitchen. We went with hon. Abiriga, Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality, in the kitchen and he began serving the prisoners with posho and all of us joined. At the end of the day, the prisoners said, “No”, these are not Members of Parliament. How could they come to the kitchen and begin sharing our posho just like that?

Mr Speaker, by the time we left to meet them officially with the chairperson, you could see the change that came and the testimony that the prisoners were giving us. Little did I know that Cyrus was actually a lieutenant in the army. He told me to be a military man, you must be a very serious coward and that is the philosophy of America’s Defense. Permanently, you must be suspicious and that is how you should always prepare for war all the time. That is when I learnt that to be a good solider, you must permanently be ready to fight. 

Our colleague cherished education. I sincerely request the Government of Uganda – if you go to his constituency, he has struggled on the issue of education. For the legacy he lived, it should be thought seriously that at least a memorial in his name especially, for a school be built in his constituency. He has done a great deal.

Lastly, our roads in this country since independence or even before have remained narrow but the vehicles are always increasing in sizes. Is it possible because if you look at the narrowness, it is like you are going to heaven? Indeed, we have these challenges. Can’t we have a review of our roads so that we can go from 18 to 36 metres so that we can have two lanes both sides and you minimise to some degree, some of these accidents that are occurring because of head-on collision. I have –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 5 o’clock and we need to close. I am going to enlarge the time a little - that is a request from the family.  I have a long list but I am not going to follow that now. I have Mitooma, Bukonjo West, Pader, Soroti District, Mubende District, hon. Amoding, honourable member for Ngora and Member for Kasilo. What I am going to is that I am going to ask the honourable Member for Kasilo who is part of the team that is organising this to speak and then we close.

4.55
MR ELIGHA OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kasilo, I would like to send our condolences to the family. In the last Parliament, I served in the Parliamentary Commission and that was when I became very close to our late brother, hon. Amodoi through his son. I will not go into the details.

Mr Speaker, what I found stressing and which was good for my own survival and may be it can also be good for the Members, was his level of security conscience in whatever he did. One thing he taught me was that if I am going anywhere; in a restaurant, I should never use a glass if I am not sure of the people but rather to use a straw. If asking for tea, never ask for black tea; ask for milk tea because any foreign element in milk, the milk will go bad. That is how conscious he was. Honourable colleagues, that is something you can use in your daily life for survival. 

One thing that has not been said is about hon. Amodoi handing his life to Jesus Christ as his saviour. I was the second Member of Parliament to get to Jinja when the body had been taken to the mortuary after hon. Chemutai who had branched to the hospital as she was heading to her constituency. I interacted with the widow, Esther. I drove her up to Mulago and back home. Along the way, we would all break down and cry. She said, “I wish my husband had listened to me”. When he left home, he told the young daughter to tell the mum he had gone and he would see her later.

In the night, his daughter asked the mother to pray for hon. Amodoi for journey mercies. She just said, “In Jesus name, amen”. The next thing was when they got a call that the father had gone. One other thing I picked from the wife is that at one time, she had become weaker spiritually. He asked her to pray for her. He knelt down and prayed for her to have strength so that she is able to get through the hard times. Therefore, hon. Cyrus Amodoi had changed his life and he was a member of the PRM Church.
That was the other part of his life. How a child, at that age, would ask the mother to join her in praying for the dad; how many of us have brought up our kids that way? It could be very few or none at all. That is the other aspect of our brother, which I found we needed to emulate.

I would like to clarify one other thing. We have talked about roads but the road where the accident took place is very good. I think it is the indiscipline in the drivers that we have in this country. There were two taxis heading towards Mbale and Busia. He was in the front taxi and the truck knocked the rear of the taxi where he had sat. He was seated in the middle and the people who were on both sides survived. After that, the truck knocked the second taxi and ramped into a church. 

It was either there was a mechanical failure in the truck or the driver was fatigued or just indiscipline like in most cases where you flash your lights and the other drivers do not flash back. That is how the accident happened. 

I would like to thank the police especially the DPC of Njeru, ASP Katumba, the son of our colleague here. I also would like to thank the doctors and more so, the neighbours, the LC1 and another gentleman called Emmanuel from Kyanja. Emmanuel was the one taking care of the wife and the children. When he was contacted at night, he drove the two nephews and hon. Amodoi’s wife to Jinja. They did not know how to get to us, so, Emmanuel called his Member of Parliament, hon. Turyahikayo. He asked her to inform Parliament that hon. Amodoi had got involved in an accident and he did not know if he was going to survive. I found him in Jinja.

Therefore, that was when hon. Turyahikayo called the Clerk. The Clerk tried to get hold of hon. Ogwang whose phone had a problem and then, she called me at about 6.30 a.m. That is when I drove and by God’s grace, we arrived safely. However, it was too late to save his life. He had already passed on. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank you but more so, hon. Odonga Otto here. At a very difficult time, when everyone feared the allegations made against our colleague. Hon. Odonga Otto stood firm and said he would defend his colleague at the risk of losing his job. Some Members of Parliament including Osegge went to stand surety during campaigns.

I also served with him in the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). In fact, the CPA Africa Region sent their condolences. During the previous campaign, I asked him how we were going to handle because the opponents were using the allegations. However, he asked me not to mind that as he would handle it. How did he handle it? He just told his people, “assume it was true that I was involved in the mercury deal and if I got that money, it would be yours.” That was the end of it. (Laughter) That is how he was able to deal with that situation. Sometimes, when these blackmails are put on you, you must be smart enough to know how to wriggle around and make it here.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister who was with us yesterday. I would like to thank your office, Mr Speaker and the staff of Parliament through the Clerk for all the input. We would like to pray to God to give strength to this family. You have heard he has two children and Esther is pregnant. She needs your prayer. He had six children of his late brother and sister at home who need support. Can we all join hands to handle that?

As a friend, there are some things that he confided in me. We shall be able to deal with them when we get back. Last week, he had told me he wanted to show me some of the things he had done just in case. That is how he said it. I told him we would go this weekend and it has not come to pass. Hon. Komakech and I were with him when he said he was going to use the taxi because he had invited us to go to Katakwi. Hon. Komakech asked him to use a bus but he insisted he would use a taxi. It was his day. 

Therefore, for those using whatever types of words on the social media, as hon. Obua said, we can only say, “may God forgive them.”  May the soul of our brother rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Thank you, honourable members. I have a condolence message from the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Savings and Credit Co-operative Society Limited signed by hon. Tony Ayoo. They gave Shs 1 million to the family. I have a message from the Chairperson of West Nile Parliamentary Group, hon. Benard Atiku. They enclosed Shs 1,950,000. I have a message from the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, hon. Judith Nabakooba. They have contributed Shs 1,050,000. The final message is from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu. They have also enclosed Shs 1 million.

Honourable members, I will now put the question to this motion and we close. 

There is a condolence message of Shs 200,000 from hon. Oyet. I will pass it to the person co-ordinating this. Hon. Ogwang, please, take charge of this.

Hon. Okupa, can you quickly outline the programmes for tomorrow?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From here, the body leaves and goes to the Uganda funeral Service home. Then tomorrow morning, the body is going to be airlifted; we would like to thank the Government again of providing the means to fly the body to Toroma. 

From Toroma, it will be taken to the Council, the Council of Katakwi will be meeting and then from there it will head home. The burial will be on Sunday 19th; the Parliamentary Commission has provided transport that is going to leave on Sunday very early in the morning. You could have received messages that it will be at about 5.00 a.m. 

Therefore, colleagues, try to keep time. You can go through Kumi or Soroti. If you go through Kumi, then you have to go through the Ferry. We would like to again thank the Minister of Works and Transport who has already communicated to the Ferry operators to be available such that if you are to use it, it is a shorter route to get to Toroma. 

Some family members are going to leave immediately now or very early in the morning. However, the body will leave tomorrow together with the immediate family members and the two members from Katakwi - hon. Ogwang and hon. Akurut who will join the family to be flown tomorrow morning from Kololo at 08.00 a.m.
We would like to ask those who are in charge of the transport to keep time such that they are able to get in. 

We would again like to thank the Parliamentary Commission because they have been able to provide us with one of our medical staff (nurse) to join the team because of the state of Esther to be on the flight. As you have been seeing, she has been fainting; she is in a very difficult time. The medical team is joining her on the flight to escort her to Toroma. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to the late hon. Lt (RTD) Cyrus Amodoi Immalingat Member of Parliament for Toroma County for his diligent service to Uganda. And specifically that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Toroma County in Katakwi District and the entire country upon the death of hon. Cyrus Amodoi Immalingat.

That takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by the hon. Cyrus Amodoi Immalingat to Uganda. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend hon. Cyrus Amodoi eternal peace. That is the motion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much.

East African Community Anthem.

National Anthem.

(Exit of the late hon. Cyrus Amodoi Immalingat.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for coming and making contribution on this tribute motion to our colleague and I want to thank you for the numbers. Today is Friday, the House went on recess yesterday but you were able to come in these numbers to pay your respect. I am truly grateful and thank very much.

Like I said at the beginning, this should be the spirit of solidarity that we should express when we are hit by this kind of tragedy. I am truly grateful. I say this on behalf of the whole Parliament, the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and also on my own behalf. I am truly grateful. The special sitting is now adjourned. Thank you.
(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
