Thursday, 26 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I am going to use the prerogative of the Speaker to alter the Order Paper. Item No. 5 will not be handled today because the mover of the motion, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is not here and he will not be able to make it. We will have it done next week. This is a very important motion that needed the Prime Minister to be here in person. That is the only item that I am removing from the Order Paper. We will handle it on Tuesday next week. The other Bills that were already on the Order Paper will also be handled next week. However, for today, we want to finish whatever is on the Order Paper. Let us start.

2.13
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to do with child protection, stigma and trauma. 

Last week, I watched Bukedde TV and they were trying to establish the paternity of a child. They paraded two men who were contesting for the child as well as the mother and the child in front of the cameras. I saw this as psychological torture to the child, which can have long lasting effects on the child. It causes severe emotional and mental distress to the child. 

As a leader and a parent, I saw this as something, which is wrong. The intention to establish the paternity is good but the way they are doing it is not good. Therefore, I would request, Mr Speaker, that you request hon. Jim Muhwezi, the Minister for Information and National Guidance, as his first assignment, to ensure that no media house, in the process of establishing the paternity of children, should parade the child as part of the interview panel.

Secondly, we ask the new Minister of State for Health (General Duties), Dr Chris Baryomunsi, as his first assignment also, to give Parliament the status of the Government DNA laboratory. What is its traffic like? Is it overwhelmed or not? If it is not overwhelmed, why should people go to private DNA laboratories? In addition, who is regulating these private DNA laboratories? 

When we get those statistics, we could ask the Minister for Gender to issue what I would call a responsibility caution statement to either men or women. Since I am seeking votes for publicity, I would not want to mention which sex. However, for proper public responsibility in the nation, we need the minister to issue a responsibility caution statement so that people can behave in an appropriate manner and so that we do not over engage the Government DNA laboratory with irresponsible activities. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to say something about this?

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the member for raising the concern. I did not personally watch that incident where the paternity test was being carried out before the cameras. What I know is that cameras do not make any contribution in confirming the paternity of a person. Therefore, it was unfortunate if the test was being done before the cameras.

Medical professionals know that they must observe and respect the rights of clients and patients who appear before them. Therefore, I think it was not necessary and uncalled for to parade that child before the cameras. This is because you can take samples without exposing the individuals whom you are trying to test.

I will bring a statement about the laboratory, if that is what Parliament wants, with respect to the work they are doing. However, what I can confirm is that the government is able to carry out paternity tests. If Parliament wants details on how many cases are being carried out and the capacity, we can give a comprehensive statement on Tuesday next week.

However, I would like to caution health workers and all those who handle patients and other forms of clients that they should respect their rights. In this case, it was not necessary to parade this client before the cameras. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In light of that, don’t you think something should be done about it? I think there are questions of confidentiality in this matter. What should be done to people who behave like this?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The medical ethics and requirements of the profession dictate that there must be confidentiality as you deal with clients. I am going to investigate the matter and those found culpable will be handled in accordance with our rules and the law. If anybody violated the rights and the confidentiality of that child, we shall be able to handle that person and I will report back to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.19
MR WILSON ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The matter I would like to raise touches on the environment of this country. We have experienced a lot of uncalled for warmth in the atmosphere and we have gone through a very long drought. Even with the onset of rain, many parts of this country have not received even a drop of rain.

Just yesterday, I was in Pallisa for a burial and Pallisa town has not received a drop of this rain and there are many such areas in this country, mostly as a result of human activity.

Mr Speaker, I have two national forest reserves in my constituency of Busiki County, Namutumba District. The two forest reserves were leased to private planters who planted trees about eight to nine years ago. The issue I want to raise is that the trees are being harvested as I speak. There are 600 hectares of trees and already around 200 hectares have gone. This is only six years after planting. 

I personally went to the scene to inquire from these people why this was happening. They said they had planted pines and they do not grow fast enough yet they want money very quickly. 

I began consulting the laws of this country and one of them is the Tree Planting Act. I am one of the many tree planters that Government provided with seedlings through a programme called TEEFOK. What was the aim of providing those seedlings through TEEFOK if those trees could be erased within a very short time and at that tender stage?

Mr Speaker, the purpose of erasing these trees is for firewood. We have a factory in Jinja, which can buy any tonnage of firewood. It is a Chinese factory, which is going to manufacture textiles and there is another factory in Namanve. I would like the Minister of Environment to come to Parliament and give us the status quo of the forests Government has helped to plant and what they hoped to do so that the forests are left intact to mature. If you erase the forests after six years, what was the use of planting them in the first instance because even the money for planting does not come up?

Secondly, if you pass via Namanve immediately after Mbalala on Jinja Road between 7.00 O’clock and midnight, you would hardly see on the road. A lot of smoke comes into the road and the environment around there is diversely polluted. Something should be done because NEMA has an environment policy. This happens every day and they make sure it is in the night. During the day it is not as polluted but every other night and even tonight, they are going to pollute the place. What do we do for the people who live around that area? I see a very big hazard that is going to affect the lives of the people in that area. 

I, therefore, pray to the Ministry of Environment to quickly work out a process of carbon credit. We should not depend on the International Carbon Credit that helps to maintain forests. Can this country create a fund to help tree planters maintain the trees so that we do not cut them for want of money as quickly as they are doing? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there anybody from Government?

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the first point raised by the honourable member, we will cause the Minister of Water and Environment to come here on Tuesday and make a statement.

On the issue of policy, I am glad to inform you that the climate change policy is before Cabinet and we are hoping to approve it by next week. All the issues that have been raised by him are part of that policy. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I have further communication. The Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy has scheduled an Easter Carol Service, which will take place today in the Parliamentary Conference Hall beginning at 5.00 p.m. Please, arrange to attend.

Honourable members, you also remember the discussions we had with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about the Budget timeframe, which is becoming a big problem. As I speak, we have not yet received the Budget Framework Papers. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in the person of hon. Omach, had promised this House that by 12 March 2015, the Budget Framework Paper would be here while we wait for the ministerial policy statements.

We are running into a dangerous situation with this Budget for this financial year and I think at this stage, I need to have some guidance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on how we are going to handle this. We do not want Parliament to be pushed into a complete chaotic situation with this Budget process. This is because the Budget Framework Paper should have come to Parliament on 31 December 2014. Today is 26 March 2015 and we have not received it. 

When will Parliament look at them and give its input so that the deadline and the dates set for presentation of the Budget is in time with the input of Parliament and so that when we are approving, at least the process have been handled?  Therefore, can I have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development make some guidance to the House on how we are going to handle this situation this year?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this matter was raised last time by hon. Rose Akol, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development offered an apology for missing out on the deadlines and the House accepted the apology. We promised that we would come back on 12 March 2015 and we have not. I sincerely want to apologise for that once again.

Considering that we have already missed some critical deadlines, which are part of the critical path towards meeting the targets of Parliament approving the Budget by 31 May 2015, we now propose a way forward, which is practical as follows: (1) The ministerial policy statement and detailed Budget estimates for Financial Year 2015/16 will be submitted to Parliament by 2.00 p.m. on Wednesday, 1 April 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means it can happen before.

MR BAHATI: If Parliament opens before, we can, but it will be on 1 April 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It can mean on Tuesday.

MR BAHATI: 1 April 2015 would be appropriate and because of the limited - Mr Speaker, 1 April has nothing to do with what people are thinking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am a bit worried about making a commitment for 1 April. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Because of those delays, the National Budget Framework Paper will also be submitted on the same day. We hope that Parliament, working together with the ministry, will review this paper and the Budget estimates submitted by end of April 2015 and then the Budget would be approved by 30 May 2015. This is the new suggested way forward and we are committed to it. We will not miss an inch of the remaining process. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the Bill become an Act now? Has it been gazetted?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 was gazetted on 6 March 2015. That is an issue that is already sorted out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this clearly poses a big problem for this House if we have to handle the Budget Framework Paper, the ministerial policy statements, the proposed annual Budget and the Tax Bills in one month. That presents a crisis that could have been avoided. This is a self-inflicted injury, which is not necessary. The only problem is that other people are going to pay for it. The people responsible will not be suffering what Parliament will be going through.

We take it that on 1 April 2015 at 2.00 p.m., this House will receive the Budget Framework Paper with the financial detail estimates, ministerial policy statements and the Tax Bills. That means that we will give the Opposition shadow ministers a week for them to also submit what their alternatives are to the sector committees so that they can also handle them at the same time within that timeframe. 

It is going to be a crash programme and I am asking honourable members to brace up and do this. As you can see, it is going to be tight. What used to take us three, four or six months, we are now being required to do in one month. That is going to be a heavy job.

Therefore, I urge for commitment for that period so that we can deliver this Budget within the framework of the law as is now in force. That is my guidance on this subject. I would like to invite the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in case he has something to say. 

2.32
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is something grave about this matter and I like the level of concern that you have expressed. This is an election year and we in the alternative government, are suspecting that Government does not want to give the people of Uganda ample time to analyse figures and scrutinise policy. This is so that money is diverted for campaign purposes that will lead to inflation like it happened last time. 

As the situation now dictates, we have one week and yet Government has had more than eight months. This will show that we are not capable and are incompetent. I got information today that some people already have something, which looks like the Budget Framework Paper and the person was wondering why Government could not copy what they consider to be the position to the alternative government or to the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and yet tomorrow, they will need our support. 

Mr Speaker, when we were passing the Tax Bill last financial year, we made a commitment and arrived at a consensus with Government that they should have harmonised the issues of taxation at least in terms of the regional taxes on COMESA and the East African Community. To date, we have had interactions with hon. Fred Omach and nothing has happened. 

I therefore seek for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, because within the Budget Act, which we did not repeal and the Public Finance Management Act, you have leverage to reconsider the timeframe you have given to the Opposition to submit the alternative budget. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason I am saying this is that these papers are going to be submitted on 1 April and we are expected to take a decision on this on 30 April of the same month. It is not even 30 days, it is about 28 days. Therefore, if you take two weeks, it will spill over. I am just asking that this time we need to do something out of the ordinary. This is what we are being called upon to do at this time and I urge members to do just that. 

Much as there has been a problem with the processes from the government, the people of Uganda are waiting for this Budget.  It is what will happen in the period to come hence it is critically important that we all act with extraordinary commitment so that we are able to do just this. 

The timeframe I am giving you of one week is so that the committees are able to take both these ministerial policy statements and that coming from the shadow ministers so that we can appropriately be able to beat this proposed deadline of 30 April. 

According to the minister, it is the only practical way of handling these things. As for the House, I believe it will also be practical for us to bend backwards and move this.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note that the time period we have to handle the Budget is so short. I also know that the Budget Framework Paper and the ministerial policy statements give similar information. The procedural point I am seeking is whether these two statements can be handled concurrently in order for us to save time? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will be handled concurrently as we do not have a choice. That is what we have for now. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act give the Speaker powers to vary the date on the calendar. This is what the alternative Government and Parliament is requesting you to do. Government has let us down but we need to do a good job -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the discretion of the Speaker in those matters is practical and in an impending situation where they request that there is need to extend the period, I cannot start extending the period before it has even come. (Laughter) Do you want me to do that? There is no Budget Framework Paper or ministerial policy statement but I am now being requested to extend dates, which have already been passed. 

MR EKANYA: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You concede? That is good. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    (A) REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA
TO BORROW UP TO JPY 15.13BN (US$131.75M) FROM
JAPAN BANKFOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION (JBIC)
TO PROCURE EARTH MOVING EQUIPMENT

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a request to Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $ 131.75 million from Japan Bank for International Cooperation to procure earth moving equipment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly received and I forward it to the Committee on National Economy to examine within the framework of the rules and laws, and guide this Parliament on how to proceed.

(B) REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EURO 116.45M FROM THE EXPORT CREDIT GUARANTEE DEPARTMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND ANOTHER EURO 20.55M FROM STANDARD CHARTERED BANK FOR FINANCIAL CRITICAL ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE FOR DELIVERY OF FIRST OIL

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a loan request to Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Euros 116.45 million from the Export Credit Guarantee Department of the United Kingdom and another Euros 20.55 million from the Standard Chartered Bank for Financial Critical Road Infrastructure for Delivery of First Oil. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy to again handle within the timeframe of the rules and the laws, and guide the House on how to proceed with this matter.

LAYING OF COMMITTEE FIELD REPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Gender? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING PARLIAMENT TO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE ILLEGAL DE-GAZETTEMENT AND IRREGULAR ALLOCATION OF NATIONAL FOREST RESERVES IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Busiro North, you may want to come and speak from the front here. Proceed to the dispatch box here. Honourable member, going to the other side may raise other issues so it is advisable that you stay on this side. (Laughter)

2.42
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, just forgive me. Let me first introduce the visitors we have in the public gallery. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have members of the Students Guild Council of the Uganda Catholic Management and Training Institute. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House, please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of staff members of the People’s House of the Republic of Somalia. They are also here to benchmark and share experience with their counterparts. You are very welcome. (Applause) Thank you. Please honourable, proceed.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me time to raise a motion regarding our forests. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate the illegal de-gazettement and irregular allocation of National Forest Reserve especially Nonve Forest in my constituency:

“WHEREAS Objective XXVII (i) and (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy obligate the state to promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and a sustainable manner for the present and future generations as well as taking all possible measures to prevent or minimise damage and destruction of land, air and water resources resulting from pollution and other causes;

AND WHEREAS Article 39 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda…”–(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: I sincerely apologise for interrupting. Mr Speaker, I think it would be right for our records to have the motion moved properly and then the mover can proceed to justify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is still moving the motion. Let him move the motion and then we will ask for secondment. If there are people seconding it then we will ask him to justify his motion.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was on paragraph two. “AND WHEREAS Article 39 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees a person’s right to a clean and healthy environment; 

RECALLING that the Republic of Uganda is a signatory to the international treaties on Climate Change such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of 1992 as well as the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate of 1997, which obligates member states to, among others, protect the climate system for the benefit of the present and future generations of human kind as well as requiring member states to take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimise the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects;

AWARE that the Government of Uganda, under the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2008, established a National Forestry Authority with the mandate to, among others, develop and manage all central forest reserves;

FURTHER AWARE that the 1995 Constitution of the Republic Uganda establishes a land board for each district with the mandate to, among others, hold and allocate public land; 

NOTING WITH CONCERN that many forest reserves in Uganda today have been illegally de-gazetted, encroached upon and land titles irregularly issued to persons by the district land boards leading to the destruction of these forest reserves;

FURTHER CONCERNED that recently, Nonve Forest Reserve in Buwanuka Parish, Kakiri Sub-County, Wakiso District, which was gazetted in 1932 and measuring 738 hectares, was illegally de-gazetted by the Wakiso District Land Board and land titles irregularly issued to individuals leading to occupation and destruction;

APPRECIATING the role played by the forest in preserving bio-diversity, regulating local climate and global weather as well as supporting agriculture and other economic activities, human settlement, the general wellbeing of Ugandans and acting as a pharmacy; 

ALARMED that unless measures are taken to preserve Uganda’s forested land from encroachment, illegal de-gazzetment and destruction, there is likely to be adverse effects on Uganda’s climate, which will, in turn, result into dire economic consequences for the country; increased food insecurity and occurrence of diseases, cases of malnutrition resulting into stunting, soil erosion and land degradation leading to adverse shifts in agriculture productivity;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that a parliamentary select committee is established to investigate the illegal de-gazzetment of Nonve Forest and any other in Uganda.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Makindye West, Ngora County, Kabula County, Bunya East and Nwoya District. Would you like to justify your motion?

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I will dwell mostly on Nonve Forest, which is a forest reserve in my own constituency. This forest is actually in the parish in which I was born. It was gazetted in 1932 by the Colonial Government and it remained gazetted up to the recent past. It measures 738 hectares, which is over 1,300 acres. 

Sometime ago, one individual claimed that this Nonve Forest is a customary plot belonging to his ancestors and he called it a kibanja. The equivalent is a plot but I think it is more defined when I say a kibanja. He went ahead and applied for this plot to be converted from a squatter-like plot to freehold tenure and this was done on 29 October 2013.

The application to the district land board was undertaken and passed for the change from a kibanja holder to a freehold. Therefore, they directed the Katabi Sub-County Land Committee on Entebbe Road - and this place is on Hoima road - to go and inspect the area and give a no-objection.

Katabi Sub County Land Committee did so and directed that kibanja be converted into a freehold. In all these communications, one does not see Nonve Forest. It was called a plot by the district land board and by Katabi Sub County Land Committee that went to verify.

Once it was verified by the sub county of Katabi, the Wakiso Land Board finally approved the conversation to freehold and that was done on 11 February 2014. A letter was written, and I will be laying it here, for the Registrar of Titles to continue demarcating this land in question. This letter was signed by the district land officers as well as the chairman of the land board.

Land surveyors started going and demarcating this land into different plots for sale. The issuance of land titles, of which I have some copies with me, began on 5 March 2014. At that time when we saw many people coming to do the survey, we started raising local agitation that Nonve Forest is being de-gazetted and sold off.

When these people understood that we had raised agitation, they went to the National Forestry Authority on 30 August 2014 and a letter was issued by the National Forestry Authority, which I would like to read. It says:

“To whom it may concern: 

No objection to Haji Semakula. 

This is to introduce to you the above-mentioned who is about to set up an eco-friendly facility characterised by accommodative facilities and duplexes among others on National Forestry Authority land in Wakiso District. Please accord him all the support and help that he may require in the implementation of this project. 

Forest for prosperity. 

Signed for the Executive Director.”

This is from NFA unless they will deny it. That was the last nail in the coffin and the forest was totally broken up into small plots. We did our investigations - but let me tell you, Mr Speaker, that everybody we interviewed was full of terror. 

I started with the people who were residing around this forest. All they said was, “We do not see these people who come here in big cars.” I asked, “Which type of cars?” They replied, “’My’ car and you cannot see them. That is all they could say. I think the cars are tinted and some of them come with soldiers who have guns. Please do not quote me. These are local people.

I went to Kakiri police station and while I was there I said, “Why don’t you go and police this particular forest?” They said, “Honourable, leave me out of the forest. I need my job. These are powers from above.” I said, this is a matter that I must take on. I went to the district and met many councillors especially from my area. They all said, “Honourable, go slow. These people can kill.” There was no action ever taken by the district.

We went to NFA and I am glad that at this time, Parliament had been involved in the matter of investigation. I thank the Speaker for giving me lee way to use the research team of this Parliament. When we went to NFA, all the officers were indifferent. They had an I- don’t-care attitude. I wondered what was taking place. The Clerk to Parliament wrote to the NFA and the research team went to investigate. 

Their first comments were very interesting and I would like to read them, Mr Speaker. This is a report from the research team. The Department of Research Services (DRC) requested for information from the National Forestry Authority regarding the status of the forest reserves in Buwanika, Wakiso District. The researchers were briefed by officials from NFA as follows: 

“Two forest reserves exist in Buwanika Parish: Nonve Forest Reserve and Nalubaga Forest Reserve.

    • The NFA has not de-gazetted any forest reserve in Buwanika parish and has no plans to recommend the de-gazetting of any forest reserve.
    • Nonve Forest Reserve has not been de-gazetted but has had illegal occupants. People used land titles in Nonve Forest Reserve, an act done fraudulently.” 

Officials from NFA agree that this was done in error. NFA officials informed the researchers that Wakiso District Land Board issued these titles in error.

The officials informed the researchers that Wakiso District Land Board had agreed to rescind the decision to cancel the land titles. The only action taken by NFA was to try and evict the illegal occupants.

As I speak, they are continuing with demarcating the land. They are even putting barbed wire around the plots of each occupant. They have started putting roads and yet NFA is saying that everything has been stopped. 

Anyway, subsequent to this, they have issued yet another written letter, which I would like to read to you.

“To the Clerk to Parliament, 
Parliament of Uganda, Parliament House, 
P.O. Box 7178, Kampala 

Reference: Buwanika Forest Reserve, Wakiso District. 

Reference is made to yours of 17 February 2015 regarding the above subject. 

This is to bring to your attention that a research was conducted and revealed that the forest in question is Nonve Central Forest Reserve and there is no proposal to de-gazette the said central forest reserve and neither has NFA received any request to this effect. 

It is important to note that NFA is currently addressing forest encroachment in Nonve and investigations are on-going at Kakiri Police Station.”

Mr Speaker, the last paragraph is wrong. This is only smoothening the affair. I am very worried that our Parliament mandated National Forestry Authority to look after our national forests. These forests have been looked after in the colonial times. I used to ride a bicycle in the boundary between the forest and the cultivated land. The boundary was done smoothly and nobody was encroaching. We used to go there for two reasons only; to collect some firewood for cooking food and to wander into the forest for some medicine. These forests had a lot of herbal medicines and now, I am worried that we are denying the poor people access to this pharmacy, which kept them going for a very long time.

Mr Speaker, for example, in this forest there are two particular trees of very important significance in chemotherapy: the Prunus Africana, which is found in Nonve, Mabira and Budongo forests. It is a very important tree for treating cancerous organisms including prostate cancer. The Waburg Africanus is another tree, which most people used time and again. They are cut and are gone. What you see there are long horned cows eating the last resorts of the germinating tree.

Mr Speaker, I would like to point out these major issues regarding this forest: the people’s pharmacy is gone, people’s livelihood in terms of collecting firewood to cook their food is going. What is likely to happen is people to cook food and then store it. They have no refrigeration and it will get mouldy due to bacterial growth and the children will have infections and malnutrition from this food that is heavily contaminated.

There appears to be a very comprehensive, well organised and executed land grabbing plot, especially of this forest. Mr Speaker, this is my cry. We are the ones who passed the law mandating the National Forestry Authority to manage our forests. 

In this law, we said if NFA and the ministry would like to de-gazette any part of the forests, they must come and seek permission of Parliament. This has not been done and the Nonve Forest degradation has not been agreed to by Parliament. I would like us to reject the de-gazettment and act quickly because as I passed by this morning from my home, trees were being cut. 

My first cry is for Parliament to direct a total cease to all activities in this forest and deploy forest police to camp in this forest and stop cattle movement, and people from demarcating the land by putting up barbed wires. My people in Buwanuka would like to uproot all these however we would like to do it legally. 

My second cry is for us to institute a select committee to investigate the Nonve saga. It will not take a long time; maybe two or three days because we have all the information. Once investigations are done, let us have prosecution of any culprits identified. (Applause)

My third cry is that Nonve forest should be rehabilitated by planting indigenous trees not eucalyptus or pine. Our indigenous trees are dying off very fast including mahogany and muvule. They are all disappearing. Let us replant medicinal trees like Prunus Africana and Waburg Africanus, which have been helping our people very much as a pharmacy. 

We, the people of Buwanuka, are ready to volunteer in planting. However, we would wish to ask the National Forestry Authority to get for us the seedlings of those indigenous trees so that we can replant them in that forest.

Before I end, I would like to say that as I read all this, I find fraud but I am not going to diagnose it. I would like the select committee to look through this and any other because the national forest reserves are rapidly disappearing. Other forests are still hanging on but these are disappearing mainly because people want land to sell to other people and to graze cows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to move the House now?

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I urge honourable members to support this motion. Let us arrest this total destruction of our forests starting with mine, which I first saw in 1954. It was such a big forest that we would have to gather about five children before attempting to walk through it. I remember I was told then that some very short people used to live there and would sometimes climb on top of trees. I think those were the Bambuti. That is what we used to call them.

All this pains me and, Mr Speaker, I would like a soft heart to this motion. Thank you very much.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I note with concern that whereas the Clerk’s Office promptly sends Order Papers to all members on time and aware that the motion that has just been moved by hon. Gilbert Bukenya is such a serious motion that ought to attract the attention of the ministers holding the docket of Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Lands, I would like to find out why, even upon knowing that there is this matter on the Order Paper today, none of the ministers is here. I do not know whether the Chief Whip is the one going to handle all the issues that members are going to raise on such a serious national matter. I would like to find that out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a motion. Today being Thursday, the rules say that we should commit the first two hours to private members’ business. This is private members’ business and the request is that this House should assist and set up a select committee. I do not know what value anybody would guide the House on; whether or not to create a select committee. This is the prayer for this motion, which is to the House. The House will debate it and take a decision appropriately.

Honourable members, the seconders of this motion on record are absent: Hon. Fox Odoi Oywelowo, hon. Rosemary Seninde, hon. Beatrice Anywar are on record as seconders of the motion. I am going to pick the person who volunteered to second this motion from Ngora to move for secondment of this motion then I will propose the question for your debate. Please proceed.

3.11
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the mover of the motion. In the details that he gave, he was rather specific on the Nonve forest in his constituency.

Mr Speaker, we have a big tragedy in our hands in this country. It is a man-made tragedy and desertification is at our doorstep. Forests have largely been encroached on. Unfortunately, I would like to state here that my observation is that the custodian of these forests to whom Parliament entrusted authority, the National Forestry Authority, is not doing all that it takes to protect our natural gifts.

I find it very dismaying, especially following the detail that hon. Bukenya has given for example on the Nonve forest, that the National Forestry Authority appears to be contradicting itself by giving a letter of no-objection to a one, Mr Semakula ostensibly to put up an eco-friendly facility. What is the eco-friendly facility? Accommodation, which is a hotel? A hotel is now taking over a forest!

In another letter, they say that was in error and that National Forest Authority has not and does not intend to de-gazette the Nonve Forest. Such contradictions amount to fraud, as hon. Bukenya put it. We have talked about Nonve Forest but literally all forests have been degraded, including Mabira Forest that you drive through towards Jinja. You can only see trees along the road but deep in there, it is a different story. Where is National Forestry Authority?

Mr Speaker, in supporting this motion, I think there is need for Parliament to constitute a select committee, not only for the issue of Nonve Forest. I would like a select committee to look into detail what has happened to our forests. People are wantonly clearing forests without any replacements. I think we need to come up with very stringent measures to save posterity for our future generations.

We cannot find a Uganda gifted by nature, gifted by all sorts of trees. My colleague, hon. Bukenya even talked about mahogany. You remember at one time, he was given that pseudonym. Actually, he gave it to himself and now the mahoganies are disappearing.

Mr Speaker, we need to quickly move and in fact advocate for a massive national tree planting exercise to replace the already cut trees. As of now, I would also like to suggest that we may have to look into the National Forest Authority Act. There appears to be some lacunas that are making these people have a laissez-faire attitude without anybody touching them. Mr Speaker, I beg to second the motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, before I propose the question for your debate on this motion, let me guide as follows: The specific request and the submission on this motion relates to Nonve Forest Reserve in Buwanika Parish, Kakiri Sub-County, Wakiso District, which was gazetted in 1932. 

However, the prayer and the substantive motion is in relation to irregular allocation on national forest reserves in Uganda. The mover of the motion said they had all the information and in three days, a select committee would have completed the work. That is only in relation to Nonve Forest Reserve. What about the rest of the forest reserves in the country? Who has that information for the select committee to complete this work in three days?

I am looking at the practicality of this and guiding the House so that when we take a decision, it will not be in vain. Is it possible for a select committee to cover the country at this time and do this or are we restricting ourselves to Nonve Forest?

I would like us to be practical when we take these decisions. Therefore, I am going to ask the mover of the motion to state more clearly what his desire for the House is because his speech was only relating to Nonve Forest Reserve.

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I know many other things are happening but I came here to move this motion specifically focusing on Nonve Forest that I have known all my life. I know this is time for campaigns and most Members of Parliament will be rejuvenating their constituencies and they will not have a lot of time. However for Nonve, we have enough documentation to give us some sort of insight into what may be taking place countrywide and later on, we can expound maybe in the 10th Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us first handle this. It is not just about campaigns. I have just outlined a Budget programme that is tight. There are also going to be electoral reforms so would you like to amend your motion so that we can debate in a more practical way?  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it be proper, given the fact that the motion has been moved, that before we take a decision, we amend the motion as a House to fit that practicability that you are guiding about so that we handle Nonve but also have another practicability to save the entire county?

Mr Speaker, this is because the forests of Uganda normally suffer as we head towards elections. Therefore, wouldn’t it be better that you allow the debate and then, before we take a decision, we amend the motion as a House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members. You see, the extent of the debate will determine the decision. You cannot debate substantially and take a narrow decision. I would not have properly guided the House. If you are going to talk about Opitu National Reserve in Omoro County in this debate and yet the decision we are taking only relates to Nonve, it would not make practical sense because all the members will be coming with forest reserves in their constituency and we will be missing the focus of the debate. I would not have properly guided the House.

There is a forest in Mbarara, Bwangizi and all these places. Everybody will be talking about the forests in their areas. Therefore, we would miss the focus of this debate. It is my responsibility to so guide the House so that if this is what the member - His entire speech was on Nonve Forest Reserve so if we could zero it down and see, maybe we could take a shorter time and take a decision on that and then we move forward. When the select committee, if it is so created, is coming back, it can then make the recommendation that there should be bigger coverage and then that process would take place in due course.

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, your wise words are highly appreciated and I would like to make a correction in the motion so that it reads, “A motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate the illegal de-gazettement and irregular allocation of Nonve National Forest Reserve.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the motion now, as amended. Honourable members, the prayers will also correspond to -

PROF. BUKENYA: The one prayer that I would like to amend and put in is the complete cessation of all activities now taking place at Nonve Forest and to put there a forest police force to manage the area as soon as we pass this motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion as presented, now stands as amended so the debate will only relate to Nonve Forest Reserve as the details are specified. I now propose the question for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament urging Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate the illegal de-gazettement and irregular allocation of Nonve Forest Reserve. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Each member has three minutes.

3.23
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, this year alone and up to about two days ago, I think we were running up to about 40 degrees centigrade in temperature instead of being maybe around 25 to 28 degrees centigrade. This is one of the reasons why I stand up to support but as I support, I am really in great pain that we are limiting this debate to Nonve Forest Reserve only and that we are also limiting our debate to illegal de-gazettement. We needed to expand first the area and also the scope of the debate but, we hope this will now set the pace for us. It can start and then expand to all other areas. 

It is very unfortunate that when we see rich and big people, we melt. Melting is not right. It is important for us to stand up for the truth and always try to help the past, present and the future. We are not caring about the future. It is very unfortunate that if you move around in this country, what used to be forests are right now completely bare and that is why the temperatures have gone so high.

I used to move from a place called Lacekocot to Sacred Heart and along the way, in some places like Abera, it would be as if you have entered into a dark place but it is no more and that is the reason why we are experiencing what we are experiencing. Sometimes you feel like you should just remove everything from yourself and remain almost naked but even if you remain naked or sometimes even when you are from bathing, you find that you are already sweating.

Dear Ugandans -(Member timed out.)

3.26
DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter. In 1998, during the Sixth Parliament, a select committee of this House was set up to investigate a minister then who had de-gazetted a certain forest reserve in Luweero and had issued an instrument giving a blank amount of land to a person. 

The select committee, then chaired by hon. Adolf Mwesige, when he was still a backbencher and I was a member, investigated and this investigation was the reason for the present National Forests and Tree Planting Act. This is because we recommended that there must be a serious process of how a forest reserve can be de-gazetted.

What hon. Bukenya has said is not de-gazettement because in the Act, you must get alternative land, which has the same or better environmental value. Therefore, what is happening in Nonve is theft not de-gazettement.

Mr Speaker, I have no problem with us looking at Nonve Forest. In any case, we can use what has been found in that forest to generalise what is happening in the entire country because it is serious and we shall be held responsible, as a Parliament of today, that forest reserves are being disseminated under our noses and we shall be ashamed tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker, I think we must do something very serious. A committee must be set up and it must move very first for us to save that forest reserve. Therefore, by extension, other forest reserves and then from the forest reserves, we should look at the wetlands because they are gone. Whereas you can replant a forest, when a wetland is degraded and finished, that is the end. Are we going to walk with our heads high and say, we are Members of Parliament when wetlands and forest reserves have been disseminated when we are looking? I do not want to be part of that.

Mr Speaker, I implore Parliament to take serious steps and save Mother Nature. I thank you.

3.29
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am at pain to find that when you look at the names of the people whom Prof. Gilbert Bukenya did not mention, I saw the names of two people and I want to be honest. I saw the name of Eng. Ian Kyeyune on this iPad. I have also seen the name of somebody called Haruna Semakula. 

Honourable colleagues, when you are sent to see what is happening in Nonve, I do not want people to come here and start talking in tongues. We should mention names because not mentioning names is what is killing this country – pretence!

Mr Speaker, if you look at the signature of the person that was okaying the giving out of that land in Nonve, there is a signature, which allegedly belongs to the Executive Director of NFA but the person signed on behalf of the Executive Director but never put a name. This means that somebody could have sat at Nasser Road, signed and given that land away on behalf of National Forestry Authority.

We have a Minister in charge of forests called hon. Flavia Munaaba. President Museveni gave her a car, fuel and bodyguards with guns. I would like this minister not to step into Parliament on Tuesday. Let her go to Nonve Forest Reserve and give us a statement, which is her function as the minister. She is not here just to enjoy the air conditioning. We want a functional minister for the environment. Before we authorise a select committee, there is somebody earning a salary that even went to State House and swore to protect the forests of this country. Where is she now? 

Mr Speaker, I believe that the people that Prof. Bukenya referred to as being above – Prof. Bukenya was the Vice-President and when you talk about “somebody above you” who are you talking about? (Laughter) You are saying that people have given instructions. Let us move forward and if Prof. Bukenya thinks that the one who gave the instructions is above him, let us send the Police and we get this person. If that person is above you, he or she will come out -(Interruption)- I can take the information. 

PROF. BUKENYA: A lot of interests have been on-going in Nonve Forest Reserve. There was a project started in 2010 to privatise certain parts of the forests for people to grow trees and somebody came to Nonve Forest Reserve. If you go there, you will see a symbol of eucalyptus trees. I drove this person out while I was the Vice-President. Now however, my wings are small –(Laughter)– and I cannot drive them out. That is the information that I wanted to give.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Lastly, I have also had some issues with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We should put pressure on our colleagues here who have been given the chance to protect the environment. The Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development should also come to us and tell us how his ministry is giving out forests when they are not de-gazetted. I am praying to God that this encroacher does not have a grandfather amongst us here because you may find that some of us are quiet, pretending to see what is happening when they are among the land grabbers.

We shall not be romantic on this. I am available and I would like to go to this area and investigate so that we can come and speak the truth. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this matter, you cannot lobby. (Laughter)

3.34
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to commend the mover of the motion, Prof. Bukenya. Thank you so much for bringing this motion. 

I would like to add that the mandate of this select committee should be expanded to cover areas, which are near Wakiso District for example areas in Mpigi and Butambala districts because the problem has escalated up to there. These people have started growing ginger –(Interjections)– not jiggers but ginger.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are those, honourable?

MR KIYINGI: Ginger. They are growing ginger in the forest - not the jiggers in Busoga. The people of Butambala and Mpigi districts are destroying forests in favour of planting ginger. 

What must be noted is that the land encroached on is as if it belongs to nobody. The National Forestry Authority does not have land titles for these forests, and even the land where the head office is located along Port Bell Road is about to be taken by some big people because they do not own titles. 

I request this Parliament to allocate more resources so that this land is surveyed, mapped and titles issued by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development so that this land is saved. Otherwise by talking a lot here, we shall not save the forests in this country.

I would also like to inform this House that there are so many people, not only in Government but also individuals within the House here, who have taken advantage of these forests where land titles were not issued to the National Forestry Authority. I thank you.

3.37
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank our colleague, Prof. Bukenya for bringing this motion to Parliament. I wish we would address ourselves to the bigger picture besides the forest reserve that the mover of the motion is presenting today. There is a well-orchestrated and deliberate move by a group of people within Government and private sector to take advantage of Government land mainly in this scenario where the NFA is the custodian of this land.

We were recently debating the Kasokoso issue that I will come to in conclusion. I do not know why these government agencies have deliberately failed to take management of these lands. In the case of Kasokoso, over a period of over 10 years, all they do is lament and write to the Police. Why would they continue holding onto these lands and yet they cannot manage them? I would like to believe that they participate deliberately in the illegal acquisition of this land through other individuals who are in the top management. 

Mr Speaker, there is a problem and if you look at the wetlands like my colleague was saying - there are some people who are getting plots of land within Police and railway land. It is all over the place and for whoever wants land, the easiest way is for them to go through a few politically well placed people and acquire land within these Government lands. Government, as an institution, has not put a stand to this through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but most importantly, we as Parliament.

I sat here last week and there was a report from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure that talked about illegal settlements in Kasokoso. Most of the resolutions that were made by the committee were thrown out; we voted against all of them. What precedent are we setting as Parliament? Somebody says, this should be a patriotic Parliament but I say, let us not be a populist Parliament but really patriotic. If people are illegally settled on land, even if we want the votes, what precedent are we setting? 

If we continue at this rate, we are going to legitimise, which we have already done - For instance, the settlements on Kasokoso land yet deep down we know that these settlements are illegal. This is my opinion and I think that deep down, we understand what I am talking about. It is not only about the vote but also about the future of this country and if we continue setting this precedent that we are setting today, we are in trouble and tomorrow we should stop complaining about land being taken away because we are defending these crooks, I am sorry to say.

In the incident of our colleague who has brought this motion to Parliament, I think it is important that we start with this small area because he has a challenge. They are actually apportioning the land every other day so –(Member timed out.) 

3.40
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion and any Ugandan who has been present in the country must have realised that climate change is catching up with us. The temperatures are getting higher and higher day by day. This is because we have a self-inflicted problem in our departments of Government. National Forestry Authority must come here when they have to de-gazette any piece of a forest but what we hear are contradictions that they have authorised in one letter and they are denying in another. 

What is going to come out as a solution in this select committee, which Parliament is intending to set up to discover what the problem is? I am pleased that we are focusing on this one forest. We are going to find concrete solutions which we are going to use in future if only we expand the reach of the committee to the rest of Uganda –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to say that as we appoint a select committee for that particular forest, we should even look at the bigger picture of appointing another select committee for the entire country. We have issues in all these forests in the country. For example, in Zombo, we have three big forests of Osi, Lendu, Awangu and Onyeri crossing into Nebbi District. However, all these forests are not being managed properly. 

There are illegalities and unfairness in those areas perpetuated by NFA. People have been allocated pieces of land for short-term digging but they are not allowed to settle properly so that they can harvest what they cultivated. I think there is a problem with NFA.

There is inadequate staffing; we have big forests with two or three officers managing them. Every year, the forests are burnt and there is nobody who can come to the community and ask them to protect the forests. There are issues in the forests every year. We normally think there is going to be planting but there is no planting. 

I am proud of myself, Mr Speaker, because I was one of the first board members in NFA and we did a lot of planting. We did the planting in Mattuga, Gulu, Fort Portal and in Mayuge though in Mayuge they came and cut down all the trees we had planted.

We planted trees in Fort Portal, all the green you see now was planted between 2004 -2006.  I now see a lot of it going to waste. There is little management, no coordination with the local people and a lot of illegalities going on procedurally. I would like to support the motion, but I pray that as we look at this select committee on Nonve, we should also think of another select committee for the bigger picture. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even if we were to approve this select committee on Nonve it does not remove the responsibility of the House committee to get itself involved in this matter. Let us not focus on the select committees, we have substantive committees of the House that can do these things as well. But this is a specific issue urgent from the presentation that is why we are spending time on it. 

3.44
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I have been asking myself why Ugandans are not honest about the issues to do with forests. Why somebody would chose to use his office to destroy a forest as alluded to by the MP Mbarara Municipality. 

I have read a letter signed by the Executive Director NFA saying that somebody is being allowed to access the forest for eco-friendly or eco-tourism activities. Isn’t it possible to do an activity in a forest without owning land? Because the rest of the attachments of the documents seem to relate to the fact that land ownership was changing from customary to freehold and all these other kinds of processes. 

If I wanted to put up a hotel in Queen Elizabeth National Park, would I need to own land in order to carry out the activities? If the activity is restricted by law to be an environmentally friendly activity then let it be so. Why would ownership of land come in? I think this Parliament should consider amending the National Forestry Act - because issues to do with Climate Change are a big challenge to mankind - isn’t it possible for us to have zero tolerance on access to forests and national resources such as national parks if we consider climate change seriously?

Thirdly, as we get to the issues of accessing this for purposes of development, are there no provisions of the law on rights? National Forestry Authority must continue to protect the forests without giving away the power to be managed by certain individuals. There is no timeframe given on this title - (Member timed out.)

3.48
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I support the motion to set up a committee to investigate the illegal allocation of forest reserves in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not the motion; the motion is on Nonve. 

MS ACHENG: On Nonve, correct. I want to start on the note that instead of illegally allocating forest reserves in the country, I believe that these are wrong people because if you are not bad then you would not accept to destroy a national forest reserve; you would not accept to destroy what God has created. God created us for procreation to improve on what he had created for us.

I want to say that the Ministry of Environment should look into this issue critically and make sure that our forests are reserved. We should invest more money in tree planting. We are now witnessing global warming. What are we going to do about global warming? We have to focus and do something about Uganda’s climate. We now have temperatures that we have never had before. I propose that we all do tree planting; I propose that every year a child plants a tree on his/her own birthday. All of us can chose to plant trees the way we would want it to be. 

I also want to talk about wetlands. The National Housing Company in Uganda, instead of protecting the environment, are reclaiming wetlands. A case in point is the Naalya Estate that is being constructed in a wetland. All these wetlands have been illegally allocated to investors. If you follow the eastern route, you cannot follow these big wetlands that could really protect our environment from global warming. The western part of this country has embraced the tree planting. If you follow western part of the country, you realise that so many trees have been planted. So let every person in this House be encouraged to plant more trees to protect our environment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the prayer to expand the debate is also in relation to cessation of activities on the forest reserve, and also deployment of environmental police to preserve the status quo in the forest until the committee reports. 

Maybe we could take up all pictures. Honourable members, the full debate covering the whole subject could be done when the committee reports. If we opt to create a select committee, then from that report, we can have a clear basis of either expanding the debate or not. But for now, can we deal with the issue of Nonve Forest?

3.51
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter and I am not opposing the motion. But I am looking at how it was framed. When you say, “Illegal de-gazettement”, it connotes that there was an attempted process to de-gazette, which was illegal. 

From the documents I have seen and after discussing with the mover of the motion, I think there was no such attempt. The attempt that is clear is only unlawful change of user, take over and allocation. Therefore, when we are debating, and I think the mover has no problem with removing the words “illegal de-gazettement”, because that would connote that there was a process of de-gazetting, which was illegal. However, nothing indicates anywhere that there was any attempt to de-gazette.

 
Therefore, what we are dealing with is illegal change of users because I have seen a document here saying that they are changing users from forest to residential and the document also indicates that the forest reserve has been allocated - all those are illegal but they do not tantamount to illegal de-gazettement because there is no such process as de-gazettement that has been embarked on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you proposing an amendment?

MR RUKUTANA: I am proposing that we say, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate the illegal change of user and allocation of the national forest reserves in Uganda”, in steady of saying “de-gazettement” -(Interjections)– no, what I am saying is “de-gazettement” is a technical term. If you are to say, “legal de-gazettement”, that would mean that there was an attempted process to de-gazette and we do not have evidence to that effect. What is on record is illegal allocation; change of user and encroachment on the forest reserve. I think the mover has no problem with the new formulation.

3.55
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, you are stretching so far. There was a person who claims that that was his customary plot. In my language it is explained better, “kibanja”. He went to the district to have his kibanja changed into freehold, not a forest. He did not even mention the forest. Then the district land board allocated that verification process to Katabi sub county land committee. The committee said “It was ok”. We went there and there was no problem. They do not mention Nonve forest.

Now when we agitate that Nonve is being taken over - they go, I do not know how, to the National Forest Authority and get the first letter which does not read professionally. I think it is fraud. I do not want it to water down our views because I want us to investigate fully what I think and I am beginning to believe there is some degree of fraud.

Why don’t I want to remove there NFA, because if you hear that your forest is going, how can you just sit back in your office and communicate? In fact, the person they were communicating to is not actually there. There is a need to question such moves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think honourable members, the phrase “illegal de-gazettement” might accommodate the situation in this sense, because if there was attempted change of ownership that presupposes the fact that gazetted land does not have that title of gazettement anymore. So that now it can change ownership. So you are not saying it was gazetted, but you are saying that it is illegal, because you are now illegally purporting to have gazetted the land for you to transfer ownership. I think let us leave it the way it is.

3.57
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually I was going to disagree with the minister on the same point. Thank you very much, for speaking it very clear. It may not be faulting the process of an attempt to de-gazette. But it may be initiating another process which results into de-gazettement and that the title is right. 

When we come to the Nonve issue, hon. Bukenya has all reasons to raise suspicion and cause a comprehensive investigation and scrutiny of what process is taking place in Nonve Forest, including deploying forest police officers to ensure that there must be no any other activity taking place on the piece of land because this land in question is still an issue and the issue is that a select committee must go.

Mr Speaker, much as we should limit ourselves to Nonve, which for me even if you put the question right now, the answer will be “Aye”, but let me say this in advance. My point is generally ownership of public land. In my place, we have a forest reserve which has been a reserve ever since we were born. We used to call people forest rangers, but as we talk now, people are freely using the land. When you go to the district offices of NFA and the regional and so on, it is not even anywhere indicated and yet we know people have been working. 

There is another forest which hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace was talking about -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we need to debate this motion anymore? Don’t you think we could take a decision that if we agree, then we can come back and debate it fully?

4.00
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am of the view that we are pre-empting the work of the select committee. It would have been appropriate for us to first agree on the select committee and then work on the terms of reference. I think that is what would be appropriate. Otherwise, what I have heard and what you have heard shows that almost in every district there is a problem. This means that some of these district land boards that have been created - their members are not properly trained, they do not know what they are supposed to do. They just allocate land. Maybe they do not even understand the legal consequences. That is some of the problems that we have.

If you have read this motion properly, they are saying that even the National Forestry Authority was created recently in 2008. I am not even sure whether the people who are there fully understand the role that National Forestry Authority is supposed to play. In that regard, really the work of the select committee is very broad. They have to tell us, does the National Forestry Authority understand what they are supposed to do? Why don’t they give regular report to this Parliament on what is going on? 

Above all, Mr Speaker, we have this Kyoto Protocol; we have climate change global conferences every year. The government is very active on this matter, but Parliament is not. We have a parliamentary caucus on climate change. However, as a Parliament we do not get regular updates about what is going on to the extent that we do not know what role we are supposed to play as leaders in order to be involved in the mitigation or in the adaptation activities. For that, Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with you that the select committee be put in place -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not what I said. That is what the motion says.

MS OGWAL: Yes, exactly. I would like to agree that instead of debating and pre-empting what the select committee is supposed to do, we agree that that the select committee be formed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the frontbench, is there any response to some of these issues? If there is not, I will put the question - amendment of the motion?

4.03
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to introduce a new clause within the motion – if Prof. Bukenya and the House deem it fit – that the Minister in charge of Forestry with the Minister of Internal Affairs present a statement of the total acreage of forests that are in safe conducive environmental status as required by the Act within a period of three weeks, as well as the acreage of forests that have been encroached on with a plan of action to restore and the plan of action they are taking to prosecute the culprits. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that would come better if the report of the committee is being debated. That would be overloading the motion. However, when the committee eventually is created, on reporting then that could be one of the issues that they can recommend for the House to adopt. That would work better.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am talking about other forests within the country. We appropriate money for the ministry and other agencies. They should be working 24/7 and the Minister of Internal Affairs established a unit to monitor all national forests. Therefore, as the select committee focuses on Nonve Forest, we also need a position from Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am worried about the housing of that decision. Please, we need to house things properly so that we do not get beaten by the rain.

Honourable members, if there is no response from the government, I will put the question to this motion. The motion for which I now put the question for your decision is that:

    1) Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate the illegal de-gazettement of Nonve Forest Reserve.
    2) All activities on the said forest reserve should be ceased forthwith.
    3) The environmental police should be deployed in this forest reserve to preserve the status quo. 

In summary, that is the prayer of the motion, for which I now put the question. Yes, honourable.

4.06
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me at this point. You will find that the characteristics of the motion we have are prevalent all over the forests in the country. However, now the motion is on Nonve. I know the timeframe could not allow, but I wish we looked at other matters incidental thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will come in the terms of reference.

I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been advised by the chair of the committee that they are still consulting on this matter with the Attorney-General. Have they finished? The chair just came to me. That is why I am saying this.

4.07
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Mr Speaker, I wonder whether it is hon. Kakooza to speak on my behalf. However, as you directed yesterday to have consultation with the Attorney-General, we did not complete the consultations. We were not able to meet today because he was appearing before the Appointments Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, learned Attorney-General.

4.07
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, yesterday after you had advised that we consult with the relevant stakeholders, we did consult some members, including the chairperson, although we did not conclude. 

However, today I had discussions with the officials who authored some of the legal opinions and some officials from the National Social Security Fund. The discussions seem to take on board the views expressed, particularly, by the chairperson of the committee.

I thought that in the interest of time – since we have a lot to cover – since these views that I have seem to take care of the concerns she had, I could still present them. If she is not quite on board with them, we can then continue from there. Otherwise, my view is that they do take care of her concerns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, what would be your response to this particular proposal? We were supposing those views should have already been shared by now. The views were not shared and, therefore, we cannot indulge in it now. Please, if you can do the consultation now and come back to the House that would be fine. However, for now let us just stand over this matter and we move to the next Item, please. Next Item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013
4.09
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 1 is interpretation. I think we may have to handle that after we have finished the rest of the Bill. We stand that over.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.
4.10
Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend Clause 4 by deleting paragraph (f). The justification is: it is outside the scope of the institute.

In paragraph (g), we propose to insert the phrase, “On the hotel and tourism training” between the words “Curriculum” and “In” in line one.

The justification is to confine the object of the Bill to manage only the curriculum on hotel and tourism training. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed by the committee.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, it looks like I have a copy of the current law which we amended. It provided for even catering. If we move to make the amendments as she is proposing, then we limit the scope of the curriculum. What is a hotel? You are talking about dining and breakfast, food, leisure and entertainment. I would think that catering is ideal. By doing that I think we are over limiting the scope of the curriculum.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the committee was aware that there are other institutions including universities that are offering these same courses. This institution is not meant to regulate them, but it is meant to work with them and to work with the NCDC to guide on their curriculum. It is not that it must manage the other institutions that are offering the same training. We thought that by giving them this mandate, we will be over stepping on the scope of the institution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Madam Chair, why would you want to delete (f) and all these other things? Is there any contradictions?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, in the mandate of Uganda Tourism Board, it is the board that manages the efficiency of hotels and tourism businesses. We thought that if this was put here, then it would require that the UTB Act be reviewed. Therefore, we thought this could not be part of the mandate of the institution. This is supposed to be training, not regulating businesses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: However, if it is about promoting -

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The object of this law is to modernise the institute called the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, among which is to undertake tourism and hospitality training and ensure effective development of the tourism sector’s human resources.

Mr Chairperson, my issue on deletion of (f) is, if you are promoting training and capacity building, and you want to detach promotion of efficient hotel and tourism business from this institution, I wonder why the chairperson is really urging the House to delete this when it actually falls within the mandate of this institute.

Therefore, I want to propose that we retain (f). There is no harm by having (f) among the object of this institute. I thank you.

MR LOKII: Mr Chairperson, I think the idea is to establish a centre of excellence. If a centre of excellence has to be excellent, then (f) has to be retained. I want to propose to the chairperson that she concedes that (f) stays as one of the objectives.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any contradiction, honourable chairperson, with this?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, if by training, the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute will be promoting efficiency of the hotels and tourism business, we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then (g)!

MR KWEMARA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. On (g), there is a small correction. The National Council for Higher Education Centre - I think there is nothing like a National Council for Higher Education Centre. There is the National Council for Higher Education and possibly, the committee wanted to include the National Curriculum Development Centre. Therefore, I wanted clarification from the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that one is clear. Can I put the question to this amendment for including the National Curriculum Development Centre?

MR KWEMARA: I am just only seeking clarification on that because the mind I have of this institute - I am wondering if we are saying in consultation with the National Council for Higher Education, and at the same time in consultation with the National Curriculum Development Centre, what type of institute do we have in mind? What award is it giving? This is because I am trying to see a conflict. If it is National Curriculum Development Centre, then it is going to conflict with the BTVET Act. If it is National Council for Higher Education, you at the same time conflict with the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. What type of institute do they have in mind and what type of award were they thinking about?

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We have a National Council for Higher Education. That is what we had and then the awards that we give are diplomas and certificates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In that case, National Curriculum Development Centre is not part of this? The only word that should be taken out is “centre?” 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, yesterday, I had brought the issue of either BTVET or the National Council for Higher Education. When you bring the certification, then that goes to the Act of BTVET. When you bring it at a higher level, then it is the National Council for Higher Education. You do not do consultation. They approve your curriculum. You do not consult. You have to produce the curriculum, take it to the National Council of Education and they approve it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, can we take care of this matter?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the Uganda National Hotel and Tourism Training Institute is going to give guidance on the curriculum that is going to guide the training in hotel and tourism institution. It will also work with the National Council for Higher Education to either affiliate or guide the other training institutions that will be offering this course the way Kyambogo University does to all those who offer education.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairperson, I think it is important to draw a line between the questions of the curriculum and that of the awards. The curriculum has to relate, be developed, or approved by the National Curriculum Development Centre. The question of awards goes to the National Council for Higher Education. 

In my view, the two need to be reflected. The way they have been phrased seems to have mixed the National Development Curriculum Centre’s function and that of the National Council for Higher Education. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The word is, “to manage” not “to set”; I do not know whether management is the same as setting.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I seem to have similar observations. In my opinion, the issues of management of the National Curriculum fall under the mandate of the National Development Curriculum Centre. Then the National Council for Higher Education is for purposes of approval. In fact, where National Council of Higher Education comes in is that it should not be in consultation with the approval. It must be with the approval of the National Council for Higher Education. If you leave it as consultation, it is even possible that consultations may not take place and we end up with fake papers -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what was intended by saying, “To manage the National Curriculum”? We are not talking about setting it. What is the intention here that you want the House to decide on? This is the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute. 

The objective of the institute is, “To manage the National Curriculum in consultation with the National Council for Higher Education.” 

DR EPETAIT: Would it be injurious if we amended (g) to read as, “To manage the National Curriculum in consultation with the National Curriculum Development Centre.” That is how I thought it should be. The National Council for higher Education is for approval not for managing curriculum. 

MS ASAMO: At least I was privileged to be in both councils of Business, Technical and Vocational Education Training (BTVET) and National Council for Higher Education before I became a Parliamentarian. 

If you are setting an institution of higher learning, you are going to develop your program of training. When you develop the training and the units, then you take them to the National Council for Higher Education for approval.  

If you are doing it at the lower level, BTVET will give the certificate because they also come up with their assessments to check whether this person at these very lower levels- we needed to identify what the training is going to give. Is it a diploma? If it is a diploma, then National Council for Higher Education should be able to approve. 

The training institute should come with a programme of study. Then that programme is taken. They do not even need to go to the National Curriculum Development Centre which handles issues of schools and other institutions. Even when you are getting a university, you come back with your programme of training and take it to the National Council. It then comes in to investigate and approve that you can go ahead and train for it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members what this proposal says is that there is already a curriculum. This institute’s mandate is only to manage it.  How do you manage a curriculum in consultation with another institution? 

MS OGWAL: Chairman, I see a contradiction because when you see the committee’s preamble statement, it talks about the institute providing for the establishment. When it comes to (g), they are talking about, “The management of the National curriculum.” Management of the National Curriculum means it is already there and they are just coming in to manage it.

I do not understand. I was thinking that following what has already been stated in  this objective, you would be asking the institute to establish, or develop the curriculum, and manage it when it is already developed and in place. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Chair. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister and the Chairperson. How can there be a curriculum for something that has not yet been established? We are also seeking to expand this industry. We are looking at national transformation through this industry. 

Therefore, I would expect that the institute once established should then discuss with the National Curriculum Development Centre and have a suitable curriculum that suits the status of the newly established, or the institute to be established. Do we have a curriculum in place? If we have it, does it suit the type of institute that we are seeking to set up? 

MS KAABULE: Thank you so much, Chair. I am also seeking clarification because at one point in 5 (b) they are saying, “To provide guidance On National Curriculum” and here we are saying, “To manage” I would assume that managing and providing guidance in consultation with National Council for Higher Education are two different things. 

MR LOKII: If we go back to the committee report, one of the objects behind the Bill is, “To enable the institute to provide guidance on the National Curriculum in consultation with the National Council for Higher Education for all public and private training providers in the hospitality industry at tertiary level.” 

I think from the report, it is clearer what the objective should be. When you come back to the Bill, it talks of something quite different. The understanding is that a bigger body that will oversee the training in the hotel industry is the one that we are trying to establish, or put in place. 

Therefore, it will either take responsibility of developing and managing the use of the curriculum or it will do that with reference to the National Curriculum Development Centre which sets the standards for what kind of curriculum this kind of institution should undertake. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can somebody look at (g). It says, “To manage the National Curriculum developed in consultation with the National Curriculum Development Centre.”

MS KABAHENDA: This particular institution has been in existence; it is a traditional institution. When it was transferred from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife, it only lost its legal status; it had a curriculum even before. 

We thought by managing the curriculum, they were free to even review it, but there is already an existing curriculum they have been training on. Only that afterwards, they lost credibility when they lost the legal status. If they recover legal status, then they will just continue to manage the National Curriculum which already exists. 

We think that the National Council for Higher Education is the one that accredits these other institutions for them to train in hotel and tourism. Therefore, as the institution manages the curriculum, they must be in consultation with the National council for Higher Education. This is so that when it is accrediting, they are accrediting the subjects, or the courses according to the guidelines on the curriculum. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clearer? 

DR KAMANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to guide this August House that, this institution we are talking about was previously under the Ministry Of Education and Sports. Now, when you say that you are going to offer diplomas, then, the diploma must be accredited by the National Council for Higher Education.

What you normally do- it is the institution which develops the curriculum, and it is this particular curriculum that you use so that you know the type of instructors that are going to be recruited; it is guided by that particular curriculum

When you are talking about the institution, there are those who are also offering certificates and the certificate is BITVET, which is Ministry of Education and Sports, because these are examinable, be it certificate, be it diploma.

Therefore, when the Chairperson said that the institution has been there, without changing - because having this, it will not be in consultation, it is accreditation. The NCHE is going to accredit the particular courses that these people are going to offer.

On the side of a certificate, it is will be the Ministry of Education and Sports. That is BITVET, which is now the National Curriculum Development Centre. That is how it will go. Therefore, Madam Chairperson of the Committee, you should remove the phrase where you say “In collaboration”, because the institution manages – you see, they have to run according to the curriculum which has been developed. The NCHE has to accredit, that is all. As for the certificate, it has to be the Ministry of Education and Sports.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So how should this paragraph read?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate the honourable minister for the guidance, and would like to propose on behalf of the committee that (g) reads: “To manage the national curriculum on hotel and tourism training” and we stop there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay members?

MR KWEMARA: I still have some reservations and my view would be that the committee goes back and thinks through this deeply. When you read the memorandum, it says that “The Bill seeks to improve competitiveness of Ugandans, for jobs in Hotel and Hospitality Sector, especially under the East African Community Common Market Protocol.”

That is the reason I was asking what type of institution is the committee or does the minister have in mind? To me, I would even have loved this institution to be a degree awarding one; it can be another degree awarding institution. It can even give diplomas, certificates, and internationally accredited certificates and diplomas, like what other institutions are doing. 

If we want to be competitive, that means that we shall stop talking the National Curriculum Development Centre, and limit ourselves to the National Council for Higher Education.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the amendment that has been proposed now does not mention any of those things. Is there a provision for the review of the curriculum - to manage and review it, or something?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your guidance on whether the word “manage” would not cover “review” or if we want to over -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Since the curriculum is already developed and it is in place, we should talk about managing – you are talking about managing the existing curriculum. My amendment now is to add on what she had said. (G) should read: “To manage the national curriculum on hotel and tourism training, and periodically review it in consultation with the National Curriculum Development Centre”. 

They should be consulted in case of review, because if you stop at training alone, it would presuppose that, it is a static curriculum, not subject to reviewing. Yet review must also be controlled.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what does management mean? The word “management” includes all those things; even reviewing is part of managing it. 

DR EPETAIT: My understanding is that, since the curriculum is already in place that is what they envisage to manage. But where it involves reviewing – because management also involves reviewing. When need be for review, the institute cannot do it alone; that is my argument.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, the word “Manage” is wide enough to cover management, reviewing and all that. So, the proposal by the Chairperson is really enough. 

Secondly, we do not need to take in “consultation with the National Council of Higher Education”, because under the BITVET Act, it mandates this entire curriculum to be accredited by the NCHE. So the proposal is correct. Just stop at “To manage the National Curriculum of The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute.” That is broad enough to cover the eventualities, whether it is review or any other thing. I think it is broad enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Manage the National Curriculum of the institute, because that is the subject in contention. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman with your guidance, that is why you see or hear of a diploma of Bukalasa, you talk of Kyambogo. That is what you should accord your guidance, because that is what we normally do. That particular diploma is awarded by Bukalasa, Kyambogo, Bugema, like that. Whether you got it, but it is still accorded to their own particular programme they are offering, and the curriculum they are following. So, we stop as per your guidance, and it will be covering everything. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Leader of the Opposition and then I will have member for Budadiri West

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I am still not very convinced by the explanation, because the purpose is to enrich and strengthen our efficiency and capacity, among others, and make us competitive in the region, or even in the continent. The curriculum cannot be static. To say that “Manage” - manage has a limitation. You can only manage within the framework given to you. That is why the words which were coming out, either to develop or to review, actually implied that we are moving higher than where we are.

Saying that we just go and manage, it means that curriculum is assumed to be static and that will not lead me to where I would like to go. So, I would like to be convinced; I have no problem either way, but we need to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to be able to understand what we are after, we need to look at 2(1) which says that they establish an institute which is to be known as the hotel and tourism training institute.

Now, the curriculum we are talking about is in line with hotel and tourism. Therefore, if we are talking about the National Curriculum, we should add “In hotel and tourism training”. That is my number one.

Two, on the same, I would like to agree with the Leader of the Opposition; to manage the job is only to manage the existing thing. Therefore, to be able to allow them to manage and continuously review, we can say “To manage a periodical development of the National Curriculum - to manage continuous development”. I think to develop and manage –(Interjections)- thank you very much Hon. Kakooza for the first time.

MS KABAHENDA: Chair, the curriculum already exists. We are not developing. We can possibly say that (g) reads: “To manage and continuously review the national curriculum on the hotel and tourism training” so that we take care of the remaining -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that -

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chair, I would like to submit that it reads like a mere guideline not a major law. I would like to propose that we say “To develop”, because we are establishing this institute afresh. So let us use the term “To develop”. I wouldn’t want to use the word “Manage”. Let us develop the curriculum for the institute. (Applause)

The other bits are managerial and administrative. They can be done under administrative arrangement. I would like to submit that the subsection should read: “Develop the curriculum for the tourism”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Develop and manage?

MS KABAHENDA: Develop and manage the curriculum.

MR OMARA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to submit that the word “Manage” would be the right word to use in this case. If you are managing, you have to manage in consultation with National Council for Higher Education because managing will involve, developing, reviewing and doing many other things.

Some of these we have done and submitted to national council. The word “Manage” would be the right term; in consultation - you cannot manage it alone. You have to manage in consultation with National Council for Higher Education. Thank you.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are arguing about something which already exists. It is not their role to develop it because there is already a National Curriculum Centre, which is currently running; they cannot develop on their own. They are supposed to manage what is there because it will not be their own creation. 

Right now, there is a training School in Jinja, which already has a curriculum. There are also other private institutions which are also following the same curriculum. It is not their role to develop but to manage what is there and if they have to develop, they cannot develop alone. They are supposed to consult since it is a national issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the sub heading of this clause is objects of the Institute not functions.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. I would like to agree with the guidance of the minister. The point here is the general rule. If you have an institute, you are having different discipline, say degrees up to diploma. It is a general presumption that you will design your curriculum and submit it to the National Council for Higher Education for accreditation. However, if it is certificates, you will work with the centre for curriculum development. These are two different things.

Now, we will be left with only two questions which according to me if we could answer them, then we would have settled the issue.  The question is, “Is this an institute that is going to offer disciplines right from diploma to degree?” The answer is yes. If yes, then we do not have to struggle saying “In consultation with National Council for Higher Education.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We already took that out -

MR ANYWARACH: Now, are we going to give out certificates? Yes. It is also known that it will be in consultation with the relevant authorities.

The second question is, “Do we have a curriculum right now”? The answer is yes.  Will this curriculum be static or dynamic? That means that in the course of running the institute, if there will be in the interest of the institute a need to resubmit or to submit a proposal again to the National Council for Higher Education, then we must give an opportunity or leeway to the institute. 

Now, this leads me to the question of the word. Does the word “Manage” include that dynamism? If it includes -(Interjections)- for me, I think “Manage” means to review. Each time you are reviewing, for instance, assuming you have started with diploma and then again say you are going for degree, definitely, you will send your information to - Now let us focus on the word “Manage” it is actually greater including all the lesser terms. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members. Please let us conclude this matter. Certainly we cannot debate the word “Manage” for an hour. I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Chair and confirmed by the Minister that to “Manage the national curriculum on the hotels and tourism training”. That is the amendment that is being proposed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, agreed to.)

 MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further amendment. I would like to insert before “h” a new paragraph, because we want to take care of the interest of -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First propose

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: To continuously review the national curriculum. The justification is that even if it has already said, as we are talking now, that national curriculum should be reviewed if need arises to make this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the actual point we have been arguing - on that term we passed; “to manage” includes “to review”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to clause 4, as amended, to stand part of Bill

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, on clause 5, the functions of the institute, the committee proposes to amend clause 5 by inserting a  sub clause 1 paragraph (a)  and we substitute the word “The” with the word “such” and by substituting the phrase “Hotel and tourism” with the word “Applied”, on line two. It then reads: “To provide full-time or part-time courses of study and training in the field of hotel and tourism learning and research”.

The justification is that we are trying to manage the areas of learning in the institute of hotel and tourism training. And then the second amendment proposed is by deleting the phrase “as the minister may direct” appearing at the end of the paragraph. The justification is that the minister should not direct the areas of learning and research in the institute. 

In paragraph (c), we propose to delete the word “National” appearing between the word “Other” and the words on line two and redraft it as: “To conduct national and other tourism and hotel examination, grant national certificates, diplomas and other awards consistent with the national curriculum.”

The justification is to enable the institute to give any other wards other than the national qualification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is clear, I put the question to these amendments that are proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any further amendment on clause 5?

MS KAABULE: Further amendment to (a) is to insert the word “and” before “Or”, so that it reads; “To provide fulltime and/ or”. If you are saying or, then it means that you are either going to provide fulltime or part time. I would think the institute wants to provide both.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Technically, we do not accept that in drafting of legislation, we do not “do and or”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, fulltime or part-time is okay. We do not need to put that. But I would like the chairperson to help me; there must be a justification as to why they want the minister to direct this. In this case, if you have the Principal, his job is to do full-time and part-time courses. However, there is some need for direction. We must indicate the person supposed to direct this. It should not be the minister; we should add the board and say: “As directed by the board”. The justification is the institute must have some direction.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the institute is going to have a board and also an academic board. The academic board is the one that is going to work with the Principal on how the provision of these courses will be.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you in agreement?

MS KABAHENDA: When we go to the functions of the academic board, this will be stated; we did not think that we would bring them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, this particular issue is stated among the functions of the academic board?

MR AWONGO: Mr Chairperson, we cannot have two boards, there must be one. That academic board needs to be given a different name so that it does not confuse.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We will cross that bridge when we reach it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is always approval processes in courses to be done, and in universities the courses are usually approved by the council. Since there is no council but the board, there must be a board to deal with this. 

Hon. Awongo, I agree with you, we cannot have two boards. Even if it is an academic board, it should be a subset of the board and it works on behalf of the entire board. As the chairperson stated, “As the board may direct”. 

The justification is that, the Principal and the chairperson should not be the only people to deal with this on the day-to-day running of the institute. When they have decided that there will be a part-time or full-time course, it must be approved by the board. Then there will be a process of going to register it with the National Council of Higher Education.

However, if they do not do it, the Principal can decide to determine a course and goes and registers it without the authority of the board. That is why I would insist that the first clause, in paragraph (a) – as the chairperson stated, “As the board may direct”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That means we go back to the word which we have replaced.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi states, the academic board is a sub-board. It works on behalf of the board. However, if it is in the interest of the members, we can accept to add: “As the board may direct”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But then, you will have to go back and put back the word “Such” instead of “That”.

MS KABAHENDA: “In the field of hotel and tourism learning and research as the board may direct” - I think that is fine. We may not go back to “Such”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you sure about it, because “such” is indicating something else. But if you say “The”, it ends without assigning anybody responsibility.

“Such” is specific is that drafting language? “Such things as the minister will direct”. But if it is not there, then it can be “the”. If somebody is going to direct, it has to be subject to such directions.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I agree with the board, but the issue is now which board, the board of the institute or the tourism board?  I would think such an institute must be managed by the tourism board; just like in Sri Lanka. The peculiar nature of such institutes and the national quality must be of interest to the tourism board.

In this case, the issue will be whether the tourism board may not be easily influenced by the minister. The board sounds good; however, is it the institute board or the Uganda Tourism Board?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In this Act, the board is defined.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am not comfortable with the replacement of the minister with the board, in the sense that the board is performing a delegated mandate. Therefore, to allow the board to do the selection of some of these functions without the involvement of the minister might create problems.

I do not know whether we are going to have the board in consultation with the minister, because living out the minister completely, is creating problems in my view.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, clause 6 gives us the representation on the board, and it is basically a technical board which will guide us and the board itself has the ministry sitting on it.

When we talk about the board, it is inclusive of the Ministry of Tourism and Mr Chairperson, I would like to correct it according to your guidance and return the word we had proposed to read: “To provide full-time or part-time courses of study and training in such fields of hotel and tourism learning and research as the board may direct”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay members? Okay, I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, on paragraph (b) second line I would like to propose an amendment to delete the word “Tourism and hospitality” and substitute it with “Hotel and tourism.” The whole statement should read, “To provide guidance on the national curriculum for all public and private training providers in the hotel and tourism industry.”

The justification is for consistence. We are talking about a national curriculum on hotel and tourism training. We cannot start importing new words here and limiting it to hospitality. It should be in consistence with the title of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is okay. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, clause 6 on the establishment and composition of the board, we propose to amend clause 6 by inserting in a sub clause 1 and deleting the phrase “consisting of”, appearing at the end of the sub clause. The justification is to provide clearly for the establishment of the Board separately from its composition.

    1. We would like to insert a new sub clause 2 to provide as follows: “The Board shall be appointed by the minister and shall consist of: 

    a) Chairperson
    b) A representative of the tourism private sector
    c) A representative of Hotel Owners Association
    d) A representative of Hotel and Catering Professionals
    e) A representative of the ministry responsible for tourism
    f) A representative of the National Council for Higher Education
    g) A representative of the ministry responsible for finance
    h) A representative of the Uganda Tourism Board
    i) A Representative of the students’ guild
    j) A representative of the staff of the institute
    k) A representative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority and 
    l) Two other persons of integrity appointed from the public with experience in the field of management, economics or tourism.”

The justification is to provide for the composition of the Board.

    2.  We propose to redraft sub clause (1)(a) and sub clause (3) to provide as: “The chairperson of the Board shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity with expertise and experience in hotel or tourism management.” The justification is to provide for the basic qualification of the chairperson of the Board.

    3. We propose to redraft sub clause 2 as 4 to provide as: “The principal shall be an ex-officio member and secretary to the Board.” The justification is to provide for a secretary to the Board as an ex-officio member of the Board.

    4. We propose to insert a new sub clause 5 to provide as follows: “The minister shall in appointing the members of the Board ensure that at least one third of the members are women”. The justification is to provide for affirmative action in line with Article 335 of the Constitution.

    5. We propose to insert a new sub clause 6 to provide for the appointment of the vice chairperson of the Board to provide as follows: “The minister shall designate one of the members appointed under sub section 2 other than the principal a representative of the student’s guild or staff of the institute as vice chairperson of the Board.” The justification is to provide for the appointment of the vice chairperson of the Board.

    6. We propose to redraft sub clause 3 as 7 to provide as: “Members of the Board appointed under paragraph (b)(c)and (d) of subsection 2 shall hold office for five years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one more consecutive term only.”  The justification is to provide the term of office for members representing private sector.

    7. We propose to insert a new sub clause 8 to provide as: “The minister shall appoint the chairperson, vice chairperson or member of the Board at least three month before the end of the term of office of the incumbent chairperson, vice chairperson or member of the Board.” The justification is to ensure that the Board is fully constituted at all times and to avoid delays in the appointment process.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me just find out why the word “consecutive”? For one more term only; what is the consecutive -

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, let us delete “consecutive”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, the proposal in redrafting of clause 3 now appearing as 7 will be without “Consecutive” appearing as the third last word in that paragraph.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. From the onset, my first point of objection is, this is a tall Board with a membership of 13. I have been trying to search; I have not found anywhere a representative of hotel and catering professionals defined.

Mr Chairman Professionals world over belongs to professional bodies. In Uganda, we have lawyers, engineers, and accountants as recognised professionals; they have where they belong. I do not know where the hotel and catering professionals belong and how they are defined. Therefore, how shall we put them here when we cannot easily allocate and defined them? I would like to propose that (b) be deleted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean (b) in the proposed amendment -?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, (b) as proposed by the chairperson be deleted.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, there is an association of hotel and catering trainers. It may not be one of the professional bodies but they have an association. This institute is going to deal with training and it would not want to conflict with the other training institutions but rather work together with the other trainers so that we enrich the institute.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Then why didn’t you leave it as it appears in the Bill? A representative of the hotel and catering association of Uganda - now you are saying professionals and that was why it was attracting such statements from the members -

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, we concede to delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is deleted. 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that the National Council of Higher Education cannot be a member of the Board because their role is to monitor and supervise. I would rather we replace it with a representative from Ministry of Education than National Council of Education. It does not occur like that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is what was in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first, I would like to say that we must have a representative from Ministry of Education other than the National Council of Higher Education because that is the one which approves; so we cannot have it and we must maintain the one of education. 

Mr Chairman, I have three issues I want to raise. Boards are not supposed to be careers - you cannot have a board for five years. This is the first time I am hearing of a board of five years; boards are always for two to three years. We cannot go for five years; first of all, we must maintain what is in existence now for three years and not to be reappointed. 

In the same line, there are some members on this board who will stay for a short time; for example, students will serve for a year. There are those whom even when you say they will serve five years - save for the students because they will serve for a year - will be going and will be treated as a resignation or an end of tenure.

Thirdly, is the appointment of the vice-chairperson. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson and committee for agreeing to have a vice-chairperson, but the vice-chairperson should be somebody who will be appointed by the minister as he appoints the board chairperson because that person will be the assistant to the chairperson. Therefore, when the chairperson is away, immediately the vice-chairperson takes charge. That should not be like the case for the students; this one should follow the same criteria of appointment like it is for the chairperson.

The fourth issue is the qualification of the chairperson. If you are talking about an institute and then you talk about hotel and tourism management only - an institute is a training institute. Suppose you get a headmaster or a teacher who is retired and can be a good a chairperson. You cannot limit it to only those qualified in tourism and hotel management because this is an institute for training. You should also bring in people with knowledge in education, for example, a chairperson with expert knowledge and experience in hotel, tourism and education management because this person will bring another concept and knowledge.

Mr Chairman, I want to move my amendment around that clause that the term should remain three years, save for the students who will be there for a limited period. The vice-chairperson must be appointed as they appoint the chairperson. On experience, we must add education because this is an education institute and it is dealing with education.

Finally, I would like to delete - I would like to thank my brother from Rubanda for the serious issue he raised. If you are talking of a profession, it must have a law guiding it. The lawyers and accountants have something, unless you want to create something in that post. 

The Hotel and Catering Training Association should be deleted and even the Uganda Hotel Owners Association - I do not know if these are registered. If they are not registered -(Interjection)- are they established by an Act of Parliament? You cannot bring something which is not established here by any law and say it should also be recognised. (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and also thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The Uganda Hotel Owners Association is like KACITA. Can you have a representative of KACITA in the board created by law?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, suppose another association comes tomorrow close to tourism and they also say they want to be recognised? We must put here institutions which are established not necessarily by law but by something like the Ministry of Education or something in Government that we know exists but not to bring an association because people have sat down and made a loose association and say they must be here. No, you cannot do that. For something to be included here it must have some legal status and must even have procedures on how to select somebody in that area to represent them. It is not for some people to sit in one camp and choose a person to represent them.  Mr Chairman, I want to move those amendments on this clause. I thank you.

MS SANTA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also have a problem with the board consisting of 13 members. I think the board is a decision-making organ and if there are too many people like it is on this board, I feel that there is going to be a bit of a problem in the process of decision-making.
I see there is repetition in some of these representatives on the board, for example the Uganda Hotel Owners Association. I think their interests can be well catered for by the Uganda Tourism Board. 

Secondly, I feel that on this board, we should not leave the Ministry of Education out because it has a lot to do as far as this institute is concerned. Therefore, it would be a disservice to leave the old ministry out. I feel that - maybe the chairperson will clarify on this - instead of the Ministry of Finance, we should include the Ministry of Education.

I also have a problem with (l) about the two other persons of integrity appointed from the public with experience in management, economics and tourism. Mr Chairman, we are dealing with an academic institution and these anonymous members of the board can be catered for along the way as we constitute these other board members from the other sectors. I thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem with the students’ guild and staff being part of the board. My impression is that when you create aboard, it has some financial implication such that when they sit, you have to pay their allowances. When you bring the students to be part of the management board, it can create a problem. I do not know how it came in.

Secondly, I do not know why there is this board without the vice chairperson. I imagine that if the ministry or the committee thought about it, can it come out if the vice-chairperson is supposed to be there - so that if the chairperson is a woman then the vice-chairperson can be a man or another woman. We want to be clear on that because we are talking about affirmative action. 

However, more specifically and seriously, we cannot create a board that is going to manage the academic affairs of the institute and then put students and staff there. Particularly when it comes to the financial aspect of it, I do not know how we are going to manage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is this board the equivalent of the university council? If it is the equivalent of the university council, I served on the university council of Makerere University when I was a student. Members are paid. Honourable members, how do we proceed with processing this thing? The amendments are quite many. Can we start? 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I took concern of some of the proposals from the members and when we proposed a representative from the Uganda Hotel Owners Association in our report, you will find that actually we proposed –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You did not propose because it is in the Bill. The Uganda Hotel Owners Association is in the Bill and you are not proposing. 

MS KABAHENDA: We just maintained that because we understood that the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute is going to work with the Uganda Tourism Board. UTB is classifying the hotels and accrediting the staff of the hotels that they classify. We thought that the Uganda Hotel Owners Association would work with them and if UTB can represent them, then we can reconsider unless the minister has another idea.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the minister’s proposal and not the committee’s. (f) and (j) are in the Bill. (f) is the Uganda Hotel Owners Association and (j) is the Hotel and Catering Association of Uganda. The submission from the members is that you cannot have associations of this nature because they can change in legislation. Let the minister speak to it since it is a proposal from the minister.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, we concede to replace the National Council for Higher Education representative with a representative from the ministry because that is the mother ministry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports which is already in the Bill?

MS KABAHENDA: Yes. So we can return it. On (l) the two other persons of integrity appointed from the public are the ones from which there will be a vice-chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about the number? Isn’t it too big? Hon. Minister, please guide us on this matter.

MS AKIROR: I thank you. We agree that we can delete Uganda Hotel Owners Association and the Hotel and Catering Association of Uganda so that it reduces on the number.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And what of the two from the public as is being proposed by the committee?

MS AKIROR: I think we can consider the two from the general public as not part of the board.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, you have a representative from the ministry responsible for tourism and another from the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Do we need the two, because the Uganda Wildlife Authority is under the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities?

MS AKIROR: Mr Chairman, we also concede that the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be deleted.

MRS BBUMBA: I wish to propose that the representative of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development be deleted because the ministry provides finance for everybody and if they are to be on every board, this will means that there will be no people in the ministry to do ministry work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what is now left? Will the students and workers remain? Please for the record, what is the proposed composition?

MS AKIROR: We need someone from the finance ministry so that we can be guided in budgeting – (Interjection)- so if we do not need them then we are going to remain with five members on this board. If the two from the public remain then we shall be left with an odd number and we do concede that we have seven members.

MR RUKUTANA: I still have a problem with representation by the students’ guild because this body is not provided for anywhere. Where is it? If you just put a body which is not established and provided for, there may be a problem. I am not saying that they should not be on the board but that body should be established somewhere in the law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Attorney-General has a point. The students’ guild -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member from Budadiri, I have not yet seen you. Can we have the member from Kanungu?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The thought we had was that after giving legal status to this institution, automatically it will have a guild body. We therefore saw it fair to have one of the students or the guild president sitting on the board such that in case there is any problem or challenge within the students, such can easily be raised and solved before it becomes a problem like we have in other institutions.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think that we always make a mistake to put “guild” because you can find any student to represent others and that is why I concur with the Deputy Attorney-General that we should put “a representative of the students” and remove the word “guild.” There will be students in the institute and the student can either be from the guild or -(Interruption)
 
MR KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The clarification I am seeking is that when the students elect their leaders, they have seen that these particular students are the ones who can easily help them in solving their problems. If we say that we can get any representative, how shall we get that representative without involving the students? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I said earlier that if this board is the equivalent of a university council – Makerere University has two students on the council from the guild and I did serve one time. Representation by students is there by law. Please, let us not reinvent the wheel here.

Can we now decide on the composition of the board? Can the chairperson state the final list for us and we take a decision?

MS KABAHENDA: The list is chairperson, the representative of the tourism private sector –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you say the vice-chairperson as well?

MS KABAHENDA: If (l) is remaining, we thought that (l) would provide for the vice-chairperson from the two persons that the minister would appoint. [HON. MEMBER: “You need to state it.”] We stated it in the amendments on page 4. 

Our amendment No. 7 was that the members of the board appointed under paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of subsection 8. That the minister shall appoint the chairperson, vice-chairperson or member – it was proposal No. 6 actually that the minister shall designate one of the members appointed under subsection (2) other than the principle representative of the student guild or staff as the vice-chairperson of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the composition now so that we can take a decision. 

MS KABAHENDA: The third one remains as the representative of the ministry responsible for tourism, a representative from the ministry of education, a representative from the Uganda Tourism Board, a representative of the students’ guild, a representative of staff of the institute and two other persons of integrity appointed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question to that.

MR KAKOOZA: The composition - the number of the people that she has read is totalling to eight. If they are nine, it is okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they nine? I put the question then.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, the number is nine alright but I have a view on (2); that the board shall be appointed by the minister and shall consist of: (a) Chairperson, then it goes ahead. I was thinking that there must be a provision for the vice-chairperson. Then the proposal in (6), we are talking of a structure and down there, we are saying who can fit in as a vice-chairperson. Why? There must be a recommendation here spelling out that he is the vice-chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I also thought.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I think none of these representatives can operate as a vice-chairperson because they can be withdrawn anytime and bring another person. I think (a) should clearly spell out that the institute shall consist of a chairperson and a vice- chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On this issue of expertise in hotel and tourism management, I had raised an amendment that we add “and education.” The justification is that this institute is an education institute. Somebody may come with expertise in education -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had already spoken to that let us just put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On the issue of five years, we were saying it should be maintained at three years and that is how the boards are run. You cannot have a board for five years; you would be making it seem like a term of an MP. It does not make sense; boards are normally three years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what is in the Bill; so, we will revert to the position in the Bill. I put the question to that.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, under 6(3) the chairperson and other elected members of the board other than the principal, shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for another one term.

However, we have seen that among the members here, there are those, whose term of office is less than three years, for instance the representative of the students’ guild. Unless they are going to appoint those in first year but if they appoint those in their second year, they will not be able to serve the term of three years and they will not even be available for re-election. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The representation is an institutional representation not personal representation; so that does not arise. I now put the question that clause 6, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to. 

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes a new clause 7, to provide as follows: Vacation of office by chairperson, vice-chairperson or member of the board.

    i) The chairperson or vice-chairperson of the board may resign from office by giving three months’ notice in writing addressed to the minister.
    ii) A member of the board may resign from his or her office by giving a three months’ notice in writing addressed to the secretary of the board.
    iii) Where a person appointed or elected member of the board ceases to be member other than by effluxion of time, the appointing or electing authority shall appoint or elect another person in that person’s place. 
    iv) A person appointed or elected under subsection 3 shall hold office for the remaining period of the person in whose place that person is appointed.

The justification is to provide for vacation of office by the chairperson and other members of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about where an institution withdraws a member from the board.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is the one I was raising. An institution can decide to withdraw somebody. The minister is the one that appoints; therefore, anybody resigning must write to the minister or any of the bodies represented can write to the minister withdrawing that person.
The amendment we want is that any member of the board may vacate office by resigning, by withdrawal from the body they represent or by death. –(Interjection)- The issue of unsound mind, if you see anybody with an unsound mind, then just sack them. That proposal will cater for the period. 

On the three months’ notice, these are not fulltime employees. Three months’ notice is usually given such that when somebody is not around, no work will be done. Therefore, you must be there as we look for replacement. These boards sit quarterly and you are only paid when you sit; somebody can resign anytime they want. We should allow people to resign so that things can move. Suppose I do not agree with the chairperson, I can decide to leave. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, the hotel Bill we considered was to give the body that proposed the representative on the board time to prepare to replace and also for the minister to have time to even consider the reason why the member is resigning. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have heard the arguments, what do you say? The person can decided to say, no, I am leaving and he leaves. Why would you impose a three months’ notice? If he does not comply with the three months, what happens? Does he pay the board or something in lieu of notice? Hon. Deputy Attorney-General in waiting, please help the House on this matter. 

MR RUKUTANA: I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Circumstances may be that I want to leave immediately; I shouldn’t be conscripted to remain in an institution that I do not believe in anymore. Giving notice should not be provided for and consistently with other laws, we normally say, somebody ceases to be a member when he resigns so that you resign and go.

MS KABAHENDA: What if the member of the board has issues to settle and he just wants to run away from them before he settles them? Wouldn’t we allow the three months for the institution to make sure that the person leaving does so without an issue with the institution?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We should differentiate between the civil servants and board members. They are not in the same category. For these people who sit either quarterly or yearly, it should be different. If I decide to leave today, I should be free because even if someone said immediately, it could be two or three days. It cannot be there and then when he tenders his resignation. The most important thing is we must differentiate the civil servants from the board members.

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Chairperson. I think giving notice is worthy in the situation that two or three members of the board can decide to leave at ago. That will really disrupt the business of the board. It is unrealistic. I feel if somebody is leaving, then there should be due notice and then the board decides. It also gives opportunity to the appointing authority or body to get another person to replace such a person. If somebody just leaves within two or three days, then business will be disrupted. There is need to give due notice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would you do to me if I said I am resigning and I leave today? What is the notice for? I have quit and left, carried my bags and gone. What are the three months for?

MR LOKII: Mr Chairperson,  it is good to look at this from the kind of functions that the members of the board have to carry out. My understanding is that the provision of three months is to provide one, for the person who intends to leave to leave in an appropriate manner and to also give chance to the organisation to begin to prepare on how to take care of the space that will be created. 

Now that is different from a circumstance that arises that is not planned. What is this that would cause the chairman together with the vice-chairperson or whoever to suddenly say, I am leaving tomorrow? I think those are exceptional circumstances. In my view, the three months is too long but I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we provide the timeframe of one month. If for example you are chairing a select committee and you have not concluded your work, I think you need time to be able to say that within this period, I will be leaving so that other people begin to prepare on how to take care of that because it is about the management of the institution and not the individual who wants to leave.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, where periods are provided for notice, there are sanctions. If I want to leave without notice of three months, I pay money in lieu of that notice so that I do not have to give the notice. Therefore, it cannot be redundant that I must be there for three months. That will be conscription.

MR RUKUNTANA: Mr Chairman, the highest office in this land is the office of the President. Under Article 105 (4) the President may, by writing signed by him or her and addressed to the Chief Justice, resign from office as President -(Interjection)– there is no notice and once the Chief Justice receives the resignation of the President, it is done. So what other things do you expect from just a board member of an institution?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, we concede on removing the three months but notice in writing should remain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Notice in writing is fine.

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, I would like to bring an amendment on the circumstances that people may leave the institution. For example if somebody’s behaviour is undoing to the institution, I think the board also should have a reserve of writing to the institution. Maybe when you become a Member of Parliament - we should put some of these conditions to the amendment of vacating by the board so that the board can have leeway to tell you that you have ended your stay on the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, is that clear members?

MS ASAMO: For example in some boards, if you miss meetings so many times as a member, then it is questionable for the chairman to write to you and say, your period of being in this board – maybe you are not attending meetings and so forth.  You may become a Member of Parliament, maybe you have been convicted and you cannot continue being a board member. That is to the level of the chairperson of the board to make a decision. Thank you.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi proposed some statements when he said if a member is withdrawn by the proposing body, then that member will no longer be a member of the board. I wish he could read out what he proposed so that we consider it because I thought it was taking care of the members concerned.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and the chairperson of the committee. I know why some members are raising that. The representative of PWD Eastern also wants to bring in something like integrity, honesty and hardworking. I think we can commit them that a board member shall be a person of high moral integrity, hardworking -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you deal with the specific matter?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: A board member may resign or be withdrawn by the body he or she is representing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? Is there any contestations?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, the drafting of clause 7 tends to limit us and we are struggling to bring other circumstances other than these that may lead you into not being a member of the board or chairperson. I think the drafting should have been:  “Vacation of office by chairperson or vice-chairperson or member or the board”- and then we continue and say, “the chairperson or vice-chairperson or a member of the board, shall vacate office…” 

We then go ahead and provide all circumstances that can lead where he or she wants to resign is withdrawn, goes mentally berserk and so forth; So that we provide for all those other circumstances. The issue here is actually drafting. Let us first of all say, when can the office of the chairperson or vice-chairperson or any member of the board fall vacant? If we can write that, then we can come to the circumstances. It reads:

 “A chairperson, vice-chairperson or member of the board shall cease to hold office or shall vacate office where;

    1) He or she resigns from office by giving notice.
    2) He or she becomes of unsound mind.
    3) The minister within his powers may decide to disappoint the member. It should be provided for systematically.
    4) A person dies.” 

In other words, the vacation of office is mandatory, the moment the following things have happened: 

    1) Death has occurred. 
    2) Mental unsoundness has come in. 
    3) Resignation has come in.
    4) Termination of the job by the appointing authority.
    5) Retirement or withdrawal as member of the body for the reason of which he or she was on the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, “mental unsoundness” sounds also “unsound”. (Laughter) Probably, these days we have shifted from saying “mental unsoundness” to “mental incapacity”. This is because not everybody who is “mentally unsound” could be a medical mental problem within a short time. When we say “mental unsoundness” it sounds more unsound than it is suggested.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that regard, would you like to propose the “sound” one? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I know that this is not the first time a board is being established by this Parliament. We should be seen to be consistent. This is not any peculiar board than other boards. We should be consistent with the Constitution. Mr Chairman, you are the custodian of this Constitution and rules in this House. You have always guided us well to be consistent.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, if we say, “The chairperson, vice-chairperson and member of the board shall vacate office where;

(1) He or she…” We are going to eliminate -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you first proceed without beginning to import other words in your amendment?

MR ANYWARACH: “Where; (1) He or she resigns from office.” There, we are catering for the chairperson, vice-chairperson and any other member. This means sub-clauses (1) and (2) here will be redundant. This is because sub-clauses (1) and (2) are supposedly about resigning. Sub-clause (1) is talking about chairperson and vice-chairperson. Sub-clause (2) is talking about a member. However, the whole act here is “resigning”. 

Therefore, it will be catered for in (1) if we reduce clause 7(1) and say, “where he or she resigns”. I do not think we should even give the question of notice – where he or she resigns in writing.

Sub-clause (2); we go to where a person appointed or elected member of the board ceases to be a member other than by effluxion of time, the appointing or electing authority – whatever they intended to say here. 

7(3) We could put, “Where a person is disappointed by a minister.” That is where we have to give a provision of the period of time where the minister will give the disappointment in writing. Let us give a period of time of three months. That gives opportunity for the member of the board to also try and explain himself to the minister on why he is being withdrawn. 

7(4) When a person dies. That means when the chairperson, vice-chairperson and the member dies – they will cease to hold office.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The final, proposal honourable members: 
The heading: “Vacation of office by chairperson, vice-chairperson or member of the board.”

“The chairperson, vice-chairperson or member of the board shall cease to hold office upon:
    a) Resignation in writing.
    b) Withdrawal.
    c) Dismissal by the minster.
    d) Death.

Is that okay? We would like to find a solution to this without the chairperson being the one to debate this matter.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We would like to take the proposal by hon. Anywarach, like you have just read it. That therefore makes sub-clauses (1) and (2) redundant. As a result, we can withdraw sub-clauses (1) and (2) and remain with sub-clauses (3) and (4) to continue from the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to those amendments now?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause 7, as proposed, do stand part of the Bill.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, on clause 7 – Functions of the board – the committee proposes to renumber clause 7 in the Bill as clause 8 and amend it as follows:

    1) In paragraph (h) by substituting the words “collaborate with” for “enter into any association” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph. This is to ensure clarity.
    2) In paragraph (i) by deleting the phrase “in consultation with the academic board and the staff welfare committee” appearing at the end of the paragraph. This is because the phrase is redundant.
    3) Insert a new paragraph (k) to provide as, “to recruit, remunerate and discipline the staff of the institute”. This is to empower the board to recruit, remunerate and discipline the staff of the institute.
    4) We propose to renumber the subsequent clause accordingly to ensure consistency.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the amendments. I propose the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am looking at the justification that the committee is giving in sub-clause (3) and I am interested in remuneration of staff of the institute.
We have just looked at the functions of the board. They are quite enormous. I was just wondering whether it is only the staff of the institute that we are remunerating and not the board members. Are we remunerating the board members or are we only looking at the staff of the institute? (Mr Nandala- Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you rising on this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I rise on what the chairperson raised. The chairperson raised many issues on remuneration. Clause 7(g) says, “To provide for the welfare of the staff and students of the institute.” Now, welfare includes remuneration. The clarification I am seeking from the chairperson is, why should we provide specifically again for remuneration of staff when we have to take care of the welfare of the staff and students?

MRS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, we concede to retain (g) instead of the proposed (k).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so there is no amendment proposed in (k)?

MRS NAUWAT: Mr Chairman, the chairperson has not answered me. I would like to know whether we are remunerating the board members. If so, then we shall need to have a clause to cater for that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that will not be a function of the board. We are dealing with the functions of the board.

MS NAUWAT: Mr Chairperson, I think I have brought it in a wrong place; perhaps later after having looked at their functions - then we need to do something for them, having performed all those duties.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am sure it is somewhere.

MR NANDALI-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in order to assist my colleague, if she goes into the schedules, they will tell clearly the functions, the meetings, how they are prescribed and how they are paid. Let her look at the schedules. 

However, what I would like to raise, Mr Chairman, is that as it stands in clause 7, it really takes care of much of the items. My problem is to receive on behalf of the institute, gifts, donations, grants and other moneys. Donations and grants are okay but what are these gifts? What did you foresee? I would understand donations but what are these gifts we are foreseeing? If we start to do this - under the IGG law, the Leadership Code, it is very clear what gifts and donations are and how much you can get.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is for natural persons and not for companies and boards.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to ask the minister the difference between gifts and donations in this law? The job of this institution is to provide education to part time and full time students. Souvenirs cannot be brought here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Precisely, that is what it is.

MRS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Nandala-Mafabi is, this institution caters for issues to do with tourism and hotel management. If for instance a tourist, maybe after looking at the guerrillas and appreciating sights, decides to see where we train our students and leaves about $400 and says, buy anything -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will be a donation.

MS KARUNGI: Okay, thank you.

MR OBOTH: I thought it is standard drafting to have donations, gifts and it is according to the person who is giving. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you might donate your blue creamy neck tie to me or you can gift it. The difference between the two is not necessarily in the tie but can be brought into the context of what is being done. A donation - we are shifting actually from a donation. 

Suppose it is a souvenir; it cannot be a donation. Assuming the board or chairperson of the board travelled somewhere and is given a mug for the school as a souvenir, which will be in some office; it may not necessarily be a donation. That is a gift. For us to spend a lot of time debating the difference between donations and gifts would be defeating the very purpose of this kind of legislation. 
I hope hon. Nandala-Mafabi will concede in this one and find no problem because he can receive gifts as well. The only obligation he has is to declare the gifts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the reason as to why I raised this is because we have just passed the Public Finance Management Act. I am raising those issues because there are also grants and other moneys.

The only person who can receive grants now is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, you can receive it on their behalf. Therefore, if you are saying to receive it on behalf of the institute, gifts, donations, grants and other moneys are only received in Uganda by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR OBOTH: How about if the grant is from the Government of Uganda to the institute? Will the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development still be the recipient? The grants here are not necessarily from outside the country and other people; they could be from the government to the institute. How about that, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if my brother had read about the financing of the institute - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can only give a grant to an institute when we have appropriated here. In appropriation, it is clearly stated here in the same law: the sources of revenue for this organisation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what are these gifts, grants and donations?

MS AKIROR: Mr Chairperson, in the tourism industry, gifts are part and partial of the day. Since hon. Nandala-Mafabi said it is now only the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that receive grants - but we had wanted to delete these other monies because we did not understand them ourselves.

MR OBOTH: I will be comfortable to get clarification from the Attorney-General. Hon. Minister, in that ministry, where do you -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let us leave it at this.

MR OBOTH: The Deputy Attorney-General should help us whether this is not necessary that other moneys - you cannot in legislation anticipate what will come. When it is not a donation or a grant, it could be an award the institute received. How about a bequest -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A cash award.

MR OBOTH: Somebody dies and says I am bequeathing - a former student of that place donates or bequeaths in a will. If you are limiting - if the Deputy Attorney-General said that, I would say aye at the end.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the words “gifts, donations or grants” would cover whatever money or items of any description.

THE DEPUTY CAHIRPERSON: Are you sure about that?
Would it be very disastrous to have it there?

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to supplement hon. Oboth. The institute will attract many people who will come to it. For example Bill Gates or anyone can decide to give computers. Is that not a grant?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is a donation.

MR KAKOOZA: Or maybe a donation or something but it does not necessarily mean a grant or only money here. No, it can mean other kind of things you can give to the institution. This is tourism -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about a cash award for excellence in something? Is it a donation, gift or?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, now that the Deputy Attorney-General has advised us, though I am taking that advice with a lot of hesitation because I believe it is very limiting, the other monies I have given  for examples - I would like the Attorney-General again to further advise on what would be the danger of leaving the provision? This is your law. We should not be bothering much. This is our law but more so, Government legislation. Tell us the danger that this provision would cause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any danger? 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, there is no danger. The only thing is that it would be superfluous. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESRON: Honourable members, I will put the question. Let us move members.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to maintain, “The function to recruit.” I would like to seek your guidance on where I can place it. When I decided to withdraw (k), I realised “to recruit” would remain as the function and it does not seem to be catered for anywhere in the other function. May I be guided? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about discipline? 

MS KABAHENDA: I do not know whether it takes care of recruitment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It does not. Please propose it.

MS KABAHENDA: I wanted to propose in (i) - to make bylaws governing the recruitment, conduct and discipline of staff but then it would not cater for the students because recruiting of students is - but I would like to propose in (i) “to make bylaws governing the recruitment, the conduct and the discipline of staff.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: (j) says, “To approve all job establishments for the institute.” I think if you are looking for the recruitment, it should be to approve all job establishments and recruitments for the institute. The justification is that after establishing the job structure, they must fill them. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is correct. Is that okay members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 9, “The establishment of the Academic Board.” The committee proposes to renumber the clause as, “10” and to amend it by deleting “paragraph c”. The justification is the academic board reports to the board of directors; the mother board that is. Therefore, there is no need for a representative of the board of directors. 

For proposal (ii), the amendment is by renumbering paragraph f-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Renumbering is normally done by the people who do the editing. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, in the Bill, we have 2 (f) and 2 (g) on page 9 of the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those will be corrected by the drafters. I put the question to that amendment -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the amendment of the Chairperson -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then let me put the question. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is an institute. I would like us to delete (g), “a representative of the universities.” Why do you go to other universities when you are already here? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one is it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is clause 9(g). The rest are fine but how do you go to Makerere University and say, come and be part of our academic board? They have their own boards there. I am proposing that we delete a representative of universities. 

MS AKIROR: Mr Chairman, we agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question for the deletion of paragraph (g) in clause 9.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 9 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10
MS KABAHENDA: In clause 10, “Functions of the Academic Board.” The committee proposes to amend clause 10 in paragraph (f) by inserting the word “of” between the words “appointment” and “examiners” on line 1. The justification is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

             Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MS KABAHENDA: “Committees of the Academic Board.” The committee proposes to amend clause 11 by substituting for the word, “see” on line 2 with the word, “deem.” The justification is for clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, mere replacement of the word, “see” with “deem” right?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, please make the point; propose. 

MR OBOTH: I think it may make more sense if we said, “The Academic Board may propose such number of committees as may deem fit.”  If we just say, “As it may deem fit” whom are we addressing? The little English that I learnt from primary school together with hon. Ekanya, he even wants to quarrel - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, it is, “as it may deem fit”

MR OBOTH: If we insert more - “as it may deem fit.” How about if it was, “as it may be deemed-“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is the board here. 

MR OBOTH: I have a problem with that. We may have to- probably, my little English is not helping.

MR EKANYA: Thank you hon. Oboth. Mr Chairman, I think this relates to UPE English. I would like to convince hon. Oboth that besides using the word “deem” we could say, “As may be appropriate for the better functioning of the Academic Board.” This word “see” does not totally fit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to this clause? “As may seem” or “as may deem fit” - it is the board deeming. I now put the question that clause 11 –

MR LOKII: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to take you back. I wonder how many committees are going to be there. My understanding is that the board of directors would have its sub-committee among which will be the academic board. However, in this case we are introducing the academic board as another body equivalent to the managing board. Yes, there is the board of directors and we are creating sub-committees or providing for it to create sub-committees. We are giving it power, which should be by the board of directors. I need to be helped on that.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, the academic board is already interpreted in the interpretation clause, and it is a sub-board.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you read it, it says, “such number of committees.” I do not think we should remove the words “such number”. We can say, “such number in each committee”. What we have to say is that the academic board may propose sub-committees as it may deem fit. The words “may deem fit” are okay. However, you cannot put “such number”. It must be working committees or sub-committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to propose that we say, “The academic board may propose working committees as it may deem fit for the better functioning of the academic board.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Even without working -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “May propose sub-committees as it may deem fit.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They propose committees. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, I would want to concede on leaving the word “deem” without tampering with it. The honourable member from Jie, this is a sub-committee, a sub-board, an academic board. We are giving it powers to create and establish other -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Academic committees.

MR OBOTH: Not necessarily. We are giving it power to create such number of committees, and the same board – the superior board - may not have as much. I thought this should be left to the details. This is more administrative that it would render this whole clause idle here. If we are going to give this academic board these powers, they can have a tea committee to serve those who sit in the committees. They can have as many committees, including- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is qualified, for the better functioning of the academic board. It is not any academic board sub-committee. It is that which they deem to be fit for the proper functioning of the board.

MR EKANYA: You and I have the brain to pick very fast. If you look at Part II - Meetings of the academic board - it has the issue of numbers. We should therefore not be worried on the issue of numbers, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi was raising, among others. Numbers are kind of restricted as regards quorum. That can help you now to refine your statement.

MR OBOTH: It can pass with a few of us losing; let us put it to vote. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not looking for dimensions at this stage. We want to take a vote on this issue. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I have had problems with hon. Oboth sometimes when we are discussing serious legal matters. He can say, “You know, this is for paralegals; you are still a student of law and so on”. However, here the student knowledge is going to help. Part III is, “Establishment of the academic board and committees” and clause 9 is on the establishment of the academic board. When you go to clause 10, it gives the functions of the academic board.

You are seeing questions of admissions, the admission standards. For any of those functions you see, the board may deem fit that we need a committee for this particular matter. If they need standards for admission, they may say that so and so is going to head this committee - maybe the dean of students or the dean in charge of careers can head the committee. Therefore, it is not going to be a number of committees in vain; it will be in relation to the functions. 

Imagine you cannot bring the whole board on one matter. It is necessary to integrate and say, on this matter we have such a committee and it is going to be headed by so and so and we proceed. In summary -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with him. Here, the essence is not the numbers but functionality. We can achieve that by removing the words “such a number” and we say, “The board will propose such committees as it may deem fit.” That caters for both numbers and functionality. The emphasis should not be on numbers.

MR OBOTH: I know that just immediately after that, we are going to clause 12, which says that the institute may have such other committees as the board may determine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually, in my opinion, 12 should be deleted.

MR OBOTH: That was the bias I have, and to inform my colleague from Padyere, I do not judge people by the knowledge they have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please, can we take a decision on clause 11 in the way it has been drafted? I now put the question that clause 11, as amended, become part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12           

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to replace clause 12 in order to provide for other committees of the board as follows - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that will be the wrong housing for that because other committees of the board should have come under clause 7 or clause 6. This is the academic board.

MS KABAHENDA: These are committees of the academic board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not what is anticipated in 12 - “The institute may have such committees as the board may determine.” This not the academic board and that is where the problem is. You are bringing in the issue of the bigger board under the academic board; it does not work very well.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, you are guiding so well. After reading clauses 12 and 11, I was thinking about this other inferior board - The inferior board being given powers to create sub-committees. Such committees should not just serve and this is where clause 12 comes in. I wonder, are these the committees under the academic board, which we have just created in 11? We are also giving it under the board and will the board here be the academic board? This was the fear I had, but I am glad that the chairperson is leading and I am following.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I am sorry I disagree with your position and his. I would like to enter in the mind of the drafter, which right now is you and I -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, let us not deal with – No, the issue is simple; this particular part relates to the academic board. There are issues we can solve without arguing about them. This particular Part III relates to the academic board. Clause 12, which is under this part, is talking about the bigger board. So it is a wrong housing for it. You either delete it or relocate it. Let us not debate that. It is straightforward. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, before I propose, may I know whether if after the academic board, we were proposing other smaller boards, we would not talk about the disciplinary committee, the budget committees and whether this proposal we are making is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those will have to come under the bigger board, which is clause 7. That is where it should have been.

MS KABAHENDA: Can we therefore propose to relocate 12?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you delete 12 and take it somewhere else?

MS KABAHENDA: Okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that we delete clause 12 and take it under functions and we create clause 8 immediately after clause 7 to provide for the board committees.  The justification is that the big board will also function better if it has committees which can assist in doing its work.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, looking at clause 7(d) - the functions of the board - it reads, “The functions of the board shall be- (d) to establish departments, committees and courses of study.” If this powerful board has this power, do we need again to have an independent standalone clause? Which committee are we creating again? Mr Chairman, you were leading -

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I do agree with you that clause 12 be deleted. If you go to the schedule, I think we are doing the work which the minister can handle. When you look at the schedule, it provides for the meeting of the board and related matters. Paragraph 7 says that the board may regulate its own procedure, because there are procedural issues. You know, when you are discussing a business, you discover that there is need for conclusion and detailed research.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can somebody formally propose for the deletion of this clause?

MR EKANYA: I wish to propose that clause 12 be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the deletion of clause 12 from the Bill. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, deleted.

Clause 13

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, clause 13 is about the office of the principal. The committee proposes to amend clause 13 by inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The principal shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity, with professional knowledge and experience in hotel, tourism and hospitality education.” The justification is: to provide for the qualifications of the person suitable for appointment as principal.

We propose to amend sub clause (2) by deleting the phrase, “for only one consecutive term” appearing on line 2. The justification is: to enable the principal, being a technical person, to be appointed to serve for more than two terms.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had issues with “hospitality”. Would you like to be consistent in your proposals because you are importing words that are not familiar in the Bill?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I oblige to the guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To what extent?

MS KABAHENDA: We shall remove the word “hospitality”. The proposal reads, “The principal shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity, with professional knowledge and experience in hotel and tourism education.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. That is the proposal. Can we agree on this proposal or would you like to change it? Is this the new proposal or this very one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is good to talk about tourism and hotel management. In education management, a principal is somebody who is in charge of at a training institution. Those who have knowledge in education are the best. In fact, you cannot be the headmaster or principal of an NTC without being educated. Even in Makerere, you need to have done education to become a vice chancellor. Therefore, I would like to propose that we say “hotel, tourism and education management”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Experience in hotel, tourism and education”. They took out hospitality. Hospitality is a term that is not being used in the Bill. Can I put the question to this now?

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to be educated on why we are removing “hospitality”. When we talk about tourism, it goes hand in hand with hospitality - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, when you were not here, that matter was debated and we resolved to be consistent in the use of words here. This is about hotel and tourism training; we wanted to be consistent with the general theme in the Bill. We have deleted “hospitality” and we are trying to replace tourism and other things. Please, let us be consistent. You can keep the alternative in mind; you can read it with hospitality in mind, but we do not have to put it in the Bill.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to tell the chairperson of the committee that the five-year term is very important.  Japan developed because the professionals left the professional sector and went to business to practice what they taught. Therefore, we need to give these people a five-year term of two terms so that they can also go and establish private tourism and training institutes, so that we are able to see their action in practice and not theory. We need to have term limits of two years.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to give another experience, Mr Chairman. It does not mean that when you are a principal, you cannot come back and teach. I think this is a mistake. I recall during our time, Prof. Mugambe, who was our mathematics teacher, had to serve as the acting vice chancellor. When his term ended, he came back to teach. He remained in the university until his retirement at a later age because he liked mathematicians.

Therefore, we must fix a term. When you finish your term, it does not mean you cannot come back to the institute and teach -(Interjection)- yes, even the university deans. A dean has a four-year term. After serving the four-year term, you can come back as a normal lecturer to your respective department. We must fix the term limits.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson of the committee, I beg that you concede to two terms of five years. Such people can even be better Members of Parliament, they can be very good ambassadors abroad and they can invest in the private sector to support this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is wrong with the way it is worded?

MR EKANYA: She has amended to remove term limits. Mr Chairman, to emulate what the Tanzanian Member of Parliament did, I think we are very young in this industry and it likely we are going to have non-citizens first take the jobs while we build our capacity. You know, it is very dangerous to have no term limits.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I do not see the reason why we may not leave that to the discretion of the people who will be considering the principal. There may be a principal who serves so well that we cannot limit him to only two terms. It could be considered and -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but we adopted the same principle for the board; let us just be consistent. We have already adopted that principle of limitation of issues. This one is five years.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem with five years because it is too long. If a principal is a poor performer, the institution may go down. There is always a performance appraisal -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But he can be fired.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: But you are giving him a term of five years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He can be fired after a month.

MR PETER LOKII: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give some information. These structures are being put up to take care of loss of institutional memory. There should be somebody that causes continuity when the board’s term comes to an end. 

In terms of ensuring that there is information flow from one group of management, in terms of the board, to a new board, you need a principal who will have two or even more terms than the timeframe of the board. This will ensure better management and even for consistency.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue is now on whether they should have only two terms or more. That is the issue.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, we may give the principal two terms and we get a very stubborn and unbecoming principal who is going to claim the two terms, and yet we could have left it at the discretion of those who are recruiting to either re-appoint or not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The re-appointment issue is okay. The question is: should it be only for two terms or more?

MS KABAHENDA: We wanted to leave it open, Mr Chairman. So, it should say, “The principal shall hold office for five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment.” 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have been setting up boards and defining the terms of chief executives of many other bodies. Of late, we have adopted the principle of having the initial term and one further term.

If, as the chairperson of the committee says, the particular principal who has been appointed is stubborn or is not performing, the Deputy Chairperson has already guided on that; he said the board has got powers to fire a non-performing chief executive.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: If I am an executive and I have a contract of five years, how do you fire me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The contract itself will have conditions for firing you - (Laughter)- unless it is very badly drafted.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I believe if the Members are concerned about the issue of ability to fire, we should make sure that under the powers of the board, we indicate that the board can fire the principal if they are not satisfied with his performance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is there. Honourable members, the issue is whether you should serve for a maximum of two terms or you can continue for more.

The amendment proposed by the committee is that it should be open. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee that the terms should be open.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 13

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no amendment to clause 13. I put the question that clause 13 stands part of Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is education taken care of?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The amendment where we talked about the principal. You never put the question to that, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, there was an amendment. Can I put the question on this proposal for sub clause (2) by the committee and the amendment proposed on – I thought we voted on this. We voted on this already. Education is there; we only removed the word “hospitality”.

I now put the question that clause 13 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 14, office of the deputy principal: The committee proposes to amend clause 14 by redrafting sub clause (1) to provide as follows: “(1) There shall be a deputy principal who- 
(a) shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board, on terms and conditions that may be specified in the instrument of the appointment.”

The justification is: To provide for the appointment of the deputy principal by the Minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you read the provision on the office of the deputy principal in its current state, you are creating two power centres. You shall have a deputy principal and they are even giving the roles down here. 

First, before we go there, we should say, “There shall be a deputy principal who will deputise the principal”. This is to avoid power centres and problems. After that, we can enumerate how he or she is appointed.

However, this deputy principal must also be limited. Like with the IGG, the deputies have term limits. This can apply to the deputy, unless he or she moves up to become the principal. However, if he remains a deputy and after two terms he cannot be appointed a principal, he should leave the office.

Mr Chairman, if the committee could agree with my proposal, we could say, “There shall be a deputy principal who will deputise the principal and the term of office shall be as for the principal.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It would be okay in the second part if you propose an amendment to sub clause (3) and say, “Section 13 (2) and (5) shall apply to the deputy principal.” That would take care of that.

Can I put a question to the first part of the amendment that he or she should deputise? It should be clearly stated that, “The deputy shall deputise the principal”. After that, we come to this particular amendment of sub clause (3) - Section 13 (2) and (5).  I put the question to these amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.


Clause 16

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, clause 16 is on other staff. The committee proposes to amend clause 16 by deleting the phrase “officers and” appearing on line one. The justification is that the phrase is redundant. 

Two, the committee proposes to amend clause 16 by deleting the phrase “officers and other” appearing on line two. The justification is that those words are redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, officers and employees have to exist. The principal is an officer. There will be a rank of people who are officers and then there are employees who will be there for a long time depending on the terms. In all organisations, there are officers and employees; outside, they may be called employees but internally, they are officers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, is there anything fundamentally wrong with this drafting in the Bill?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, as a committee we wondered which other officers would be at this institution of learning other than the employees, who are staff, and the Board. Which officers would we now be looking at?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I agree with the chairperson of the committee. Internally, within the organisation, they are free to designate who is an officer and who is simply an employee. However, we do not have to place it in the law. We can just say, “the board will appoint employees.” That is it. Some of those are internal administrative issues, like some of you have already commented. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, clause 17 is on staff responsible to the board. The committee proposes to delete sub clause (2). The justification is that it shall be taken care of in the transitional provision.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I wonder whether we want even drivers and cleaners to be appointed by the board. Clause 17 says, “All members of staff, whether administrative, academic or other category of employees, shall be- (a) responsible to the Board...” 

I would like to seek clarification; don’t you think there is need to separate so that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one? Is it sub clause (2)? The proposal is to delete sub clause (2) because it is a transitional provision, which should be substantially taken care of in the transitional part of the Bill. I put the question to the deletion of sub clause (2).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairperson, clause 18 is on incapacity of a member of staff. The committee proposes to delete the entire clause. The justification is that the clause is redundant as sub clause (1) is on issues catered for under the Public Service Standing Orders and may be properly provided for in the staff regulations. Also, sub clause (2) is already addressed in clause 14(2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion from the committee is to delete clause 18. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have live examples. I wish you brought the Public Service Standing Orders. They require one to give a period of one year. They even require a sick person to report and if that person reports, they can sit in office; that position does not become vacant - and it creates a crisis.

My sister was sick for two years; she is a nurse but she could not be replaced. Even here in Parliament, we have a similar situation. So, we need to make a provision for when somebody cannot perform, because you can only bring somebody on board if there is a vacancy. The Public Service Standing Orders have a loophole. Therefore, this provision here is very good because we need people who can work.

Right now, I do not want to mention Parliament here, but there are deputies who are working because their bosses are unable, but the Public Service Standing Orders stipulate that they are still in those positions. A vacancy is only created if the Medical Board comes in or if somebody has been declared dead. I do not know what Public Service Standing Orders you are quoting; you may need to refresh your mind.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the committee is right. This can be addressed. That is why there will always be a boss and a deputy. When somebody becomes incapacitated, under normal circumstances that person should be compensated and he or she leaves the organisation, because it means you cannot perform the functions that you are meant to do.

Sometimes, organisations tend to keep people for just humanitarian grounds but under normal circumstances- If you are a driver, for example, and your hands get cut off, are they supposed to retain you because you are a driver and yet you are incapacitated? You are supposed to be laid off. 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Nandala, this is just information. That is exactly what clause 18 is saying: “Where a member of staff is incapacitated, whether through absence from station, illness or other reason, the Board may appoint a suitable person to perform the duties of the incapacitated member of the staff during that incapacity.” 

That is what the law says and the chairperson is requesting for its deletion. I am saying this needs to stay because the current provision we have is that you cannot bring another person on the payroll because this position has not fallen vacant. (Interjections) This provision is very good.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, if the hon. Ekanya is citing irregularities or gaps in the Public Service Standing Orders, we cannot amend them in this law. That is why we would like to stick to the existing law, unless a review of that particular law comes.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, apart from the Public Service Standing Orders, there is the Employment Act, which is very elaborate on what happens when somebody is incapacitated. Therefore, the chairperson is correct that this clause is redundant because it is properly catered for.

MR KABAJO: Thank you. In addition to that, even the proposal of hon. Ekanya would not sort out the situation he proposed. Here, it is only stating that another person will act in the place of the incapacitated staff but the other would still be there. I think we should just delete this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have a crisis in the health centre in my constituency. Once somebody is still in office, you cannot even bring someone to act; the provision says that you ask the district or the ministry to delegate a staff. 

I know this because I have been the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government Accounts and we have looked at audit queries. It is only through this provision that the accounting officer can appoint somebody to work and pay them and there will be no query. (Interjections) Yes, this provision is not redundant but very important. 

Mr Chairman, you know that in legislation, if the standing orders are an old law, today we, the Members of Parliament, are saying there is need to move forward. This is a new thinking. The legislators are saying this is the way to go.

I do not want to mention a staff here in Parliament, but I have given you scenarios. People go for study leave, people fall sick and are in hospitals but you cannot recruit and pay others because the Auditor-General will raise a query because even the sick person still gets paid.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairman, I understand that the Public Service Act provides for this and, therefore, it is the standard provision for all employees of Government and its parastatals. Therefore, I think that it will not be necessary to have this clause 18 if the Public Service Act is in place already. 

It gives the procedures that are to be applied when somebody is incapacitated. Therefore, what meaning does it serve for us to again provide for this when the Act is already there? It makes this inconsistent with the existing law.

Secondly, I think the situations that are being cited are a weakness in administration. It is about the managers choosing to ignore the law and taking favour with those who either fall sick or are incapacitated. They do not act upon the provisions in the Public Service Act. 

Therefore, I agree with the chairperson that this should be deleted because it is redundant. There is a provision to take care of that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be deleted. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have spoken on this subject-

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am very passionate about this matter. We have had situations where women get maternity leave, they undergo a caesarean operation and the institution cannot bring another person because if you bring another person –

Members are talking about weak administrative measures or sympathy. It is not about sympathy because the law is clear; if you are to bring another person to replace a woman who went for maternity leave and developed complications and yet her name is still on the payroll, the Auditor-General will query. This is because according to the Public Service Standing Orders, you can only employ someone else if the other position has been declared vacant.

Therefore, this provision enables the institute, in that case of a woman who has gone on maternity leave and developed health complications, to continue getting pay but a new staff is brought in, who can work and the staff is paid and the institute operates normally.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairman, let me give information on this. Hon. Ekanya, the law is clear in the case of civil servants. If in a district, for example, somebody goes on sick leave, the law provides that this person will be on sick leave and shall be paid up to a period of six months. After six months, a decision shall be taken. This is what we are referring to when we are talking about the Public Service Act.

It also provides that if somebody without reason disappears from office past a certain period of time, that person shall be replaced. Those are the issues we are referring to. We do not have to again specify them in this particular provision, unless you want us to find another way of how to deal with the Public Service Act and that cannot be done now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I can see why hon. Ekanya is passionate about this. If you read towards the end, it states “...perform the duties of the incapacitated member of staff during that incapacity.” It means that during the time somebody is unable to perform his functions, there should be somebody to do that work. My colleague from Karamoja raised an issue that where somebody is on sick leave, after some time they say “We have paid you, go away but if you become better, you can be report back.” 

I think hon. Ekanya has a big point, Mr Chairman. I had not seen the last sentence. For the principal, the law is clear. Clause 18 (2) is okay because if the principal is incapacitated, the deputy is there and he has to deputise him. However, for a member of staff for whom it is not provided for in the law to have a deputy, it is different. 

In this case, supposing a driver loses either both his hands or one hand after an accident, what happens in that circumstance? Do they park the car? That is another story in retirement. I would propose that “absence from station, illness or other reason” can be deleted, but where there is incapability for a certain period, somebody must do work. That is what hon. Ekanya is on referring to. I want you to move an amendment that only refers to the period of incapability.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairman, I thought I was clear. The question of temporary incapacitation does not require an appointment. In the Public Service Act, it delegation of powers is provided for. I do not envisage a situation where you have a specific officer who does not have any other person below him to whom he can delegate authority to in his or her absence or even when he is present but has a lot of tasks. These are the administrative decisions that the board will take from time to time.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, people fall sick and they fear to lose their jobs. He is right to say that they are given six months, but when somebody knows that it is now five months and 25 days, he will struggle to come to office with even a wheelchair or a stick and sit there for two days, sign in the attendance register and then he goes back again for another five or eight months. Now, this person who has been delegated to deputise cannot deliver service and we have crises. (Interjections) Anyway, if that is what the Members want - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question for the deletion of clause 18 in the Bill. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, deleted.

Clause 19

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, paragraph (e) of clause 19 (1) mentions a training levy. Now the law has changed and all monies collected by any institution will be taken to the Consolidated Fund. Two, to open an account, you must have the authority of the Accountant-General. So, there is need to amend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, paragraph (e), “A training levy…” the whole thing can stay as it is but we add, “...managed under the Public Finance and Accountability Act.” That one should apply. Then section 2 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, wait, we have not got it. (Mr Rukutana rose_) No, let us get it properly, honourable minister. I need to also get it so that I can see how to proceed. Are you saying we continue from “…the minister responsible for finance” and then add that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right, I had not seen that one. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are on paragraph (e). 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are on paragraph (e). It should go up to 2008 and then we add. It should say, “…2008 and shall be managed as prescribed by the Public Finance and Accountability Act”. It is very clear; they have said that all the money collected by any institution -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, your proposal is to first delete “as determined by the Minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That should be deleted and in its place we say, “shall be managed in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability.” Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment - 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: No. If you say that, then it will be redundant because the Public Finance and Accountability Act has its own provisions of how resources collected by institutions are dealt with; they revert to the institutions. So, why put it here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For avoidance of doubt.

MR KAKOOZA: Actually, it is so done. In addition to that, Parliament is going to appropriate money for this institution to be utilised to run their activities. What the Public Finance Management Act says is that you collect the money, come and bring your budget on how to spend it, we allocate it to your vote and you use it. Most of the institutions are not spending the non-taxable revenues at source. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, that means we add this provision of the -

MR KAKOOZA: I support what hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana has said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the member for Budadiri West. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have a further amendment to sub clause (2): “The institute shall open and operate a bank account in a bank determined by the Board with the authority of the Accountant-General.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MRS BBUMBA: That is okay, Mr Chairman. However, I have a problem with limiting the institute to operate one bank account. Under prudent financial management, they may find it necessary to operate more than one account and in more than one bank.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know, in the interpretation of laws, the singular includes the plural; that is why drafting is always in singular. Isn’t that correct, learned Attorney- General?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: When you are specific and you say, “shall operate a bank account in a bank determined by the board”, I do not see how it can be interpreted to be plural. So, I buy the amendment of not limiting the institute to one bank account.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I would like a proposal now. 

MR KABAJO: “The institute may operate bank accounts as approved by the Board and the Accountant-General.”

MR KAKOOZA: The amendment should be, “The institute shall operate bank accounts in banks determined by the Board with the approval of the Accountant-General.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that, honourable members.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 21 is on investment. The committee proposes to amend the clause by substituting the entire clause with the following provision: “Any funds of the institute that are not immediately required to be applied for the purpose of the institute under this Act may be invested by the Board for the purpose of the institute, as may be determined by the Board with the approval of the Minister and the Minister responsible for Finance.”

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, this is a government institute and we have included the Public Finance Management and Accountability Act.  We are operating something like a single Treasury account – you are given money and if you do not need it, it goes back to the Treasury. You do not start investing, auditing, declaring profits, dividends and losses. 

This is the query we have with NSSF. They bought land at a higher price and now they are selling at a low price. The issue of investment should be left to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Leave it to them to do business. 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, the issue here is that we have allowed the institute to collect money in the discharge of its functions. As they are admitting students, for example, they may collect some funds. Now, what if this money we have allowed them to collect is in excess of what they need, they should be allowed to invest it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason we made the Public Finance Management and Accountability Act is because these institutions’ job is not investment. Their job, like this institution, is to provide training in hotel and tourism. 

When you let an institution to be in charge of getting resources to invest, it is a terrible thing. That is why many organisations are now holding money on fixed deposit accounts after they have negotiated with the banks. This is how they negotiate: they say, “I have Shs 2 billion and I want you to give me back five per cent and another five per cent to the institute” This is 10 per cent of the money. The money is then held there and yet at the same time, there are those government institutions that need money and they go and borrow money in the open market – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My proposal is that this should be deleted because their function is not to invest money. It is not a business institute.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson has proposed an amendment but the honourable member has proposed an amendment to delete the clause. If it is deleted, then there is no need to even consider what the committee is proposing. The motion is to delete clause 21.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, this institute is going to be running a hotel. True, the hotel will be for demonstration but on the other hand, it may provide services that are paid for and it will also be training students who will be paying. Just in case it had money that it is not going to use at that particular time, how do they deal with it and yet they will need it later?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Public Finance and Accountability Act deals with it.

MR KABAJO: I think we need to seriously consider what the chairperson of the committee has told us. If the institute is running a hotel as part of its training, the hotel guests will come and pay but they will also expect services like food, among others. However, you cannot predict right from the beginning how many guests you will get during the year. You cannot say that they will only depend on the money that was appropriated to them by Parliament to operate that hotel.

Given that they have to operate a hotel, and to give a good example to the students about how to operate it properly, we should allow the part of the hotel some leeway.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is about investment and not about keeping the money. When you come to investment of public money, there are rules and we cannot start bending those rules. If you are saying that they can keep the money for buying food, then that is okay because it is not investment. I now put the question that clause 21 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, deleted.

Clause 22

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 22 is on borrowing powers. The committee proposes to amend the clause by substituting for the entire clause the following provision: “Subject to Article 159 of the Constitution, the Board may, in consultation with the Minister, obtain loans and other credit facilities as may be required for meeting its obligations and for carrying out its functions under this Act.” 

The justification is: to subject the borrowing powers of the board to Article 159 of the Constitution.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are appropriating money and if they want to borrow money, they will come and say, “We are going to borrow part of the money we need” and we will authorise them to go and borrow. The person who will come for this authority is the Minister for Finance. 

According to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, this does not apply and so we have to delete it. I propose that clause 22 is deleted.

MS AKIROR: If it is not in conformity with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, then we delete it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The author of the Bill has spoken. I will now put the question to the motion that clause 22 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, deleted.

Clause 23

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes to redraft the clause to read as follows: “The financial year of the institute shall be the same as the financial year of Government.” The justification is: to be in conformity with the government financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 24 is on estimates. The committee proposes to amend clause 24 by deleting the entire sub clause (2). The justification is that it is redundant as it is already provided for in Government financial instructions. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Estimates are supposed to be approved by Parliament and they can only submit them to the minister for onward submission to Parliament. The reason it is in the Public Finance and Accountability Act now is because their budgets are approved by the board and their accountability is brought to Parliament. Parliament has now come up to say that the budget must be approved by Parliament such that they account to us.

So (1) and (2) must be re-drafted to say, “The budget estimates shall be submitted to the minister for onward submission to Parliament for approval as per the Public Finance and Accountability Act.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is this sub clause (1) you are talking about? Which clause are you talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, sub clause (2) says, “The annual estimates shall include all the income and expenditure of the institute for that financial year and shall include…” They are trying to specify what shall be included in the financial year but we are saying these estimates will be prepared by the board and be provided to the minister. The minister will then give them to the Minister of Finance, who will in turn present them to Parliament. The entire clause 24 should read as budget estimates -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I thought the chairperson proposed the deletion of the entire clause 24(2); so your amendment should focus on 24(1). You can proceed from there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if the committee has proposed to delete the whole (2), then we can now amend (1) to read as follows: “Budget estimates. The board shall, within three months, before the end of each financial year, make budget estimates for onward submission to Parliament through the minister responsible for the institute.” The justification is: to ensure that it is in line with the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And then (3)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sub clause (3) should read, “No expenditure shall be made out of the funds of the institute unless it has been approved by Parliament.” Parliament is now the one that is responsible for approval. 

MR EKANYA: I would like to seek just one clarification from hon. Nandala. We have said this institute will have a hotel; we need to be a bit flexible for the daily operation of the hotel. The Auditor-General can say that you spent the money, and this is a very delicate aspect. I do not know how best we can handle that. They need some money for trading.

MR KAKOOZA: There will be an accountant employed in this institution. The expenses will be put in the books of accounts. Therefore, you do not need to put it here.  What this section is saying is that the budget estimates must be appropriated by Parliament. How do you do this? These people will submit the planned activities of the financial year to the minister who will forward them to the Minister of Finance and we will appropriate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The moment we appropriate, we will give them working capital, which takes care of the trading. We are not going to say, “Buy this amount of food”; no. We are going to say, “We have given you Shs 5 billion as trading capital, at the end of the period you must account for the Shs 5 billion whether you made a profit or a loss.”
 
Therefore, we have taken care of this. The day-to-day running of the institution will be in the budget. “We estimate to have X number of guests and we shall have Y amount of money and this will be our expenditure, kindly approve this working capital” and we shall approve as Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What happens to (3)? Do we leave it as it is?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think (3) is not necessary; it is redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to delete (2) and (3) and redraft (1) in the terms proposed by hon. Nandala. Honourable members, is that okay?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendment proposed is that sub clause (2) and sub clause (3) of clause 24 be deleted and sub clause (1), which now will be the substantive provision, be amended in the terms proposed by the member for Budadiri West. I put the question to the amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, clause 25 is on accounts and audits. The committee proposes to amend clause 25(1) by substituting the phrase “the 31st day of March in the following year” appearing on line three, with the phrase, “three months after the end of the preceding financial year.” The justification is: for clarity.

Secondly, we propose to amend sub clause (3) by substituting the word “four” appearing in line one with the word, “three”. 

The justification is: to require the auditing to be done within the statutory period of three months from the end of the financial year.

Thirdly, amend sub clause (3) by deleting the phrase “for auditing” appearing in line three.  The justification is: for clarity.

Four, delete sub clause (7). The justification is that it is redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed by the committee. I put the question to the amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 26 is on contracts. The committee proposes to amend clause 26 by re-drafting sub clause (1) to read as follows: “(1) A contract on behalf of the institute shall bind the institute and its successors and all other parties to it if made in the following manner:

(a) If it is a contract required to be in writing and under seal, it shall be executed by the expressly authorised officer of the institute, under the seal of the institute.

(b) If it is a contract not made in writing, it shall be made orally by parole on behalf of the institute by the expressly authorised officer of the institute.” 
The justification is: for clarity.

Two, amend the clause by deleting sub clause (2). The justification is that it has been catered for in the redrafted sub clause (1). 

Three, amend the clause by renumbering sub clause (3) as sub clause (2). The justification is: for the chronological flow of the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the last sub clause remains? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to

Clause 27

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 27 - exemption from tax. The committee proposes to delete the entire clause. The justification is that statutory exemption from taxation is not necessary as this is done on a case by case basis.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal from the committee is to have that clause deleted. I put the question to that deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, deleted.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 29 - annual report. The committee proposes to amend the clause by substituting the word “calendar” appearing in line one with the word “financial”. The justification is: to provide for a financial year. 

Two, amend the clause by substituting the word “send” appearing in line one with the word “submit”. The justification is: for clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Line one or two?

MS KABAHENDA: Line two, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is clear. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 30 is on the minister’s powers of direction. The committee proposes to amend clause 30 by redrafting the clause to read as follows: “The Minister may give policy directions to the Board, and the Board shall comply.” The justification is: to restrict the directives of the minister to policy and to allow the board to evaluate the directives of the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 31 - Institute to work with organisations. We propose to amend the clause by substituting the phrase “non-governmental”, appearing in line one, with the phrase “other relevant and appropriate”.

The justification is: to empower the institute to work with other relevant and appropriate organisations.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete the whole clause 31. This is an institute and it is free to collaborate; we do not have to tell it to do so. There are different types of collaboration. It has its core function; it is not for us to direct it to work with other organisations. It can work on its own. So, I do not think this is necessary. It will bring us problems. They can even go and do some business with other -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You propose that it should be deleted?

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Yes. Clause 31 should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, deleted.

Clause 32

MR KAKOOZA: I have a problem. It says, “The Board may make byelaws for the general administration of the institute.” Should we put this in the law? I thought these are administrative issues. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one is it?

MR KAKOZA: On the byelaws. “The Board may make byelaws for the general administration of the institute.” Do we need them?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, for the board. It is an academic institution.

MR KAKOZA: I thought these are administrative issues, which do not need a law. They can come up with guidelines or regulations but to making byelaws! I have a problem. I do not know what the minister meant by this.

MR RUKUTANA: I do not have a position on this matter. However, it seems to be redundant because any institute is free to make regulations to guide its operations. I do not know what the use of putting it here would be.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have regulations in clause 33.

MR RUKUTANA: These are regulations by the minister but operational regulations for the institute -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are they usually called, ordinances?

MR RUKUTANA: Operational manuals or something like that -(Interjections)- Guidelines. 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I partly agree with the minister. I would propose that we delete this and leave it to the minister to put this into the regulations of the organisation when the law is being put into effect.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, under the Education Act, there are rules. Some of you who are teachers know that every training institute is supposed to have rules. In this case, we are just saying the board should be aware of the rules governing the institute in terms of discipline, academics, students and visitors - the entire operation. It is very important. If you take your child to any school, you should ask, “What are the school rules?” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, would those be byelaws? Would they have to be provided for in the Act?

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairperson, I am not a lawyer but I know that byelaws should not be the right word for this. I think there a mix of many things. When you look at sub clause (2), for example, it includes things to do with establishing departments and constituent colleges of the institute. These cannot just be rules. This should be taken somewhere, in my view; maybe we revamp the function of the board or of the academic board or something.

The other thing is to do with awards, description of the awards, regulating conduct of examination. Those can be in the rules and regulations. However, there are things like establishing terms and conditions of service; I think these things needs to be reorganised. I am not sure whether these should here. They are really confusing.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I have a school and I know that a school cannot be given a licence if it has no rules and regulations. This is in the Education Act. This is a training institute. If we do not make a provision - The board must be aware of the rules for disciplining children and management. It is a requirement. We have said here that it will have to operate in line with the National Council of Higher Education guidelines.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, if you look at sub clause (2) then, it is not dealing with the issues you are raising. It says, “Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1)...”, in other words, the general provision in sub clause (1). 

This is about establishment of departments, description of awards of the institute, requirements for the awards, regulation of the conduct of examinations, establishing of terms and conditions of service of employees, regulation of the constitution and procedure of meeting of the board, which are already in the schedule. It is also about regulating the establishment, composition and terms of reference of its committees. All these are not the rules of how you manage children. These are details.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I think that clause is redundant, given that we have already passed clause 7, - functions of the board - which in (b) gives the board powers to supervise and control the general management and administration of the institute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General first brought out something, which we should not lose focus of - the issue of operational manuals. In all organisations, it is the responsibility of boards to make sure that there are operational manuals like human resource manuals, auditing and accounting manuals. So, I think the Attorney-General should help us; instead of calling them byelaws, they should be called operational manuals. 

Sub clause (1) would read, “The board shall make operational manuals for the general administration of the institute.” The justification is that you must make sure that it is an international practice that - (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving way. I am aware that many organisations these days are required, even if we do not put in the law, to come up with the operational manuals you are talking about, policies and so on. If you do not have them - I am a member of COSASE and the Auditor-General’s office is always having these queries for organisations which do not have those manuals. I do not think we need to put that into the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What harm would it do if we put it there?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I think sub clause (1) was enough to deal with all that. All the other details can be put into the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why the honourable member for Budadiri is now saying, just change the name and instead of calling it byelaws, call it operational manuals and leave it at sub clause (1).

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, there is a difference between operational manuals and rules and regulations of an organisation. A description of the awards of the institute, for example, does not fall under the operational manuals. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, every institution will have an operational manual, which is tailored to it. If it is an engineering company, it will have an operational manual to deal with engineering. This is education; it will have an operational manual dealing with that. Who qualifies for a scholarship; how is it awarded? - Those ones will exist.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, as I was proposing, clause 32 should refer to operational manuals. So where there are byelaws in sub clause (1), we instead say, “operational manuals” - “…operational manuals for the general administration of the institute.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we then delete (2)? Is that what you are saying?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, we can then shift that clause to clause 7. If you look at clause 7, which we have passed, it says, “(i) to make byelaws governing the conduct and discipline of the staff and students, in consultation with the academic board and the staff welfare committee; 
(j) to approve all job establishments…” I think those are the kinds of things we are anticipating.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that taken care of then?

MR RUKUTANA: That is why I was saying, to me it looks redundant. However, if you insist - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, propose properly, honourable minister.

MR RUKUTANA: I propose a deletion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete clause 32 as it is taken care of in clause 7. I put the question for the deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, deleted.

Clause 33

MS KABAHENDA: Clause 33 – regulations. The committee proposes to amend clause 33(2) –

1) in paragraph (a) by deleting the word “national” appearing in lines 1 and 2;

2) in paragraph (b) by deleting the word “national” appearing in line 1, and by using the uppercase for the letter “a” in the word “act” appearing at the end of the paragraph.

3) in paragraph (c) by deleting the word “national” appearing in line 2. 

The justification is: To mandate the institute to award not only national awards but also may affiliate with other international institutions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put that question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to redraft the entire clause 34 and rename it as “Transitional Provision”. The redrafted clause would read as follows:

“Transitional Provision 

(1) All property, movable or immovable, held by or on behalf of the Hotel and Tourism Institute shall from the commencement of this Act be vested in the institute.

(2) Upon the commencement of this Act, the rights, interests, obligations and liabilities in favour of or against the Hotel and Tourism Institute existing before the commencement of this Act under any contract or instrument, or at law or in equity, shall by virtue of this Act be assigned and transferred to the institute.

(3) The institute may, on the commencement of this Act, accept into its employment any person who immediately before that date is employed by the Hotel and Tourism Institute and who has been given an option by the institute and has opted to serve as an employee of the institute.

(4) A person who opts to serve as an employee of the institute under subsection (1) shall only be accepted as an employee of the institute on a competitive interview basis and shall be employed on terms and conditions of service not less favourable than the terms and conditions of service to which the person is entitled immediately before the coming into force of this Act.

(5) For avoidance of doubt, a person who is not accepted under subsection (1) as an employee of the institute is entitled to terminal benefits and the Government shall be responsible for the payment of all outstanding benefits and severance payable as appropriate to the employees referred to in subsection (1).” 

The justification is: to provide for the transition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: My first comment is, you are referring to subsection (1) and subsection (1) is about property movable and immovable; it should be subsection (3). Wherever subsection (1) appears, it should be subsection (3).

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I would like to correct sub clause (4); I am referring to subsection (3) in sub clause (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is in subsection (4) and (5).

MS KABAHENDA: I would also wish to correct subsection (5) and refer to subsection (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee for the transitional provision, because the institute actually exists.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am interested in the employees. I agree with the committee that you do not need to take garbage. However, in most cases during changes, employees are the people who suffer a lot. I think the first priority now should be given to the employees who are there during the transitional period. I would like the committee to assure me to that effect. They are saying they are going to compete, which is okay, but before they go for competition, they should be given first priority. If you confirm that they are incompetent, then they go out.

Therefore, I would want to make sure that these employees -[MR EKANYA: “Internal adverts first.”]- Internal adverts, yes. How are you catering for those employees first before you go to the open market?

MS KABAHENDA: Honourable Chair, proposal No. 3 caters for the employees who will accept to be employed by the Hotel and Tourism Institute. Those who had been employed immediately before that date of the commencement of the Act will be given an option to serve as employees if they choose to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If they choose to, it will be on competitive basis in No. 4. That is the issue.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I have a problem in harmonising sub clause (3) with sub clause (2). Sub-clause (2) is general and specific – “Upon the commencement of this Act, the rights, interests, obligations and liabilities in favour of or against the Hotel and Tourism Institute existing before the commencement of this Act under any contract or instrument, or at law or in equity, shall by virtue of this Act be assigned and transferred to the institute.” This includes contracts of employment, engagement etc.

When you come to sub clause (3), it says, “The institute may, on the commencement of this Act, accept into its employment any person who immediately before that date is employed by the Hotel and Tourism Institute and who has been given an option…” This presupposes that now you have terminated all of them and given some an option. This is inconsistent with sub clause (2). 

I think we have to redraft sub clause (2). If it is true, as the chairperson says, that they do not need to take garbage, either we decide and retire everybody or we take everybody up and get another mechanism of sieving to get the best. It cannot be both ways. It has to be one way. We either adhere to (2), in which case we are taking everybody as is, or we are retiring everybody and starting de novo.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I think sub clauses (3) and (4) as proposed take care of the employees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue is that those are obligations of the existing institute and the contract. In sub-clause (3), you are already undermining that contract, which is subsisting.

MS KABAHENDA: In (3) we are giving -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By virtue of the subsisting contract, it is automatic that they will continue as a matter of right.

MS KABAHENDA: If that is the interpretation, Mr Chairman, then sub clause (3) would be redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it would not. It just needs some qualification because if the rights, interests, obligations and liabilities in favour of the other one is now inherited by the institute, some of those things they are inheriting are contracts of employment. In sub clause (3), you are now saying that there is another process for accepting these people whose contracts have already been upheld.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, the experience of KCCA, for example, shows that when you have these changes, for employees who already had contracts by the time the new institute starts, you have to abide by these contracts. However, many of these contracts have procedures for how you can terminate them. 

Therefore, you can accept the contract as it is but if you wish to terminate the service of that employee, then again you have to follow the terms, which were written in the contract. If the contract says that the employee can only be terminated by being paid the equivalent of six months of his pay, then that is what you do. That was what was done in KCCA. You cannot simply throw away the contract the employee already had.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I think the original formulation was superior to what is proposed. It says, “(a) The rights, interests, obligations and liabilities of the public tertiary institution existing before the commencement of this Act under any contract or instrument, or at law or in equity, shall by virtue of this Act be assigned to and vested in the institute established under this Act. 

(b) any contract or instrument as is mentioned in paragraph (a) shall be of the same force and effect against or in favour of the new institute and shall be enforceable.”

The good thing is that these are contracts. To avoid taking up garbage, you wait until the contracts expire and you have the discretion to renew or not to renew those contracts.  It is more prudent -

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to be made to understand; this Act is meant to create this institution so that we are able to provide quality human resources that match international standards. What if somebody got a contract like three months back and maybe the contract is saying he or she is going to work for five or four years, how will you consider that? Maybe, at that level, we will find that this person who just got the contract does not match the standard we have created in this Act; how shall we go about that?

MR RUKUTANA: At this time, the power is in our hands. It is us who know what we want to create. If we want to create that high standard institute, then we say that on the coming into force of the Act, all contracts will cease. We have the power to say that. In which case, we definitely will have to pay for termination of contracts. We can say that; there is no question about it. However, it cannot be this way and the other way at the same time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the Attorney-General. From this, there are four offices we have created. It is very clear that a board will be appointed. Therefore, if there is a board now, according to this law it ceases and we will have to appoint a new board. That board has the powers to approve the establishment and recruit. 

In addition, we have created the principal, deputy principal and the academic registrar. Under this law, if there is anybody seemingly to be a principal, he has to go because according to this law, the principal will be charged with certain qualities and will be appointed by the board with the approval of the minister. It is very clear. 

Therefore, this drafting is very good in the sense that you are free to terminate and compensate anybody who has a contract according to what the contract says. It is very clear. We do not need to reinvent the wheel and struggle with this. As we are, we are perfectly okay. 

The original clause is good because it takes care of the rights, interests, obligations and liabilities. Now, when we go to part (b), it says, “any contract... shall be of the same force and effect against…” You can decide on how to deal with the contract. 

Honourable minister, I think the committee was trying to be very sympathetic with the employees. However, you cannot be sympathetic beyond the law and make an organisation for which you are creating the law very inefficient.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I concede on behalf of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no proposed amendment. I now put the question that clause 34 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Schedule

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, in Part I, paragraph 1, - meetings of the board - the committee proposes to amend sub-paragraph (4) inserting the phrase, “the vice chairperson, and in the absence of both chairperson and vice chairperson, then” between the words “absence” and “the” in line 2.

The justification is: to empower the vice chairperson to preside over meetings in the absence of the chairperson.

In paragraph 3 - minutes of the meeting - we propose to amend sub-paragraph (2) by deleting the phrase, “present at the later meeting” appearing in line 4. The justification is that it is redundant.

In Part II, paragraph 1 - meeting of the academic board - we propose to amend sub-paragraph (2) by inserting the word “academic” between the words “the” and “board” in line 1. The justification is that the board referred to in this part is specifically the academic board.

In paragraph 2 - quorum - we propose to amend sub-paragraph (1) by substituting the word “a half” with the phrase, “one-third” appearing in line 1; and by inserting the word “academic” between the word “the” and “board” appearing in line 1.

We propose to amend sub-paragraph (2) by inserting the word “academic” between the words “the” and “board” in line 1.

Paragraph 3 - Board may regulate its procedures. We propose to delete the entire sub-paragraph (3). The justification is that the procedure of committees is already regulated by the board under paragraph 7 of Part I of the schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are clear proposals for amendment. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think if these are going to be meetings of the academic board, even the subheading should be made clear. It should say, “Meetings of the academic board”, so that it is clear right from the beginning that we are talking about the academic board.

THE DEPUTY CAHIRMAN: You know, there is Part I and Part II. Part I is, “Meetings of the board and related matters”. Part II is, “Meetings of the academic board and related matters.” Therefore, it is clear. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification before I move on. Is this cross-referencing part of the schedule?

THE DEPUTY CAHIRPERSON: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Cross-references. This is because they are very vital here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they are not part of the schedule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Can we bring them up later?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is for information to guide researchers about what has happened.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am asking this because we shall have to do more cross-referencing; for example, the Stamp Duty Act must be deleted. It is no longer applicable because we deleted the tax exemption. 

The one which should come here is the one on education. You remember when the Attorney-General asked, “What is the students’ guild and the national-Those are found in the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This only refers to those that have been mentioned. The ones that are mentioned must come here. They do not give you the details of the Act; they are cross-referencing. Therefore, you come at the back and find out what these Acts are. They are not going to tell you that it is the Stamp Act, Cap. 342; they will just give you general information. You will now come to find out what this termed Act is and then you will now find that it is actually chapter 342 of the laws of Uganda. That is how it is supposed to be. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That means with the cross-referencing here, we remove the Stamps Act and put the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2015. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, all the laws that have been mentioned here. The cross-referencing will be done. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It has been mentioned. Is it 2014 or 2015? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Can I put the question to the schedule now? Do you have an issue with the schedule? 

MR PETER LOKII: Yes, Mr Chairman. There was a point that the honourable member for Amudat had raised initially, which you said would come later. It is the question of the remuneration of the members of the board. It does not seem to be mentioned anywhere in the Bill. I am wondering whether that is being taken care of in another way or it is just an oversight. 

MR EKANYA: That one will come in the budgeting. It is not necessary here. 

MR RUKUTANA: I remember when we were considering that issue, there was a clause about welfare - Was it welfare?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, welfare.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Chairman, I thought what the minister is trying to refer to is the functions of the board. It does not talk about the remuneration and welfare of the members of the board. I think these are two different things.  I do not think the board would go ahead and begin to take decisions on how they are going to be remunerated. 

If I recall, when we were establishing some of these other boards, there was reference to the fact that remuneration of members of the board shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those ones usually come in the instrument of appointment. Can I put the question to the schedule now? I now put the question that the schedule, as amended, stands as a schedule to the Bill.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes to amend the Bill’s title by inserting the word, “Uganda” after the word, “the” and to accordingly amend all clauses where the Bill title appears. The justification is: to reflect the national character of the institute. 

Under clause 1, the interpretation, we propose to amend clause 2-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one were you proposing first? 

MS KABAHENDA: The title. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not called the title.

MS KABAHENDA: I am sorry, Mr Chairman. Under clause 1, the interpretation, the committee proposes to insert a new paragraph to provide as follows: “‘Training levy’ means a percentage of the tourism development levy as may be determined by the minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance.” 
The justification is: to provide for the interpretation of “training levy” as used in clause 19 (e).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only proposal? Can I put the question to the amendment of this definition of training levy? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to ask the Attorney-General or the Minister for Education for the definition of students’ guild. I would say “Students’ guild as defined in the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act” because we cannot get it clearly here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it actually defined there? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are providing for its interpretation because among the board members, there is a representative of the students’ guild. We want to define it to avoid the question of where the guild comes from. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the honourable member is right but I am not comfortable. I am not sure how the students’ guild is defined under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. I recall it is defined but in order to quote it here, we must be clear of how it is defined. The setup of the universities may not necessarily be the same unless you can -

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was proposing that we define the guild as “The guild of the Hotel and Tourism Institute.”  I beg to propose and if hon. Nandala-Mafabi can try to beef it up, you are most welcome. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you want us to define it here, I think we can say that the guild is the leadership of the students. I think we can say, “Students’ guild refers to the leadership of the student body in the institute.” That will provide an answer if we were not so sure. 

MS KARUNGI: If you could allow me to add, “elected by the students.” (Interjections) The leadership may be appointed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you can say, “It is the body representing the students of the institute.” This is so that you do not go into elections, appointments and others. Will that be okay? Can somebody propose that properly then? 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that we define the guild as, “the students elected leadership of the institute.”

MR KABAJO: Can I define it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, you can try. 

MR KABAJO: Can we define the students’ guild as, “the leadership of the student’s body of the institute?” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that better? I put the question to that.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes to amend the Bill’s title by inserting the word, “Uganda” after the word, “the” and to accordingly amend all clauses where the Bill title appears. The justification is: to reflect the national character of this institute. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We do not need to have that long title. We would have then said, “Ugandan Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act” or “Uganda Income Tax Act”. This is not necessary. People will Google tourism in Uganda and they will find this Act.  It is not necessary, Mr Chairman, unless we would like to make all the laws to start with the word “Uganda”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Uganda Makerere University – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Uganda Kyambogo University Act”.  That is what we are trying to do. I would like to propose -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. I would like to inform hon. Nandala that the UWA Act, for example, is referred to as the Uganda Wildlife Act. You were in this House, I do not know why you decided to call it the Uganda Wildlife Act. Are we now going to remain with that style or you would like to change it now? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I will answer that. It is even called Uganda Wildlife Authority and that is why it is called Uganda Wildlife Act. In the Makerere University Act, we do not put “Uganda”.

When you see an Act referring to Uganda first, it is because the institute starts with “Uganda”, like Uganda Revenue Authority. It starts with “Uganda”. So, for this one, it is “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Act.” There will be very many which will come and they will fall under that.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, we discovered that there are many hotel and tourism training institutes in other countries like Tanzania, Zambia among others. We wanted to create one that really spells out “Uganda”.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, sometimes when I am doing research using a search engine, if you just put the hotel and tourism training institute, you get information of other countries. However, in this case it will help with research. You and I do a lot of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to the proposed amendment to the title of the Bill? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Chairman, I would like to move the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE 

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put a question to that Motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013 
7.12
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I beg to recommit clause 33 (2) (a) to prescribe national degrees, diplomas and certificates. 

The justification is that in the region, all the training institutes award degrees. It will be so strange that this institute, which we have allowed to collaborate locally and internationally in order for it to be competitive, will only end up awarding diplomas. We shall have done disservice. I, therefore, beg to move –(Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, we considered that and in clause 5 (c) and also 33(a), there is a reason why we say, “prescribing national diplomas, certificates and other awards.” The sky is the limit. One can even go for a PhD; why not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that satisfactory? You withdraw the motion for recommittal?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, based on the wisdom of the chairperson, who happens to be my extended sister, I beg to withdraw my motion (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the motion moved for the third reading? 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Ms Agnes Akiror):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that “The Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Bill, 2013”, be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: 
“THE UGANDA HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE ACT, 2015”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. Honourable minister and madam chairperson, thank you very much. Thank you to the committee and honourable members of the House. This House is adjourned to Tuesday, 24 March 2015 at 2.00pm.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 March 2015.)


