Thursday, 11 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have a number of prominent Ugandans from Rotary International. They are led by Rotary District Governor, Mr Henry Kyemba and accompanied by Past District Governor, Mr Sam Owor, another Past District Governor, Mr Robert Ssebunya and Mr Kirkwood also Past Rotary District Governor. 

They are here to accompany something unique, which you can see on our Table code-named “Rotary Polio Ball”. It is a ball that has traveled all the way from South Africa, visited a number of countries south of Uganda and I understand it will continue to Eastern Uganda into Kenya until it reaches Cairo in Egypt.

The Rotary Polio Ball is here to signify a very important programme, which Rotary International carries on in this and other continents in the fight against the deadly disease called polio. It is here to indicate the determination of the people on the African Continent to kick polio out of Africa.

The organisers must have realised that Parliament is a partner in this programme thus making it part and parcel of this campaign and that is why they are here. Please join me in welcoming them and to convey to them our determination to always be with them in kicking polio out of Africa. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Now, I would like to invite hon. Ruth Kavuma to say something before we hear from the minister.

2.53
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, allow me to say something about the relationship between the ball that is before us, and polio. 

The word polio in full – I cannot pronounce it – but it is a crippling and potentially fatal disease. It invades the nervous system and can cause total paralysis very quickly mainly striking people in their very young age, although it can as well strike people at any age. So, all of us are potential - we should not think we have overgrown it because we are no longer under five years of age.

Uganda was declared polio free sometime ago, but then three cases were reported in Amuru District in Northern Uganda. Reports said it came from a neighbouring country that was not free.

The symbolic Rotary Polio Ball – Rotary International is fundraising and creating awareness on the need to eradicate polio. This is being done by taking advantage of the World Cup games due to kick off in June in South Africa because it is very difficult for anybody who suffers from polio to kick that ball. So, everybody needs to be aware of how much the polio sufferers miss out on the fun – I am a member of the Parliamentary Football Team and I know how much fun I get out of kicking that ball. So, this is a gesture to show the partnership the Rotarians have with all the different members of society in order to kick polio out of Uganda. 

The ball arrived in the country yesterday and as said by the Speaker, it will be going through quite a number of different countries.

Rotary International’s involvement in the eradication of polio globally began in 1988 with the launch of the global eradication initiative spearheaded by the World Health Organisation, United States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, and UNICEF. Since then, 99 percent of the work has been done; the other one percent that is still undone matters a lot because if it is your child then it must matter to you as well.

The activities of Rotary International in eradicating polio include among others, donating oral polio vaccines, chain equipment, providing information, communication and education materials, setting up surveillance centres and laboratories, providing technical assistance and lobbying for funds at various levels. 

By the time the world is certified polio free, Rotary’s contribution to this cause will have exceeded US $1.2 billion. This is in addition to the amount of time and knowledge that the different people have put into this area. In line with its motto, “Service Above Self” they serve above self in this area by voluntarily putting in a lot of time.

Uganda belongs to District 9200, which has other states like Kenya, Tanzania, Ethiopia and Eritrea. We also do exactly the same work as most other Rotarians in all the other districts do as part of the Rotary Foundation.

On behalf of the Rotarians, I would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda for allowing this ball to come here. This is because anything that gets to the Parliament of Uganda is embraced nationally; it is not an individual activity. So, I also would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda for this gesture. But I would also like to thank the Rotarians for the same gesture. These Rotarians, as has been mentioned by the Rt Hon. Speaker are: Past District Governor, Mr Henry Kyemba, who was once a Minister of Health of Uganda. He is the coordinator of “Kick Polio out of Uganda” and the national chairman for this cause. I also thank the Past District Governor, Mr Sam Owor, who is the Rotary International Director Elect, Past District Governor, Mr Robert Ssebunya from the Rotary Club of Rubaga, and Mr Frank Nyanzi who is the President of the Rotary Club of Kampala, the host club. 

I further would like to thank all of you led by a good number of other Rotarians for coming here to make us part of this cause. I recognise the Rotarians in Parliament. These include the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament –(Applause)– who is a Paul Harris Fellow, the Rt. Hon Deputy Speaker of Parliament, also a Paul Harris Fellow – well hon. Ruth Kavuma is also a Paul Havis Fellow and so many other Rotarians in the House. 

Further, allow me to thank the Ministry of Health for being with the Rotarians in this cause by helping us do what we have been able to do. Also on the list to thank is the Parliamentary Football Team for supporting the Rotarians in this cause through its actions of playing football itself. 

And finally, allow me to thank everybody else for coming. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.02
MS SOFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a polio victim, I first of all would like to thank Government for the efforts it is taking to eradicate polio out of Uganda.

Previously, you heard about the massive polio immunization exercise. I would like to mention that the ultimate result was the declaration of Uganda as a polio free country. However, some few years back, we were threatened by the spread of polio when some cases were identified in Southern Sudan and part of DRC.

As persons with disabilities and who were specifically affected by polio, we were happy when Uganda was declared polio free because we know the complications that are brought about by polio. You have several times on the Floor of Parliament heard us talk about issues such as some people missing out on education because of mobility problems. And sometimes if one had an effect on the upper limbs, they may not be able to write even if they have access to a classroom.

The other issue is about economic empowerment and finding employment. When we were amending the Income Tax Act, we reiterated the fact that even when a person with disability applies for a job, he/she can just be sent away at the point of interview because some people think such people are unable to perform. And for us mothers, who were affected by polio, when it comes to giving birth, we face a number of complications and challenges; we are categorised as mothers at risk.

Mr Speaker and the Rotarians, on top of polio, we have a problem of having multiple disabilities manifesting themselves in one person. The other day I raised a question on the Floor of this House asking the Minister of Health to tell us what causes this condition. Unfortunately, I never got a satisfactory answer. But I thought that some research would be done to establish why multiple disabilities are manifesting in some individuals - if that condition continues, it will be a costly issue to the nation. 

On that basis, I would request the hon. Members of Parliament to join us in all these efforts to kick polio out of Uganda, Africa and the whole world. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you too. Okay, let us hear from hon. Nokrach before we get statements from the Minister of Health and the Shadow Minister of Health on this side.

3.05
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of polio survivors and on my own behalf, I would like to recognise this campaign and thank the Rotarians for the good work they are doing. We do not want more people to walk like us. During our time, these good services were not around. I appeal to everybody to encourage parents to take their children for immunisation. 

Many times when the government is launching or carrying out immunisation campaigns, there are issues that come out that the vaccines have been poisoned and therefore children should not be taken for immunisation. I want to appeal to everybody to join the campaign because we know the challenges we face. It is not easy to survive and perform effectively in all fields. So, if polio can be eradicated, it will end with us and I think we shall have a good community. 

I also commend the Rotarians that what you are doing is quite good but it is not enough. Why don’t you extend your support to the survivors? Indeed the appliances we are using now are outdated. It can cause more disability. For example, the one I am using is very heavy but I cannot get a better one. Modern technology has produced better equipment but we cannot afford it. So, we appeal to our government and Rotarians to extend more support to survivors in the villages so that they are able to move well. In primary schools in rural areas, there are many children who do not even have wheelchairs and when it rains you can imagine how dirty their books get. 

In the same vein, I appeal to the Ministry of Education to at least allocate some budget funding for polio so that our children who are affected by it and cannot move well get that kind of support and feel better among the community in the school. 

We must all support this campaign. It is a good one. It is true, as my colleague mentioned, that inside us we feel like kicking a football. Sometimes, when I go to watch football, you find me crying because I have missed it, I cannot kick it. We do not want more people to feel like me when we have a very good opportunity like this. 

This is a very good move. We thank the Rotarians and inform them that our Government is also doing its best. Every year we have a very strong campaign to kick polio out of Uganda. I thank you.

3.09
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank Rotary International for this very good job. Moreover, whenever we have our campaigns in this country, they facilitate us a lot by donating the oral vaccines, the cold chain equipment, the provision of Information Education and Communication (IEC) materials and also setting up surveillance labs and of course providing technical support and lobbying for funds at different levels. I sincerely thank you members of Rotary International including you, Mr Speaker, for that gesture.    

In primary health care, there are three major ways of preventing diseases, that is, primary health care, secondary prevention and tertiary prevention. The way polio has been handled is a clear testimony that if we emphasised primary prevention of diseases, most of these communicable diseases would be eradicated from our community. 

At this moment, I would like to urge Government, specifically the Ministry of Health, to emphasise primary prevention of diseases because it is very cheap and affordable compared to the other two prevention measures, that is, secondary and tertiary prevention, which involve diagnosis and treatment of these diseases. This will go a long way in cutting down our budgets especially in the health sector if we can dwell much on primary prevention as a key strategy in our primary health care. I thank you.

3.11
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank Rotary International through hon. Nvumetta Kavuma for their campaign to kick polio out of Africa, in particular, out of Uganda. I am particularly happy to see my former boss who encouraged me to come here, Rotarian Frank Nyanzi, who is there among other guests. 

This is a wonderful opportunity to reawaken national consciousness that polio is looming over us and that it is waiting anytime to take its next victim unless we are ready to stop it. 

We have heard that after decades of a polio free Uganda, three cases were reported in Amuru District. It is a great opportunity now to know what steps the leadership of Amuru or the leadership in the Ministry of Health has taken to ensure that polio does not spread in Amuru to other places. We have heard about it but I do not remember a task force or plans to follow through and ensure that it does not spread. 

When there is an event like this, we come here, we hear matters like polio or malaria and when they come to the national Parliament, then they are treated as matters of national importance. And we use this opportunity to look deeper into our problems, challenges and successes in the country beyond the matter that we are talking about.

About two years ago we were discussing the Ministry of Education report and the view was that the students had performed fairly badly and Members of Parliament were discussing the reasons for the poor performance and we had reasons from different areas. I think those that I can recollect was a Member from Busoga region who said in Busoga they have a problem of Trachoma and because of Trachoma, students find it difficult to read from the blackboard and parents cannot afford to buy them eye glasses. That is the reason for the poor performance in Busoga.

And somebody stood up from there, he was from Masindi, and said, the problem in Masindi is that every fourth person is epileptic. Students get stigmatised and cannot read because of epilepsy. 

Another Member stood up and said in Teso, it is famine. The students performed badly because of famine. Hon. Anywar stood up and said in Kitgum it is the guinea worms. 

All those extremely important matters were just mentioned for a few seconds by Members of Parliament and we left them there; such important national matters. Like now, we are discussing polio in Amuru. After this meeting, we will probably not hear of it again until another initiative.

The point I am trying to raise is that very important matters come to Parliament but after discussing them they become regional matters and we do not hear about them anymore, which leads me to think that we need strong regional governments -(Laughter)– I am serious! We need strong regional governments because if the Trachoma from Busoga had been left to the region of Busoga, they would have discussed it for two weeks; they would have set up a budget for research on that matter; they would have allocated a budget to educate people about opticians but it was left like that because one national Parliament is too busy to discuss regional matters that are very important in the region but cannot have enough space in a national Parliament. 

So, I would like to urge my colleagues as we consider the matter of polio in Africa and in Uganda, especially that polio was even reported in Amuru one time but we did not get to hear about it again, that we consider strongly the matter of regional governments because this country has got regional issues, which just cannot find enough space in the national Parliament. 

Otherwise, my thanks go to Rotary International for raising awareness and for giving me this opportunity to talk about the importance of strong regional governments. I thank you.

3.17
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the entire Opposition and on my own behalf, I would like to join other colleagues in commending the efforts and the selflessness of Rotary International towards betterment of mankind generally but specifically helping to get the world free of polio.

Polio is such a debilitating malady that otherwise is preventable. We have made significant strides in eradicating polio in our country and the status quo so far should not make us relax because we are aware that there are still pockets of Poliomyelitis in the neighbouring countries, indeed that was responsible even for the three cases that were cited or confirmed in Amuru District. 

Political instabilities usually come with so many other attendant problems. Any country which is not stable or has instability of any sort, nurses so many other medical or health related problems majorly because the control programmes are not followed to the dot. While we are getting a little ray of hope that Uganda was declared polio free, we must ensure that our freedom from other maladies, including polio, should be reinforced by a serene political environment and it is my prayer that Uganda gets a serene political environment.     

All efforts should be targeted at making sure that we do not get re-entry of infections that we have fought internally from other neighbouring countries. In fact, I would like to appeal - first of all, we have seen the good results of being a Rotarian. Personally, I am persuaded; hon. Nvumetta, I think after here we will have to discuss more. I am persuaded to become a Rotarian and I encourage many other Members to do that as well.  

I would like to see efforts being made to network with other countries, Sudan and Congo in particular, where a number of challenges still exist, to see how to double efforts in containing Poliomyelitis in those countries. 

Finally, here we are talking about polio; we have many other challenges. A number of colleagues have already alluded to them. I did request you, Mr Speaker, to allocate Parliament some time to discuss in greater depth issues and matters to do with health. I have shared the same feelings with my colleagues from the Ministry of Health and it is our sincere prayer that you allocate time for Members to discuss issues and matters to do with health. 

If we cannot have sufficient time in the plenary, maybe we could even arrange some kind of internal retreat in the Parliamentary Conference Hall so that we discuss and exhaust issues and let Members pour out their views on how to collectively address challenges affecting the health sector in Uganda.

Once again, I thank Rotary International and I wish you a safe journey. The ball should not burst because we want that ball kicked out of Africa. Thank you.       

3.22
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also on behalf of the Government like to take this opportunity to thank the Rotary Club for the wonderful cooperation they have always provided to Government to fight, especially polio, in this country. 

The Government of Uganda established the Uganda Expanded Programme for Immunisation (UNEPI) in 1983 in order to protect children of this country from morbidity and mortality from preventable diseases such as polio. Among the priority resolutions of the World Health Assembly held in 1987 was the eradication of immunisable diseases such as polio. The Government of Uganda made a renewed commitment to revitalise immunisation efforts in the country and the Uganda National Expanded Programme for Immunisation was therefore re-launched in January 1987 by His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to accelerate and strengthen Government efforts towards reduction of morbidity, mortality and disability from vaccine preventable diseases. 

The goal of UNEPI is to contribute towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goal No. 4 that aims at reduction of morbidity and mortality of the children aged under five by two thirds by the 2015. 

One of our honourable members was puzzled as to why there is re-occurrence of polio after many years of paralysis – this is the so-called secondary polio syndrome that occurs after many years of the first attack. This is because the virus stays in areas of the nerves called ganglia and is then later released. Sometimes the paralysis gets worse and may even cause death when they get a secondary attack of polio. One of the Members here went through that condition but fortunately, he recovered. 

The Government of Uganda has continued to adjust and take up up-coming evidence-based required vaccines for children and in 2002 immunisation against other common childhood diseases such as Hepatitis B, Haemophilus Influenza were added to the programme. Currently through immunisation, Government of Uganda’s policy on immunisation offers protection against the top eight killer, preventable childhood diseases. 

Members will note that Measles used to be a very serious disease in this country. Every hospital used to have a ward specifically for Measles but since we started immunisation, the wards have closed and Measles is a disease of the few who do not take their children for immunisation. 

The Government of Uganda has continued to procure routine immunisation vaccines against Polio, Tuberculosis, Measles, Tetanus as well as their related injection safety materials. 

Delivery trucks and field vehicles for the delivery of the immunisations supplies have been procured to ensure that there is chain equipment for the Central Vaccine Store and districts. Gas cylinders have also been procured. 

Monthly distribution of vaccines, gas and injectable material is ongoing for all districts in the country. The Government of Uganda has established cold chain infrastructure such that every sub-county in this country has a vaccine store. 

Mr Speaker and the whole august House, I thank you for having given us the honour to share with you this great event of hosting a symbolic soccer ball as a sign of our renewed commitment to continue working as a team in order to keep Uganda, Africa and the whole world polio free. 

I also thank Rotary International, WHO, UNICEF and other development partners, institutions and all the members of Parliament who tirelessly partner with the Ministry of Health on the various immunisation activities in our country. We therefore make an appeal that in the constituencies we represent, we shall continue to vigorously mobilise the people we lead to utilise the immunisation services the Government offers so that all our children can remain polio free and lead a qualitative and productive life.

A Member pointed out that we sometimes get interested in a situation when it is current and we forget all about it after some time. We forget about it because it has been controlled. For example, polio came back after a period of more than ten years after we were declared polio free. The Government was able to mobilise its efforts to control the spread of polio and as we speak, polio vaccination is on-going and we have not forgotten about it. No case has even been reported since that re-insurgency, which was greatly controlled. 

We, therefore, appeal that you continue to mobilise all parents and caretakers in your constituencies to ensure all eligible children comply with the immunisation schedules as indicated in Government’s immunisation policy of the Ministry of Health – we are guinea worm free in Uganda.

I thank you all who have shared in this function this afternoon. Let us continue to keep immunisation high on our agenda in all our constituencies for the good of the children of this country so that together, we can contribute to the successful achievement of the Millennium Development Goals through immunisation. 

As we endeavour to keep a polio free Uganda and contribute towards kicking polio out of Africa and the whole world, I thank the Rotary Polio Plus committee of Uganda in a special way, for having made it possible for this important occasion to take place. The hon. Members of Parliament have participated in the event of kicking polio out of Africa. 

I would like to thank hon. Henry Kyemba for leading the Rotary club in performing a number of functions. His grandfather was equally very productive; he is a grandchild of Mr Luba of Bugiri –(Interjections)- Luba was from Bugiri and was one of the kings of Busoga. Thank you very much for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members, for this contribution. I am encouraged because the report I will give on this will be that honourable members, men and women, are committed to joining this march to kick polio out of Uganda and out of Africa. From my assessment, the honourable members here are ready to play any number on the team - they could be strikers, defenders and so forth - to have an effective game. I have seen one of them and when he kicks the ball nobody will ever find it anywhere –(Laughter)- and return it to the field.

Thank you very much, hon. Kyemba and your team, for recognising the role of the Ugandan Parliament. They are partners and they will move with you; they will give the necessary collaboration. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

Hon. Members as you have heard, this ball will not only be in Uganda but in other countries. I understand that today may be its last day here. It has to be at the source of the Nile because it will end up in Cairo where the river flows into the Mediterranean Sea. I should not detain it here. I should allow them to move with it for that long journey. Therefore, the ball can now leave the Chamber.

On a sad note, this morning we received news of the demise of hon. Jim Muhwezi’s mother. The body is being transported to Rukungiri. The burial will take place tomorrow. We should observe a moment of silence for the deceased.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the other visitors we have in the gallery are students of Clive College, Kireka. You are most welcome to your Parliament. 

3.37
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance. Last Monday, we celebrated International Women’s Day. I travelled much earlier. You can even hear my voice; you will excuse me for it because it is a bit shaky. We had a lot of fun and also the other side of it. I was in my constituency preparing the people of Kitgum and Lamwo to celebrate the day with a lot of dignity and attachment, particularly for the women of Uganda and Lamwo. I was given an invitation from the organising committee to be the guest of honour in my district of Kitgum and in Lamwo as the woman Member of Parliament. 

The theme for this year was to do with celebrating equality and prosperity for all, especially women. The main celebration was in Kitgum District, Lagoro sub-county. In Lamwo District, we had it in Padibe. As a mother of twins - the two districts - I had scheduled my time to officiate in both districts. I started with Lamwo and had no problems because I found the district officials and the RDC. I delivered my speech and encouraged the women of Lamwo to join the rest of the women in the world to recognise that we have come a long way but we need a lot to make us really achieve the equality we desire.

I reached the main celebration ground in Kitgum, which was in Lagoro sub-county, only to be set aback. I found the district officials and Resident District Commissioner had changed the guest of honour. According to my invitation letter, I was supposed to be the guest of honour. The programme had changed overnight and the LC V chairperson was supposed to invite me to speak and then I invite the RDC as the President’s representative. I objected to that on two grounds. My invitation clearly stated that I was the guest of honour –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected from these who are –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. Recently this Parliament has been attacked for not doing much work. It has been attacked by the press and the public for wasting taxpayers’ money by coming here –(Interjections)- It is a point of procedure. It is in the newspapers. 

The matter that is being raised on the Floor - I would like to know of what emergency it is on the national policy. Of what importance is it that it should take all our time? Is it procedurally right to continue wasting taxpayers’ money when we have got too much work on the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to summarise what you want to say because we want to proceed with other business? Just summarise what you want to say. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I want the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Minister for the Presidency to clearly tell this House what the International Women’s Day means to the women Members of Parliament in their respective constituencies. 

The organising committee got clear guidelines from the Ministry of Gender; how come the RDCs of this country are stepping too much into the women’s space? How come they do this with impunity yet International Women’s Day is our day. The women literally objected and shouted them down. I want it to be on record that we clarified this and the communication should be sent to the RDCs. 

The argument is that if the President can preside over the women’s functions, then they are the ones to run such functions at the district level. We want this to be addressed to them because the RDC said that he never got a communication from above in writing. That is why it is continuing. I am sure it is not in Kitgum District alone. I passed through Amuru and I found that the Women MP there was grieved. Last year – 

THE SPEAKER: We have understood what happened. Let us respect ourselves. We have received the complaint on what happened on Monday in that area. So, what is the comment from the Minister for Gender who was the owner of this day? 

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. The decision on who should be the guest of honour was made at the district level but our message was national. Therefore, we would like to restate what we wanted. The function was to take place and the guest of honour at the national level was His Excellency the President. At the district level, the district committees would decide on that. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the point was that an earlier communication to her was made that she was going to be the guest of honour. Don’t you think that she was entitled to an apology that this arrangement had been cancelled?   

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, it is not the first time we come to this House complaining and we complain across the board as women Members of Parliament. You know that following a number of complaints in 2008, there was an undertaking by the Prime Minister that there was going to be a directive to all RDCs and chairpersons that in the absence of a female minister, if a district cannot secure that person, it would be the woman MP across the board. It was put in writing. It only looks like Government has now forgotten and you do not want to call these errant RDCs to order. They are defying a policy directive which your government gave. 

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, hon. Alaso has said that the directive was that if the district could not secure a guest of honour, then the –(Interjections)– yes, if they had not secured one they would have opted for the woman Member of Parliament, but they had secured someone. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what we can do is for you to go and look into this matter so that in future, the matter is made straight. She was asked to come and be the guest of honour and she was embarrassed. Review the record which the Prime Minister put out for such events; you go and look into it and come back and tell us.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. We would like to celebrate this day without confrontation. If it is true that the Prime Minister communicated, we are going to review it and make sure that we take note of that. 

3.49
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, as the acting Leader of the Opposition, I am getting concerned. For the last four years my women Members of Parliament on this side have been harassed on Women’s Day, which is an international day. The first incident involved hon. Alice Alaso in Soroti, the second was Betty Aol in Gulu, and in Kaberamaido the same thing happened – in fact in this one it was Christine Abia involved. The other day, it was hon. Nabilah in the market. I am getting concerned!

As acting Leader of the Opposition, I demand a statement from the Leader of Government Business to explain the harassment of the women on this side. I beg that we get this explanation from Government as to why our women are being harassed. This is an attack on the women; this is an attack on this Parliament. I thank you. (Applause)

3.51
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to widen this issue. To me it is not only a matter of mistreating women Members of Parliament on Women’s Day. I think what we should know from Government is: is there a protocol list in this country? I really cannot go to my district or to any district in Uganda and start arguing with an RDC or a chairman about my rank in this country. Government must come out with a protocol list and say, “Where does a Member of Parliament stand or where does a minister stand vis-à-vis the district leaders?” That is what is important to me.

3.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I notice that hon. Mabikke is likely to behave in a manner that is not acceptable to this House. The level of provocation [MS ATIM: “I am aggrieved”.] I did not know he was doing it on your behalf.

An issue has been raised by hon. Kibanzanga of alleged mistreatment of women leaders and he has cited some cases. In the first place, I would like to say that it is a policy of the NRM Government to support women causes. We have always been the vanguard of supporting women causes. This policy will not change and it cannot change overnight. If there have been incidents where some women leaders have not been treated in the manner —(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Just a few weeks ago the President was going around the country in a poverty eradication drive and he happened to come to my constituency. I do not want you to restrict it to women. He came to my constituency, hon. Kibirige was the master of ceremony and they pasted me out of the whole programme. It looks like there is a deliberate move to frustrate the Opposition and I do not know for how long this is going to continue.

Leader of Government Business, it is unfortunate that even as colleagues in this House, we can get out of here and start some kind of manipulation to frustrate other people. So, there is a need to come up and really streamline these things. Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, as I was about to point out, the cases of mistreatment will be duly taken up by Government. They will be studied and will be investigated. As you have heard from the hon. Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, guidelines were issued. If there was a breach of the guidelines that were issued, this is a matter that we shall take interest in. As you know, hon. Anywar, the NRM Government would like to maintain its relations with women because they are the backbone of our support as a party.

As regards the issue of the order of protocol, I would like to request the Minister for the Presidency who is charged with such matters to throw more light on this one. I know a circular was issued but well, I better let the minister throw more light on this. Thank you.

3.57
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the matter of protocol, I believe the best way forward is for us to put out another circular and inform members.

I want to clarify the matter that was raised by hon. Kikungwe on the President’s Prosperity-for-All tours. Hon. Members who have been visited will recall that we normally invite you for planning meetings. In those planning meetings we categorically inform Members of Parliament that when the President is in your constituency, you are the master of ceremonies. Unfortunately, some of my colleagues here especially from the Opposition have declined to participate in the planning meetings. Those who have participated will agree with me that they have been masters of ceremonies. Dr Lulume, you can bear witness.

THE SPEAKER: I think we are going to waste a lot of time on this, repeating ourselves. I think the best solution is for the minister concerned to put this in writing, tell us what would happen in such and such circumstances, and for the Minister of Gender to tell us what should happen on Women’s Day. I think then we shall abide with what is there rather than repeating ourselves. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 82/1/08 TO THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY

3.59
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “(i) In August 1992, a senior aide to President Museveni, Mr Innocent Bisangwa, was arrested in the United States and charged with conspiracy to illegally export TOW missiles to Uganda and other third world countries;

(ii)In January 2004, it was alleged during Ekimeeza debate that chemical and biological weapons were imported into the country and sent to the North; and

(iii) The main headline of the Daily Monitor, Wednesday July 30, 2008 was: Museveni aide ‘bought’ chemical, bio weapons!

(a) Could the hon. Minister inform the House why the Presidency, the fountain of honour, should persistently be associated with acquisitions of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD)?

(b) Could the Minister further inform the House for what purpose are these Weapons of Mass Destruction being sought?”

3.59
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My response to question 82/1/08 is as follows: I want us to note that Mr Innocent Bisangwa was arrested in the United States of America in August 1992. He was arraigned and tried by a court of competent jurisdiction. He was acquitted by court after a due process of the law. In essence, this means that he was cleared of any wrong. It would be very unfair therefore to bring into question matters that call on inquiry into his innocence at this forum where he has no right of reply.

Besides, not all allegations that are made by people on radio or in the print media are true. The Uganda Government has never imported, acquired, possessed, used or developed chemical or biological weapons. It is, therefore, not possible that what is non-existent would have been sent to the North or any other part of the country. 

The headline of The Monitor of July 30 2008, which said “Museveni Aide bought chemical, bio weapons”, is the epitome of all falsehoods. There is no aide, employee, advisor or assistant of the President who has been involved in buying or by any other means procuring chemical or biological weapons or weapons of mass destruction.

Weapons procured by the Government of Uganda are procured by the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs in accordance with both municipal and international law from legal sources and for legitimate purposes. These weapons are procured for the preservation and defence of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda as described in Article 209(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. They are procured to protect life and property and to preserve law and order in reference to Article 212(a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to state that these questions asked were premised on falsehoods and grave distortions. I thank you. 

4.03
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for attempting to answer the questions. 

I have two supplementary questions. The first one is: why did the minister not come up with clear explanations like she is giving now when these issues came up? When you keep quiet, what do you expect the public to do? We believe that what is stated is correct.

Two, I wonder whether the minister is aware that there can be no thunderstorm without clouds or smoke without fire. I thank you.

4.03
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise a supplementary question to the response of the hon. Minister’s statement. 

In the last paragraph she states - and correctly so - that weapons imported into Uganda are imported by the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs and she lists the aim for such weapons according to the Constitution. The quote she has made is, “to protect life and property and to preserve law and order”. I want to discover from the honourable minister why then in 2009 on September 10 and 11 innocent Ugandans were shot with some of these weapons and some of them were shot inside their houses? It is my desire and the desire of this House and indeed the general public to learn from the minister, who sounds to be more authoritative on this, why some of these Ugandans were innocently killed by the said weapons.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know, hon. Member, whether that is a supplementary question or an independent question. I think the best way you should have brought it as an independent question should have been: “Are you aware that in such a year at such a place this happened?” (Laughter) Because she may say “I am not aware.” If you wanted that question answered, that is how it should have been framed. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am proud that you are not only my Speaker but the Speaker of this House. Thank you for that guidance.

Hon. Minister, are you aware -(Laughter)- that in 2009 some Ugandans were shot innocently in their own homes using weapons that are supposed to guard them and to protect them? Some were in Kazo and others in Kawaala. I have a comprehensive report but my question, as guided by the Speaker, is: are you aware that some Ugandans were murdered by these weapons? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much. I wish to thank hon. Okello-Okello for his supplementary question but I was wondering whether in 1992 when this incident occurred, Parliament then did not have an opportunity to ask this question. This should have been the beginning of this question - wondering why the minister did not come up with these issues.

In Uganda we can have smoke without fire when we are talking about politics because we get so many stories cooked up and put in the print media and everywhere about things which are not true. You know it has happened to most of us here. So, I am not surprised that the smoke in Uganda can come without fire on some of these issues.

Hon. Kyanjo, first of all this is a serious matter that you are raising and I want to tell you that this matter should have already been handled by the Minister of Internal Affairs. If it has not been handled, I think the best thing to do, because you are quoting many incidences, is for you to raise a question to the relevant minister and he will be able to inform us properly. But we do not buy weapons of mass destruction. I want to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Minister, the thrust of the question was whether you were aware? Were you aware? (Laughter)

MS WABUDEYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to respond that I am not aware. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Fine.

MS WABUDEYA: I am not aware that innocent Ugandans can be killed just like that.

QUESTION 102/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, for question 102/1/08, I am standing in for hon. Beatrice Rwakimari because this question is a concern for most of us.

“Would the minister explain to the House the practical strategies that Government has put in place to reduce maternal mortality to attain the MDG No. 5 by the year 2015?”

THE SPEAKER: Were you instructed?

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Yes I was.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think that is how you should start - that I was instructed by so and so. (Laughter)

4.10
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, this is the second time I am appearing here over this question of maternal mortality, which is a very broad area to discuss. What I have done is to summarise the steps the Government of Uganda has taken to reduce maternal mortality and on the next page, the responses are followed by explanations in case honourable members are interested in following the question further. The other time I tried to bring an extremely well illustrated answer but the Rt Hon. Speaker thought that I was not in order.  

THE SPEAKER: Even this one –(Laughter)- I think if you wanted to answer these questions within the time given, you just say, “Maternal and new born identification and auditing” and then if somebody does not understand what you mean by making that lone sentence, that is when you come in to give other details. Otherwise, you will once again be caught up by time because this cannot be answered in three minutes. What you should have done is given one strategy in just one sentence and if one has not understood the strategy that is when you come in to elaborate. But you can proceed. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I take note of that. So the answer to the questions raised regarding maternal mortality and what the government has done are as follows: 

The Government of Uganda has undertaken construction and upgrading of health units to provide maternal health care services. We are equipping and shall continue to equip health units with emergency obstetric care units. 

We are improving referral systems. I have attached the number of ambulances, which have been purchased for that purpose and the distribution thereof. 

Medicines and Supplies 

There is a lot of controversy in this area because of the changes we made, which are good and are improving. I can guarantee the honourable members that in the next three months, all health centres will have the necessary drugs available -(Interjections)– Yes! 

We are increasing availability of blood. There was a temporary shortage of blood but that was because school children who are our major source of blood were on holiday. However, since they are back, blood will be available. As an international law we used to get blood from prisoners but we are now not allowed. 

We are revitalising family planning -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, were you getting blood from prisoners as part of their punishment? (Laughter)

DR MALLINGA: I think that it was just interpreted that way but it was in a real sense voluntary for prisoners to give blood, although it was misinterpreted that some of them were coerced to provide blood. So, that was stopped; there is no more getting blood from prisoners. Also, the HIV/Aids prevalence is quite high among them.

Revitalising Family Planning 

Family planning in this country is at about 25 percent, which is very low, but there are explanations. More than 50 percent of the population of this country are Catholics and the Catholic Church accepts only one method of family planning, which is the rhythm method. The other methods are open and we are expanding them. We have just received US $30 million to revitalise family planning.

Building Capacity for Human Resource to Provide Maternal Health 

We are training and holding workshops.

Maternal and Newborn Death Notification 

When the death of a woman who is pregnant or who has just delivered occurs, it must be notified to the Ministry of Health and investigations will be carried out. Any death under five years old, especially if it occurs in the hospital, must be reported to the Ministry of Health and an investigation will be carried out. If there are any shortcomings, procedures might be applied against the doctors who managed that case. 

Adolescent Health Programmes 

Adolescent health programmes are ongoing. We are integrating maternal health with HIV/AIDS and malaria service.

Routine Provision of Maternal Health Services

In all health facilities, including health centre IIs where obstetrics is not supposed to be practiced, we are providing emergency obstetric equipment. We are providing emergency obstetric equipment at health centre IIs and we are also strengthening the systems at health centre IIIs and IVs. 

As I explained earlier, maternal mortality involves a lot of ministries. At the end of my presentation, I would like to summarise to the honourable members that in order to improve health, a multi-sectoral response is necessary especially in other ministries: 
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to address the gender issues like FGM that may lead to obstructed labour. 
    • The Ministry of Education and Sports to help in addressing issues of illiteracy, better decision making by women on maternal health issues. Educated women are unlikely to die during pregnancy because they are likely to seek help and they are likely to have fewer children.
    • The Ministry of Agriculture for nutrition. 
    • The Ministry of Works to provide roads for transportation to access health centres.
    • The Ministry of ICT should address communication technology for supporting mechanisms for relaying health information. 
    • The Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds, which is the most important. I really feel that you are sending me to the frontline but you are not giving me the proper equipment, that is money. I need money in the Ministry of Health and I appeal to the honourable members to support me in the next budget.
    • The Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government should support districts in recruitment of required human resources in the district. 

So, we are doing all that is necessary and within our ability to reduce maternal mortality in this country. By 1985, maternal mortality in this country ranged anywhere between 670 and 700 per 100,000 live deliveries but it is now at 435. This shows that there has been a considerable drop. Infant mortality was more than 200 but at the moment it is 76. Overall, it is really a reflection of social development -(Interruption)

MS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the response that the hon. Minister has given, and I think that most of these issues have been reflected in the policy statements; so, they are quite known. What I would have expected to hear from him was to tell me what the audited quality of health services is in this country, as far as skilled attendants are concerned; how many skilled attendants we have and at what level.

I would also have expected him to tell me about the basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric care, and where exactly we can find it in this country. For instance, if you are talking about the basic obstetric emergency care, which is supposed to be at health centre IIs, like he has mentioned here, how many health centre IIs in this country have that kind of facility, and how many health centre IVs have the comprehensive emergency obstetric care?

Mr Speaker, he has talked about the community-based strategy to improve the quality of reproductive health through the use of village health teams. May I know how many sub-counties in this country have had this strategy implemented and where it has started? Is it sustainable, working and functioning so as to change the behaviour of the mothers?

Approximately 15 percent of pregnant mothers will develop an obstetric complication even when risk assessment has taken place. That means that for emergency obstetric care, there is no need of just talking about it, that you have done it, but where exactly do we find it? Those are the issues that I would have expected to hear.

We have moved to many health units and indeed, when you get there, you get the shock of your life because of the way the deliveries are handled; the limited supplies and equipment. I would have expected the minister to tell me that this year we have disbursed this amount of money or equipment, and medical supplies to the different health facilities.

THE SPEAKER: I don’t think all these details could come in an answer. I think the solution is what hon. Epetait earlier said and actually there are arrangements to give the committee some time on the Order Paper to debate this issue of health extensively. That is where you can get all this. Otherwise, in an answer that has to be given in three or five minutes, you can’t and you don’t expect him in a supplementary question to give you those statistics. When we get time to debate this, as we have said, say two hours, there you will get those details which you want. We actually intend to give the committee time this month or next month.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for having looked at the potential candidate to this specific question. My submission is to the minister. The minister is appealing to Members of Parliament to support him in ensuring that there is enough money that goes to the ministry. You will recall that last year, hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya, brought to this House a motion urging Government to support maternal health. The minister was among the people who were saying, “No, Government is working hard to ensure that maternal health issues are taken care of.” We told the honourable minister that the motion was made in good faith, to ensure that Parliament backs the ministry so that they get enough money to settle these issues. I am surprised that he comes here again to lament that Parliament supports him to ensure that he gets good money!

Secondly, Parliament has always said, “Bring a loan request for issues of maternal health”, but nobody has ever come up with a motion to borrow money. We are living on borrowing money for issues that we are not even going to implement. We have even borrowed money for workshops and seminars. Why don’t you come up with a loan request to improve facilities in health units so that we can have our children safely?

Mr Speaker, as an expectant mother -(Laughter)- I would be happy if the minister told me that, “Do you know what, as a country, we have put everything in order. Winnie, tomorrow when you go to deliver, you will be safe”. I got surprised when he started talking about prisoners donating blood. These hungry people who are even beaten in prisons are not eating; how do you expect them to donate blood? It is a shame to us as a country. You know the level at which we are feeding our prisoners and even the students themselves. I would imagine the reason why they are not donating their blood is because they are malnourished. Mr Minister, be a little bit serious with your work and let the lives of mothers who are giving service to this country be secured. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: What we have heard are really debates, and as I have indicated, the minister has put it on notice that when we have a general debate on the issue of health services, this will be a very big issue. So, you can prepare yourselves to give us statistics and so forth. As I see, these questions and the answers may not solve the purpose. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to request the Ministry of Health to update Parliament majorly on two documents; to lay on the Table the road map for the reduction of maternal and neo-natal death, and also lay on the Table, the Health Sector Master Plan that the ministry claims to have developed and submitted to His Excellency the President. The House is ignorant about it and we want it laid on the Table so that when we are debating health issues, we are all abreast with what obtains as of now. Thank you.

4.28
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to ask a specific question to the Minister of Health. I wonder whether the minister is aware that in Uganda today, the many needs for family planning commodities stand at 43. I agree with him that family planning is low, but their needs stand at 43 percent. Is the minister aware of this? It is wrong to use a religious denomination as a scapegoat. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the minister comes to answer, I would also like him to give us more details on some of the health centre IIs which were put in place with taxpayers’ money and they are not functional. One specific example is Lagoro Health Centre II, which has been put in place with taxpayers’ money, but has no medical personnel to operate it or drugs; it is non-functional. Even Okidi Health Centre operates three times in a week. What is the problem? You should update us on those dysfunctional health centres in which we have put money but you have not put the personnel and the drugs. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The procedure with supplementary questions is that they are also limited. Normally, the person who has asked the question is given the opportunity to do so and then about two or three supplementary questions are allowed, but you cannot get 10 or 20 supplementary questions. This is the practice, and the solution would be that perhaps next week or the other week, we can set time for this general debate on health. That is when you will be able to exhaust your concerns and he will be able to tell you everything. But to ask 20 supplementaries in this single question is not our precedent. 

Supplementaries are related to the answer given. So, if you want, we can decide to set a date next week and we have a debate on health. So, prepare yourselves to do this. Otherwise, we deserve your answer. 

Before we go to another question, we have in the gallery students and teachers of Bugema Adventist Secondary School. You are welcome. (Applause)

QUESTION 106 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

4.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): “Is the Minister aware that there is a high drop out rate, especially for girls under UPE?
ii) If so, would the minister present to the House disaggregated statistics indicating the completion rate for UPE since 2007?
iii) Would the Minister inform the House about the concrete plans that Government has to address the high drop-out rates in UPE?
iv) How much, in financial terms, has the high drop out under UPE cost the Ugandan taxpayers?”

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Quality of health services, emergency obstetric care – 

THE SPEAKER: Leave it. 

4.33
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports. The papers are circulating. 

The first question is whether the ministry is aware that there is a high drop out rate, especially for girls under UPE. The response is that the ministry is aware that children drop out of school before they complete the primary cycle. School drop outs with respect to gender indicate that the rate of drop outs is almost equal among boys and girls. For example, in 2008, the drop out rate was 6.3 percent for boys and 6.2 for girls. 

According to studies conducted by the ministry, pupils drop out because of various reasons as indicated in that pie chart - I am sure, Members, that you have the papers. As can be seen from figure one of that pie chart, the majority of the pupils drop out of school due to lack of interest, and that is at 43 percent, followed by family responsibilities at 15 percent. But then there is sickness at 12 percent, fees at 8 percent, marriage at 4 percent, jobs at 4 percent, pregnancy at only 2 percent, and dismissal at only 1 percent; but what is highlighted there is lack of interest followed by family responsibilities. 

On question No.2, Mr Speaker, completion rate refers to the number of pupils who enrol for Primary Leaving Examinations expressed as a percentage of the official primary seven school-going age population. That is six to 12 years in the population.

By virtue of computational formula, completion rate cannot be compared or computed only for the UPE schools. So, we are talking about all children aged 12 years who are completing the primary cycle. And, therefore, the completion rate for pupils since 2007 is shown in figure No.2. 

In figure No.2, for 2006, the total was 48 percent; 47 percent for 2007, and 49 percent for 2008, and different figures are indicated for boys and girls. 

“Would the minister inform the House about the concrete plans that Government has to address the high drop-out rate in the UPE programme?” 

Mr Speaker, I have listed 12 measures or interventions which we are already implementing to address this issue of high drop out rate. I think to save time; I am calling upon the Members to read those measures. But let me point out measure No. 4 - intensified inspection - because we think that without intensive inspection, teachers are relaxing. They are coming late; they absent themselves; they teach for half a day and so forth. So, inspection is one of the outstanding measures we are taking to ensure that they teach regularly and properly. 

“How much, in financial terms, has the high drop out rate under UPE cost the Ugandan taxpayer?” The response to this question is that using the education information system, the Ministry of Education and Sports on an annual basis keeps on reviewing enrolment in UPE, which numbers are used to pay the capitation grants to schools through the districts. Therefore, the children who drop out of school are not paid for and they receive capitation. We keep on monitoring the figures and capitation is paid only according to the enrolment in schools; meaning that those who are outside are not paid for. The dropping out of pupils from schools impacts negatively on the sector performance indicators.

4.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Soroti woman representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the minister for coming in to respond to these questions; they had taken quite a bit of time. 

Let me first of all observe before I make this supplementary question, that the response to question one to me is inadequate. I would have expected the minister to compute drop out in terms of completion of a given cycle of education. That is the standard way that we do it as educationists. You do not do drop out in terms of a class and in terms of a year. Therefore, the figures that the minister has given me of 6.3 percent for boys and 6.2 percent for girls are a misrepresentation of facts. We know that by the time children complete the primary cycle, you have over 45 percent of the girls dropping out and you have this data within the ministry.

Secondly, what constitutes the lack of interest, the minister has talked about it as a key factor? The major contributory factor to drop out in education is lack of interest. According to her, it contributes to 43 percent of dropout. What is that that is embodied in the lack of interest? Why is there lack of interest in education? 

I also want to know whether the minister does not consider feeding; teacher motivation; the learning environment, and sanitation and teacher accommodation as key factors in causing dropout in our schools?

In regard to question three, I think the minister avoided my question because I expected that the concrete plans would be related to the causes. Unfortunately, the concrete plans to address the causes are not related to the causes. So, I do not know how they will help to mitigate dropout.

I am very disappointed with question 4. My supplementary would have been as follows: “Did the minister read question four and understand it?” The Ministry of Education does not see the cost of high dropout to the taxpayers in this day and age where we know that education is an investment? So, you invest, and when these children are in P1, you put in capitation grants; you put in text books; you put in teachers and then you go on to year two; they get out of school and then the Government says there is no cost to the taxpayer? That is why my supplementary is, was my question really read? 

4.43
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative Mityana): Hon. Minister, it is an open secret that more girls drop out of school than boys but in your response you said that there is no difference; that the dropout rate is equal among boys and girls, and you talk about a certain study. Can we be informed of what kind of study the ministry carried out?

We need also to look at - I find its findings lacking because it contradicts what is known. Hon. Minister, in your own statement on page 2, you went on to say that Figure 2 indicates that the completion rate for boys is higher than that of girls and yet you say that there is no difference between the dropout rates. Can you clarify on that?

4.44
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, if these figures presented by the minister are anything to go by, there is a big problem in this country. Two percent pregnancy would account for about 200,000 defilement cases in this country; that is the simple interpretation.

When you look at the 13 percent which is unknown, it looks to be a big figure that the ministry should have gone a step to find out exactly what these factors or reasons are. Just to state that they are unknown is a big loophole. I pray that we find out what accounts for the 13 percent. I will only end by asking the minister if it is possible, to maybe at a future date, give us details of these pregnancies; it would of interest to know really what happens.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a session for questions; it is not a session for debate. Questions should be questions; if you do not have a question then you do not participate in the session. Please, we should have straight questions.

4.47
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, my supplementary question is: is the honourable minister aware that UPE schools in Kyamuswa, which have classroom one to seven, only have one to two teachers?

THE SPEAKER: This should have been an independent question.

MR KABUUSU: No, Mr Speaker. I am linking it to -  

THE SPEAKER: Do you really expect the minister – 

MR KABUUSU: Yes. Is the hon. Minister aware that in Kalangala and Kyamuswa specifically, the dropouts are contributed to by disguise? That children who go there from primary one to seven, which have classroom one to seven, never learn to count, speak or write English which is part of the dropout cause.(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, what I want to honestly tell you is that the minister is going to say that she is not aware and is going to investigate. But if you had asked her a formal question about Kyamuswa teachers and so forth, she would have come here with an answer. But this question as far as it is, was a general question and you are now going into the details, which is really unfair to the minister because how will she do it? We should find a way of asking questions -(Laughter)- you see, maybe our friend there has –

4.49
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you. For the last one and half weeks, my Party President, Col. Dr. Kizza Besigye was in the West Nile region and I was at his side. He diagnosed the problem of UPE as follows:

One, the children are hungry and a hungry person cannot be able to listen properly in class.

Two, teachers are under paid. He promised that as soon as we are in the driving seat, he will pay teachers a minimum of Shs 400,000. (Laughter and Applause) Can Government take on this free advice before we get there? I am saying so because it was Dr Besigye who said he was going to scrap poll tax, graduated tax and Government quickly took up the challenge even without preparation. I thank you. (Laughter)   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, don’t you think lack of feeding and low payment to teachers has an impact on the dropout? 

4.51
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you. Hon. Minister, on page 2(ii), you proposed to enforce the policy on automatic promotion in all schools. 

One; don’t you think that particular policy of automatic promotion greatly affects the quality of the products that we churn out from primary schools? 

Two; the ministry also imposed a ban on holiday teaching. Hon. Minister, are you aware that that policy is enforced in rural districts and yet it is being done in certain schools within and around Kampala? What are you going to do about it? 

4.52
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): I thank you. In question three, the minister has plans which have been outlined to address this. I have one specific question. When are these plans going to be rolled out and what are the budgetary implications to it? Do you have the money to undertake this? I thank you.

4.53
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you. On page 1 of the answers, one of the reasons that cause dropouts is stated as fees contributing to 8 percent. Can the minister explain which fees these are?  Is it school fees or some other sort of fees? Could there be some other sort of fees that is an impediment to sustained stay at school?

One of the reasons causing dropouts is lack of interest. There was a Government programme some time back that was intended to encourage pupils to stay at school, and the idea was that we would provide meals in form of milk and fruits, and that was the reason why the Dairy Corporation Ltd was divested then at US $1 at that time.

The reason for this was that we could have a programme known as the School Milk Feeding Programme to encourage pupils to stay in school. So, what happened to that programme? In what form is it now? How did that one die out yet taxpayers sacrificed and gave out the Corporation at only US $1 when there was a buyer who could have bought Dairy Corporation Ltd at US $2.5 million? 

What happens to the children who drop out? This is a serious matter of concern. If the children dropout - yes, we are working to reduce the rate of dropouts. But for those who drop out, what happens? Where do they go? Who knows where they go? Do you know, hon. Minister, where they go? What programme do you have to follow them up as Government? 

THE SPEAKER: That is a question for the minister in charge of children. No, I think we should wind up on supplementary questions.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): I thank you very much. I also thank my colleagues for responding to that question. The hon. Shadow Minister of Education and Sports asked why lack of interest constituted 43 percent of the dropouts. There are very many reasons for lack of interest. I want to remind my colleagues that before UPE came into force, we had only 2.7 million children in schools, and when we started UPE in 1997, we had 5.7 million children in schools by the end of that year and this included those of three years, 20 years, 18 and so forth. When we started implementing this programme, we discovered that it was neither profitable nor feasible to have three-year-olds in schools. 

We have been advising parents and the schools to make sure that they do not take or enrol any child less than six years in school. The drop out rate is very high in primary one and primary two. This is simply because all these young people who were brought into the system before they were ready for school keep on crying that, “I want to go back to my mother.” Many of them have left the system.

We have been trying to advise - the law is very clear that we should not enrol children below six years.  But many parents are very enthusiastic; they take them to school. After a term or two, they drop out; they are just not ready and too young to continue. When we looked at the figures, many of the children are too young to stay in school and their interest is not yet cultivated. That is one reason.

Two, those who are 14 years and above have many other interests; getting a PLE certificate is not their priority; so they also drop out and go and do something else. 

Lack of interest can be accounted for by either those who are not ready in terms of age, or those who are not ready to stay in school because they have other interests. They have grown to such a level that they can do many other interesting things. Of course, many other factors can come in. When we look at that figure, the question still stands. We shall continue looking into this. But at least the survey we have conducted has revealed under-age and over-age. Those two factors are very prominent. 

The Member went on to say that, “Is the minister aware that feeding, teacher motivation, sanitation and so forth may be some of the factors behind lack of interest?” I take note of that. We are all aware that we are working very hard regarding feeding. Here in 2008, we passed a law making it a responsibility of the parents to feed their children. What we are doing is to sensitise the children about the link between hunger and studies. Many of them are responding.

We are motivating teachers. After the introduction of UPE, we started paying - the lowest paid primary school teacher gets Shs 200,000. We are planning to increase that money.

Regarding sanitation, during the current financial year, all the money we have for construction is to put up toilets, expand toilets, improve toilets, provide water and so forth. 

Those issues are being addressed effectively. I want to ask the members of parliament to continue supporting the budgets which we increased for such motivation.

The Member went on to say that, “The plans we have are not related.” We have realised that the pedagogy aspect is very important and, therefore, many of the measures we are taking are aimed at addressing pedagogy. The problem we have is absenteeism. When a child is absent, who is responsible? Probably the parents should also be motivated or mobilised to make sure absenteeism is reduced. 

The minister said I did not understand the cost to Government but we are talking about dropouts and saying that the capitation grants and books we are giving out take into account those who are in school and, therefore, we do not lose out on those who are not in school. 

Another question, which was raised by one of the Members is, “Where are they?” That is a very good question. Where are those who drop out? If a child drops out at the age of five when he was brought to school under-age, he goes back to his family to grow up. I am sure many of them are growing up and will come back to school when they are ready. When a child drops out at three years, as I found them, they grow up and come back to school when they are ready. 

In Uganda, our policy is open, we start at six years; but we do not have a ceiling for rejoining school.  Some 42-year-olds are sitting PLE and nobody is complaining. So, those who drop out when they are too young come back when they are ready, and those who drop out when they are over-age go and become other good citizens in society. We are now working out what we call the polytechnics – they join the polytechnics and acquire skills.

Hon. Ssinabulya is wondering why the figures indicate that the drop out rate for boys and girls is more less the same when the reverse is known. What is known and what is researched are two different things. We shall continue researching about this. We shall do the research in Mityana and try to assess the drop out rate for girls and boys. Many studies have been conducted on this and that is what we are finding; but because there is that emphasis on the girl-child, the girls who drop out are more visible than the boys. When you look at the statistics and research findings, the difference is very marginal. We shall establish if what is known relates to the research results.

Hon. Kikungwe said there is a two percent pregnancy rate and concluded that they are defiled. That is a very good question to answer. Defilement is high, but pregnancy outside defilement is also high. So, who is responsible? Are they defiled? Are they raped? Those are social issues we can continue investigating. The unknown reasons - surely I agree with him - we shall continue finding out what else the answer can be.

Hon. Kabuusu is complaining about fewer teachers. Multi-grade teaching is very well-known, and I am answering this question for the third or fourth time here. In Kyamuswa and Kalangala, the low enrolment cannot call for a teacher per class. Some classes have three children, others four; the largest class is 10, so we cannot have so many teachers in a low – 

There was a question about hunger. We are addressing hunger and mobilising the population to feed the children. I have already answered the question about under-paid teachers. 

Regarding automatic promotion, we are conducting a study to find out the exact number of children who repeat classes in this country. So far, we have found out that the number of those who are repeating is not as big as it is put. Indeed, we are encouraging teachers to make sure that all children pass.

Coaching in holidays is only in urban areas. You know that urban schools normally do not comply easily with regulations and guidelines. But we have arrested some; I think you heard over the mass media. We are trying to enforce it. 

Mr Speaker, the children should not stay in school for 365 days; it is not good for their brains; for their bodies; and learning is not only in the classroom; learning can also be done in the home environment. So, this is against the principles of teaching and learning.

Dr Lulume asked, “When are the plans to be undertaken?” We have already put this into force; that is why in 2009, the first grades we had were higher. So, we are already working on this. The honourable member also talked about fees. These figures are affecting those in private schools and those in public schools. So, there are those who are paying fees and when they cannot pay, they drop out. 

On lack of interest – meals are being mentioned. We are tying to work on that by mobilising the stakeholders. I am not aware about the milk programmes; I am going to ask more about it. Thank you. 

MR MEHNYA: Mr Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure, rule 69, under behaviour of Members during Debate and Dress Code; rule (d) is about the military attire for Members of the Armed Forces. Is the Member of Parliament representing Ibanda North Constituency, and also a commissioner, in order to adorn a military attire to tease us, yet we know that he is not a military officer?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he is tracing his roots; he cannot forget his roots. But now that you have read out the rule, I hope that he will comply the following day. (Laughter) 

QUESTION 107/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION

5.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): “Would the Minister of Education explain to the House the regional disparities she noted in the performance of students who sat UPE in 2008?

(ii) Would the Minister inform the House about plans that are in place to improve PLE performance in regions where UPE performance is still very poor?

5.07
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The performance of pupils in PLE has been varying in different regions of the country. During the academic year 2008, there were regional disparities in performance as presented in that table. The reasons for the disparities and the interventions have also been outlined below. 

May I draw Members’ attention to Table No. 1 indicating the regions: Central region, 81.8 passed during that year; in the Eastern region, 75.1 passed; North East, 72.8 passed PLE; North, 75.9 passed the examinations; South West, 84.6 passed and then West, 90.6 passed the examination. Those are the regional disparities as indicated and the figures indicate those who sat, those who passed and those who did not sit. 

Reasons for Poor Performance

Mr Speaker, through our enhanced inspections, we realised that we have problems with pedagogy, management and administration of the curriculum. So, we are looking at how much is being done in the classroom, and we are trying to tackle those issues. 

Reasons one to nine, I will point out some of them:
    1. Inadequate practice of the subject matter by pupils, which results into failure to link the topics which are taught in both the lower and the upper classes. This is a pedagogical issue, which we are already tackling. Teachers rarely give homework to the pupils, or even plan for assignments for the pupils. Assessment of pupil’s work is rarely done; we are looking into that through inspection and intensive supervision.

    2. Low levels of literacy, evidenced by failure to read and follow instructions, and of course this results in poor performance and misinterpretation of questions, where candidates ignore the key words that define the issue to be dealt with and, therefore, end up presenting irrelevant work. 


    3. Insufficient coverage of the syllabus – Mr Speaker, you will recall, I have been to this Floor to say that much time is being wasted; but we are tackling that issue.

    4. Failure by teachers to prepare lessons with well-stated outcomes and clear linkages; we are enhancing the refresher courses to make sure that this issue is tackled. 

    5. Inadequate teaching and delivery mechanisms - With the increase of numbers, many teachers are not using a variety of methods. That is another pedagogical issue.
 
    6. Little attention is given to the individual differences in the learning process. This is partly because of the large numbers we have. But of course, we are also encouraging the teachers to improve on that aspect.

    7. Inadequate syllabus coverage; children cannot answer some of the questions because they have never covered some of those areas. 

Those are some of the issues we have identified for poor performance, and we are already implementing interventions. The interventions are one to seven, but I should have added, sensitising parents and guardians about their responsibilities. This is because many of our parents just say to their children, “Go to school”, without caring whether the child walks to school or not, or whether he or she has a book or not. They think UPE means just sending the child to school, hungry without even books. So, we are sensitising the parents. 

And then, we are monitoring the utilisation of the resources we send to schools for the UPE programme. Those who didn’t get the paper - but we are looking at those aspects as very crucial to make sure that we make meaningful interventions to be able to encourage the children to pass very well.

The other issues are broader than what we could get on this paper. As peace returns to our country, children will be attending regularly but that is a macro issue which I think we all appreciate. In some areas there was insecurity, children could not easily walk to school on a daily basis and therefore their performance was affected in that way.

But by the pattern we have here, we are already in control of what we think we can do and we have started a programme on top of the second page, the Quality Enhancement Initiative, where we are implementing those measures from one to seven. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

5.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, hon. Minister. I have a problem with this answer. I was looking for regional disparities; I thought that was the key thing in regards to performance. I wanted a comparative analysis in education. We do comparative education and we do comparative analysis again and what I see here is just listing of performance that includes, I presume, even the private schools. Again, I was more interested in PLE in UPE and how the regions faired. I find this response misleading because the minister has even decided to hide under what she calls a pass rate. That pass rate could be division one, two, three, six, seven, eight up to U - I do not know which division that one is. The minister knows that what I am looking for in regional disparities would be very clear if she had gone by giving us grades.

The minister also knows that presently performance is assessed in terms of academic performance. Regions that get division one are rated to have performed very well. Now, when you cover up this answer in terms of a pass rate, I find it problematic. 

Therefore, I want to put it to the minister - because I cannot now ask supplementary questions with this type of response - that it is important that the ministry looks at this regional disparities and draws lessons from the performance in various regions, the rural-urban divide, the North-West divide and all those things that come into play in our education because there is a lot of potential that is being lost in our country. 

It is not that the children, for instance, in Kalangala or elsewhere are dull children. It is the disparities in the facilities that we put to them: the absence of laboratories, the absence of good schools, the absence of teachers, the absence of classrooms; those are the disparities we are looking at and we are losing a lot of potential as a country because we are concentrating facilities in some parts of the centre here.

I think that I cannot ask supplementary questions; maybe my colleagues can figure out what supplementary questions to give but we are lost and that is what we put to the minister to address the disparities in the distribution of educational facilities between the rural and the urban so that we do not lose out on the future of our children.

5.20
MR JACK WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to find out from the Minister of Education whether she is really happy with the results she reads out, year after year, of the performance in UPE schools. If she is happy, for us in Mbale we are not happy at all because the UPE children cannot even spell a simple word. Children in class 4, class 5 cannot even spell the words “Teacher”, or “chair” but if the minister is not happy, what measures has she taken? 

I agree with hon. Alaso that the Minister of Education should have looked critically at the performance of regions for the children who go to private schools in Kampala here perform highly and we know that a one in Kampala could be anything between 80 and 100 but upcountry in those places where some of us come from, it is very rare that a child gets 90 in a subject. Therefore, if the minister is happy, she is only happy with the results from the schools around Kampala and these are private schools.
 
I wonder how many honourable members here send their children to UPE schools. The whole country, people are proud that we have got UPE schools but people who pass are the ones who go to private schools. When you wait around Kampala Parents, Greenhill and Lohana Academy, you will see hon. Members in this House dropping off their small children to those schools and when hon. Namirembe Bitamazire comes to the House and gives figures, I have a lot of doubts that this is a true reflection of what is taking place in upcountry schools. UPE programme was a good one but it has been mismanaged. I thank you.

5.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. The minister has given us tabulation. Twelve is grade one, four is grade one. Could the minister really tabulate and show us in the East how many got four because exactly -(Interjections)– yes, that is a basis. You tabulate those who got four, five like that so that we know exactly what really is the performance because 12 is grade one and four from Kampala Parents is grade one.

The question I want to put to the minister is, are you aware that we all come from the same tree? A villager is the same as the person in town. Why do people in town perform differently from those in the villages and what actions have you taken to rectify the disequilibrium?

The second one, Madam Minister, we are aware you were once a headmistress and we know you have been in the Ministry of Education for sometime. Are you at the same pace of the current technological move because the technology of 1960 is not the same as that of 2010? Are you at the same pace? 

5.24
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question is in regard to whether the poor performance is because of the exam-oriented system as opposed to the continuous assessment which I think would have been ideal if we are talking of universal primary education for literacy and numeracy. Would you want to recommend us to switch to continuous assessment as opposed to the current exam-oriented system?

The second question is that now that UPE leads to USE, and that the drop-out rate is very high - I can give an example of Buliisa where close to 8,000 children seven years ago enrolled in P1 and only 1,000 did PLE - what intervention are we making to target the drop-out citizens who actually will not go to secondary school? I thought I would bring in the completion together with the performance because at the end of the day, you have citizens falling out and there seems not to be a plan for them. I thank you.

5.26
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question to the honourable minister is, during our time, many of us studied in the rural schools and we competed favourably with students from the town schools and we actually qualified in the first and second grades. Those days even the third grades were non-existent. But these days the picture is completely different. May I know what has gone wrong and how can these gaps that exist today be addressed?

5.27
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the honourable minister to answer the following questions: Are you aware that this disparity is still continuing? And are you aware that accommodation of teachers, which you have not mentioned here, played very significant roles in 2008 because most of your teachers were mobile teachers since during that period they were operating from the IDP camps or in town to come and assist the pupils in the learning centres?

And then, are you aware that some of the books which should have been used to help these pupils were destroyed during the war and have not been replaced? What measures are you putting in place to address this? 

And finally, are the answers and reasons you have given to address some of these questions in five, six and nine, adequate? Because although you have provided measures in three, what happens up to now is that teachers have not managed to address this issue of the syllabus up to the end of the year and they will walk free with that. When you try to investigate you find that there are still mobile teachers - some of them have failed to be accommodated in their school premises. Now, when they have not covered the syllabus fully right from P1 to P7, do you expect any results? What are you doing to these particular head teachers and teachers because some of them have become immune to PTAs and the SMCs have also failed to handle the situation? Are you putting in place some measures to address this like transferring them or demoting them so that you can be heard on the ground? Thank you.

5.30
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, I wanted to ask the minister whether she is aware that even pupils who have not passed are let to pass and go to another class and that it is a ministerial directive that no pupil should stay behind? What plans is the ministry putting in place to see that only those pupils who qualify to go to another level are promoted? 

And two, can the honourable minister and the ministry plan for questions and exams to suit learners in rural areas in order to curb the disparity? Because it would not be important to examine the learners at the same level yet the ministry is aware of the disparities and continues ranking learners in rural areas as if they cannot compete yet the ministry can design a mechanism to suit learners from different geographical areas?

5.33 
MR YOWASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister’s answers are not really very convincing. She has put the blame of failure on the victims - 

THE SPEAKER: What is your supplementary question?

MR BIHANDE: That is what I am coming to, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, make your supplementary question.

MR BIHANDE: The supplementary question is: is the minister aware that she has put the blame on the victims of failure, that is, the teachers and the pupils? When you look at the reasons she has given for failure she has exonerated Government.
 
Is she also aware that in some areas in this country teachers walk seven kilometres in the morning to reach their schools and therefore, they cannot put in all the time they are supposed to put in?

THE SPEAKER: The question should be, “Have you exhausted the causes of the failure?” (Laughter)
 
MR BIHANDE: Secondly, is the minister aware that in some areas we still have a lot of congestion in the classrooms whereby each teacher teaches over 100 pupils per class and therefore cannot effectively teach which may be reason for failure. So, what programme does she have to rectify that hiccup?
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, answer that.

5.35
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, colleagues, for those very good comments and observations. Hon. Also is not happy because the perception of the question did not meet her expectations. What I can say, Mr Speaker, is that we can go into the information; I will see her and she writes down what exactly she wants but according to the questions which were put here, what she is putting down that should have been the answer is not related to the question.  But we can very easily produce another text going into grade ones because the question should have been, how many got grade one in the East? How many got grade two in the West? I will surely bring down that grade table and then we shall get that answer very easily. 

My colleague from Mbale wanted to see whether I am happy or not. The answer is very obvious and our manifesto is very clear, we shall continue implementing UPE and address the challenges and disparities. So, it is a continuous programme; education has been in this country for more than 100 years but we are trying to make it better every year. So, I want to assure the Member that we are committed to continuously improve the quality of education in this country. 

The same Member said private schools perform better. I can also produce that information to show him the comparative figures and I am sure he will be the one to make the decision as to whether private schools perform better than the others but the figures are very revealing and we shall be able to do that. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you want to know why the range of first grade is very large, from 4-12? You want to know how many scored four, five up to 12; that information is also available. If a question is put in that respect, we shall be able to bring the figures and then you will be able to compute.

Why urban vs. rural? I am sure people living in Kololo are not living the same style with those in Gomba, where I come from. The rural-urban divide is just a socio-economic-cultural issue. And indeed what we are trying to do is to provide resources equally. Because the teachers who are teaching in Mbale were trained in Shimoni here; they had the same teacher training colleges with the same facilities, same curriculum, have the same salaries et cetera. So, what I think we can do is to ensure that when we go to the rural areas, let us ask these questions: where are the books from the ministry? Which teacher is teaching and what grade is he or she? Where was he or she trained from? And you will see that most of the equity issues can be answered right from each school. 

But we are also trying to address these two because your son or daughter will not perform at the same level. The levels of literacy in the urban and rural area are determinant factors. So, surely we can analyse this further and look at what exactly brings about the difference. 

I did not know what technology you were talking about because you were asking whether the technology some of us went through is still the same. But I think one plus one is two. (Applause) That is what it was and that is what it is. And if, Mr Speaker, you allow me to go on, I believe the sun still rises from the East and sets in the West. So, I do not know, but I will go out and we speak on a one-to-one and get the technology, which I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi would like us to adopt now. 

But let me give you one example. We have adopted the SMS technology, where results can be obtained without any hullabaloo at all -(Applause)- and that is one of them. So, I will find out and take not of what technology hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to and then we shall surely take his recommendation. 

Hon. Mukitale, the examination-oriented system is being replaced with continuous assessment, which we are introducing soon and I am sure that when we have trained the teachers, it will play a big role in helping our children. But where we started the pilot scheme, the continuous assessment was abused. Some teachers wanted to give very high marks to make parents very happy. But we are going to make sure that we polish up that.

As for the interventions, I have already given them. But then I want to draw the attention of the Members to universal post primary education and training. When we started Universal Secondary Education (USE) we at the same time introduced the Universal Post Primary Education and Training and there are over 40 institutions in the country where those who fall out of P7 and cannot continue or for one reason or another want to acquire skills, are being trained - if I had known, I would have brought the list of these institutions. So, they are being taken care of and Government is sponsoring them at those farm and technical institutions. So, the rural-urban is a question that has often come up but we have already looked at it.

About accommodation, I would like to thank hon. Angiro because he is working with a group of NGOs who are putting up houses for teachers and I am very happy that he has taken that initiative. He invited me to go and launch these teachers’ houses, I haven’t had the opportunity to do so but I want to recognise his initiative in this respect.

However, the government is also working on that. May I announce with pleasure in this House that concerning the books that were destroyed, the Netherlands Embassy has given many books to many districts and schools in the Northern region. At another convenient time, I will bring the list of schools and books and indeed the government should be grateful to this Kingdom of the Netherlands. I am sure, Members, that you have come across this information but if you haven’t, I will give it to you and you will know that they have helped us to replace about 80 percent of the books, which were destroyed.

From Kalangala there was raised the issue of automatic promotion. Who of you would take his child and want him to repeat? What we are doing is to encourage the teachers to make sure that every child qualifies and when we look at the percentage of those who don’t qualify, we are also comparing. If 40 repeated and there are 100 coming into the same class, then we shall be running a system, which is congested.

I went to one district - but I will not mention it. The MP I think is not here but the head teacher was telling me, “For us all children spend 13 years in primary.” Thirteen years when a course is only seven years! I don’t want to say that we should encourage that kind of –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. You recall very well that when we passed the Education Bill, our committee sponsored an amendment to bring in quality as part of the key aspects of universal primary education. You also know that we continue to assess our children based on an examination mode of assessment. 

When children are promoted when they don’t know how to read or write, they will definitely not pass PLE and if we grade them the way you had initially put them on your paper and say they passed, they will have passed but not well enough to go into a good secondary school and they will not be able to get good results, that is the As and Bs for O’ Level and ultimately, you will not sponsor them among the government sponsored students.

I would like you to know that by pushing these children who neither know how to write or count, you are literally more interested in numbers than in the quality and effectively you are undermining the principles that are provided for in the definition of universal primary education.

I thought you would be reminded, as the political custodian of that Act, to ensure that our children are not condemned when you mass promote them when they don’t have any value added into them. This is because you want to probably account to the donors or to this House that UPE is a success story when children are not benefiting from it.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you so much for that supplementary question -

THE SPEAKER: It is an observation not a supplementary.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: A supplementary. Repeating does not automatically mean learning. You can repeat five or ten times without passing. So what we have done, and I have listed these, are the measures or interventions. For some of these people who are repeating, we have taken trouble to find out why and in some instances during the month of June, they go away to graze animals and come back during third term to sit exams. Others are missing classes for 38 days a term and there are 86 days in a term. Some come to school in the morning and mum wants them home in the afternoon so at lunch hour they go. Others would come at 9.00 a.m. or 10.00 a.m. when Maths and English lessons have ended. So, these are all factors. 

I can’t see a pupil who went away for four months to graze animals during the dry season coming back - and by the way, this is seasonal. That child will have been at school for a total of about four months and if we continue promoting this idea of just repeating and saying there is time - we are promoting them and identifying individual needs and I think in my response I said this. 

Who are these people who are due to repeat and what other factors are affecting them? We have already started with children suffering from HIV/AIDS. If you make an infected child repeat ten times without knowing that he is a victim and taking measures to assist him, he gets demoralised. So, this automatic promotion is healthy -(Laughter)- and I would like to be a little bit professional here. The rate of growth of children differs so you might make him repeat when actually he can improve in the next class. He can, yes. I want us to go into philosophy and pedagogy and prove all these things.

Let us not demoralise our children. Definitely, if a parent comes to say, student x was in hospital for three weeks, it is understandable but when one goes to graze and then you accommodate him for the seven years he will be in school because every July he will go, what are we doing? I would like to beg the Members of Parliament that let us give this a more scientific approach and let us look at what makes these children repeat but not just say let whoever wants to repeat do so because then we shall not have done good service to them.

Hon. Bihande said the paper is not convincing and that I am blaming the victims but until we are firm on the ground to make sure that children go to school, that teachers come to school and the teaching is correct, we cannot just say people will pass. So, I have given you the lists of interventions that are in place and we are all going to make sure that we improve the quality of education in this country. 

Concerning the high teacher-pupil ratio, this is as a result of our massive approach to education and we cannot, as a country, go back to elitism where just a few used to go to school. Let us get everybody to share the cake and let us all vow and resolve to improve the quality of education. If we want to go to the classroom where the students are 20 or 15, there are international schools here with 15 or even five pupils in a class. But with our massive approach to education where we want everybody to be literate, we shall handle this high teacher-pupil ratio as we move on. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I do not know whether we can proceed with the other subject – the Bill of the Minister of Public Service. Maybe we will deal with this on Tuesday. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. I wish you a good weekend.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 March 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
