
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Friday, 25 March 2022

Parliament met at 3.40 p.m. at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER: Proclamation made by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament on the election of the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

“WHEREAS on 25 March 2022, the Clerk to Parliament, during a Special Sitting of Parliament notified the House of the resignation of Hon. Anita Annet Among from the Office of the Deputy Speaker of 11th Parliament, thereby rendering the Office of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament vacant; 

WHEREAS under Article 82(6) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 6(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, ‘An election to the office of the Deputy Speaker shall be held at the first sitting of Parliament after that office becomes vacant’; 

NOTING that Article 82(2) of the Constitution of Uganda and rule 6(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda provide for election of a Deputy Speaker by Members of Parliament from among the Members; 

AWARE that Article 82(5) of the Constitution and rule 6(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the Speaker to preside at the election of the Deputy Speaker; 

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of powers conferred upon the Speaker under Article 82(5) of the Constitution, rule 6(2) and 25 of the Rules of Procedure, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds today on the 25th day of March 2022 at 15.40 hours to elect the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Given under my hand and seal at Kampala on this 25th day of March 2022.

Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among,
The Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and, once more, I thank you for electing me to this position. Thank you so much.

Honourable members, earlier today, you elected me to be your Speaker and I am grateful and pledge to serve you in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

In this regard, I have vacated the Office of the Deputy Speaker, by resignation, in compliance with Article 82(7)(c) of the Constitution.

Article 82(6) provides: “An election to the Office of the Deputy Speaker shall be held in the first sitting after that position has become vacant.” This sitting, therefore, is convened for the sole purpose of complying with that constitutional requirement. 

As you are aware, we are supposed to receive the alternative policy statements from the Opposition on Tuesday. This means we must conclude the process of having the Deputy Speaker and that should be done today and now. 

I thank you for turning up in this number.

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES FOR THE OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: We are inviting nomination of candidates.

3.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, permit me to add my voice to the voices of those who have congratulated you. Receive my congratulatory message upon the triumph and elevation to the new office.

I rise to move a motion under rule 5 and rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: Is it rule 6, rule 5 or rule 6(5)?

MR NAMBESHE: Both rule 6 and rule 5 because there are modifications that are supposed to be made as per instructions in rule 6. So, they are used interchangeably.

I move to nominate Hon. Moses Junior Okot Bitek, the Member of Parliament representing Kioga County on the FDC ticket. I nominate him to take the Chair of this Parliament as the Deputy Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nambeshe. Is it seconded? 

3.50
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I wish to congratulate you for having attained that high office. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Santa, please put on your mask.

MS SANTA OKOT: Madam Speaker, I stand before you to second the nomination of Hon. Moses Junior Okot Bitek, the Member of Parliament for Kioga County, for the position of Deputy Speaker of Parliament. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In line with rule 6(5) and rule 5(6), we are required to get consent from the candidate. 

3.53
MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, cognisant of the whims and admirations of the nominator and the seconder, who are alive to the fact that I am a Member of Parliament for Kioga County, a reflection of the hoi polloi (the plight of the common man) in northern Uganda – (Applause) - I do accept my nomination in furthering the legacy of the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, my uncle. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Bitek. Hon. Nambeshe, could you talk about your candidate for three minutes? (Applause) Hon. Gilbert Olanya, this is not a market.

3.54
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I bring to you and the 11th Parliament, the Hon. Okot Moses Bitek. He was born to a retired head teacher, a one Mr Angiro John and the mother, Emule Tekela Angiro of the Okarowok Clan. This is a clan where the deceased, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, belonged. (Applause) The mother to Hon. Okot Bitek has been serving – she is actually an ardent supporter of the NRM party in Kioga. She has held a number of leadership positions in the party up to now. She is the Chairperson of the Women’s League of NRM, Amolatar District. 

Hon. Okot Bitek, the man I am presenting to you as a candidate, is a man of substance. He went to Amuka SDA for primary education; Aputi Senior Secondary School for O’Level; Gombe S.S for A-Level; Makerere University for his Bachelor’s Degree in Law and to Law Development Centre for a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice.

Hon. Okot was elected a Member of Parliament on FDC ticket, by the people of Kioga. In Kioga County, after he was elected to Parliament, he was designated to these committees: the Committee on Human Rights and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. On these committees, his exceptional abilities have been a blessing because of being straightforward and principled. 

Prior to coming to Parliament, Hon. Okot Bitek engaged in politics of activism, especially human rights activism. He championed –

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to go. 

MR NAMBESHE: He championed the fight to protect the rights of fishermen on Lake Kyoga –(Applause)- and it is upon such a background that high-handed men, who have taken this country hostage and have no respect for the rule of law and good governance, shot him for dead. The people of Amolatar voted him overwhelmingly in the constituency. This was the very first voting, where both NRM and Opposition jointly overwhelmingly gave him the vote. (Applause)

As a man of many firsts, Madam Speaker, when they were voting him to be our flag bearer for this Opposition political divide, we were all united as forces of change - the six parties - and he emerged unanimously as our flag bearer. 

Finally, our candidate greatly condoles with the people of northern Uganda, who have lost a brother, a father and a statesman. Our candidate is cognisant of the careless statements that were made by our adversary in this contest, Madam Speaker, who dismissed, with sheer arrogance, without any iota of remorse, the grieving community of Lango Parliamentary Group, Acholi Parliamentary Group and West Nile Parliamentary Group. 

Madam Speaker, in a nutshell, these careless utterances relegated the community, which was grieving to hell. It is forgivable but not forgettable, Madam Speaker. With those remarks, I say this for God and my Country. I implore Members to unite and give Hon. Okot Bitek a vote. God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, I do not think that was called for. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah belonged to the whole country, not only to northern Uganda. (Applause) Any other nomination?

4.00
MS SARAH OPENDI (Independent, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move this motion, allow me, on behalf of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association, to congratulate you for this landslide victory for the position of Speaker. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, worldwide, the position of women Speakers in parliaments globally is just 29 per cent. With what we have done here today, I believe this moves us to just 30 per cent. So, we hope that other parliaments will do what the Ugandan Parliament has done so that we do not just look at gender but also capability. 

My name is Sarah Opendi, Woman Member of Parliament Tororo District and the chairperson of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association. I beg to move, under Article 82 of the Constitution and Rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, that Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, Member of Parliament Ruhinda North County, Mitooma District, takes the Chair of this Parliament, as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah Opendi. Is it seconded?

4.02 
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to the other voices in congratulating you, Madam Speaker; as the women fraternity of this country, we take pride in this achievement. Congratulations.

I rise to second the motion, moved by Hon. Sarah Opendi, for the nomination of Hon. Thomas Tayebwa as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aber Lillian. 

4.03
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Rubanda County North, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you and say, I am proud of you. Without further ado, I accept the nomination. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Tayebwa. Any further nominations? If there are no other nominations, can Hon. Sarah Opendi speak to her motion for about three minutes?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I rise, with the greatest humility, to recommend to you the Hon. Thomas Tayebwa. He was born in Bitereko village, Mitooma District. He is the Member of Parliament for Ruhinda North County in this district. He holds a Master's Degree in Business Administration from the Eastern and Southern African Management Institute, a Bachelor of Laws degree and a Bachelor's Degree in Social Sciences - both from Makerere University. 

He is a lawyer and an experienced administrator, with an impeccable record of over 15 years. He holds a professional certificate in Parliamentary Affairs from the International Centre for Parliamentary Studies, London and a certificate in negotiation from the Harvard Law School, USA. He is, therefore, well grounded in the Rules of Procedure and Parliamentary Practices. 

Hon. Thomas Tayebwa was appointed the Government Chief Whip in June 2021 and he held this position until yesterday, when he tendered his resignation. He has built a good working relationship with both sides of the House and leadership within Parliament. He has been instrumental in fostering cohesion and unity among us, the Members of Parliament. 

He is an inspirational, God-fearing and result-oriented, dedicated servant-leader. He stands for equality, fairness and independence of the institution of Parliament and for the rule of law. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa is a family man and he is married to one wife - who is a woman. 

Madam Speaker, there can only be one Deputy Speaker at a time. And I, therefore, present and recommend to you Hon. Thomas Tayebwa for this position and call upon you, honourable colleagues, to cast your votes in his favour as our next Deputy Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. Yes, Hon. Nsereko?

4.07
MR MOHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion that nominations for the position of Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament be closed.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Okot, representative of the youth.

4.08
MR HENRY OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament present, I rise to second the motion to close the nominations for the position of the Deputy Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Members, the nominations have been closed and we have two candidates. We have Hon. Okot Bitek and Hon. “T.T”. Could the Clerk avail us with the voting material?

Hon. Tayebwa and Hon. Okot, can we have two of your agents from each side?

Honourable members, they will read your name then you come and write the name of your candidate and finish voting.

ELECTION OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER

(Members voted by secret ballot)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who could have come in after their names had already been read and have not voted, please, come and vote. If there is no other Member, we can start with the counting. The agents are here. 

(Vote counting/tallying commenced)

THE SPEAKER: Electoral Commission team, thank you very much. Clerk, can we have the results?

DECLARATION OF RESULTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for completing this exercise. The results are as follows:
Hon. Moses Okot Bitek, 82 votes. Congratulations. (Applause Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, 379. Congratulations. (Applause)

By virtue of the powers entrusted to me by Article 82(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda I declare Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, the duly elected Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. (Applause)

Hon. Deputy Speaker-elect and honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the patience that you have demonstrated today. I think it is a very good start. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATH OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 82(10) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE OATHS ACT (CHAPTER 19 OF THE LAWS OF UGANDA)

The oath was administered to Mr Thomas Tayebwa

HANDING OVER OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF POWER BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE RT HON. DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

(Instruments of power were handed over to Mr Thomas Tayebwa.)

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE TO THE POSITION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF
PARLIAMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER-ELECT

6.04
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and your deputies, finance ministers, the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, honourable colleagues Members of Parliament, the Clerk and the staff of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. Allow me to most sincerely thank you for overwhelmingly electing me to serve you as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. (Applause) 

I would like to thank His Excellency the President for appointing me as a senior cabinet minister and the Government Chief Whip, a position that allowed me to showcase and enhance my potential in matters pertaining to running the Parliament of Uganda. I confess that I am much better prepared now than nine months ago, when I wanted to occupy this office. 

This was only possible due to the support and effective supervision by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, Hon. Robinah Nabbanja and Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. I cannot thank you enough. 

Relatedly, allow me to thank the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among and you, honourable colleagues, who offered me maximum support and cooperation in execution of my duties as the Government Chief Whip. The same thanks go to the NRM Parliamentary Caucus Executive and Members who supported me so affirming me as a chairperson of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus. Colleagues, I will forever be indebted to you. 

Let me take this opportunity also to congratulate, the Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among, on your elevation to the position of Speaker of the 11th Parliament. You merit it and I sincerely pledge my utmost cooperation as your deputy. Together, we shall serve Parliament with dignity, integrity and cooperation. I commit before you today, to perform the duties of this office with full energy and commitment. I will support Members and staff of Parliament to uphold the vision and mission of Parliament as we shall be led by our very good Rt Hon. Speaker. 

I would like to thank the NRM Central Executive Committee and members of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, who unanimously approved my nomination to contest for the position of Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament, on the NRM ticket. Colleagues who felt that I should carry this mantle and stepped down for me, I thank you. I can never take that for granted. 

Your Excellency, today we have witnessed a sudden transition in the leadership of Parliament occasioned by the untimely death of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I personally wouldn't have liked to occupy this position under such circumstances but the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah I know, if he was here present, he would challenge me to stand up to the occasion and ensure that parliamentary work goes on unhampered. 

I wish, therefore, to convey my sincere condolences to the family, friends, His Excellency the President, Rt Hon. Anita Among who has been the Deputy Speaker and the country at large for this great loss. We shall greatly miss his expertise and guidance, but we shall continue practising what he requested us to do. He said when we are doing parliamentary work, it should be “we” not “I”. The moment we follow that advice of “we”, all of us shall be winners and all of us shall deliver and claim the benefits together. We shall take solace in what we had shared and learnt from him to continue his legacy. 

Colleagues, as you know, this has been a difficult period for all of us. Some of us, in the heat of the moment, made statements that annoyed a section of our brothers and sisters from northern Uganda. Personally, I made some statements when I was trying to explain how Jacob would respond to some of the issues. Colleagues I sincerely and wholeheartedly apologise to anyone who was hurt.

I know we have already stood up on two occasions to pay respect to our fallen leader but even if it was a thousand times, considering his contribution to our beloved country, we would not tire of doing it another time. I, therefore, humbly request Your Excellency, the Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues that we stand up again and observe a minute of silence in respect of our fallen hero, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)
 
MR TAYEBWA: Honourable colleagues, allow me to thank His Excellency the President and the NRM party for creating an environment that rewards commitment, patience, hard work and loyalty. The environment that His Excellency the President and NRM party have created is one that allows a person like Tayebwa from a very humble background and the history of political diversity as late as 15 years ago, to be allowed into the NRM, be ideologically nurtured through the different levels of the party, and now entrusted with responsibility at a very high level of leadership. I urge my fellow young people to take advantage of this environment. 

In a special way, allow me to thank my people of Ruhinda North County for trusting me to lead. I cannot take it for granted. In our local dialect, we usually say mwebare, mwebare, mwebare munonga. I could only achieve this dream because of your overwhelming support and prayer; rukundo egumeho. 

I also would like, in a humble way, to thank my dear wife, Rukundo Anita Tayebwa - whom you have confirmed that I am married to one wife who is a woman - and my son, Timothy Rubanda Mayonza, for putting a smile on my face. This has enabled me to focus on serving my country as you help me absorb the stress that comes with service.

To my parents, Mr Daudi Bangirana, Mummy Teddy Bangirana and my family, you are the best. God bless you.

To my colleagues in the Opposition, we are the leaders that God has chosen at this point in time to serve our people. I would like to congratulate my brother, Hon. Okot Bitek, for the spirited fight he has managed to put up. We have known each other for long from the campus days, and up to now, we are working together. I would like to congratulate you and I promise that I will be reaching out to you to look at the ideas you had and see how we can incorporate them in our working plan. 

Our differences should never undermine the interests of the people of Uganda. As a referee in the contest of debate in the House, I promise to be neutral, fair and balanced. I will only demand the highest standards of debate, courtesy and mutual respect when chairing the House. This is the only way we shall bring dignity to the august House.

For God and My Country.  

REMARKS FROM THE RT HON. SPEAKER WHO WILL IN TURN INVITE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO ADDRESS PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker. I have listened to the words that you have said. First, I wish to congratulate you upon your election. Congratulations! It is God’s plan that we are together again. We stood in the last election and I became the Deputy Speaker and you became the Government Chief Whip, but little did we know that at one time, we would work together in the same office. Karibu sana.

I promise that we will work as “We” and not “I.” I have worked with the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for the past nine months and we have been speaking one word. Our statement was “We” and not “I.” I will make sure that we work together to enable Parliament achieve its goals and serve the people of Uganda. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for taking time to be with us to fulfil this noble obligation. We do not take it for granted. 

Your Excellency, you have spent the whole day here with us. It shows how much you are committed to the democratic governance of this country. We all know how busy you are and how busy your office is. We can assure you that as Parliament, we will deliver to this nation and we do not take your time for granted. 

I would also like to thank the honourable Members of Parliament for spending the whole day here performing this constitutional duty. I would like to thank members of the Central Executive Committee of the NRM Party (CEC) who enabled us to be here; Hon. Tayebwa and I. We know that they have also been here the whole day. I thank you. 

On this note, therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to invite His Excellency, the President, to make his remarks on today’s occasion. 

REMARKS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

6.18
H.E THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Anita Among, Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Her Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, ministers, all the Members of Parliament and the Ugandans who are listening. 

First of all, I again extend condolences to the people of Uganda and to the family of the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah on the sad and untimely death of our former Speaker, which happened on Sunday, and I announced it to all of you when I got the information. We have already stood up. We do not have to stand up again but we shall say more about him when the time comes. 

Secondly, I congratulate the Speaker, the Rt Hon. Anita Among and the Deputy Speaker, the Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, for being elected to those positions. Congratulations. I thank the Parliament, the NRM caucus and CEC for processing their names and now electing them to be Speaker and Deputy Speaker.

I think the political leadership will have to do what the Banyankole call “Okuhonga.” Okuhonga is when you do bad things like murder, insult, abuse, attack. The answer is okuhonga and you pay a fine. We shall have to kuhonga because with the Banyankole, there is what they call “Ekyosi.” Ekyosi is from the verb “Okwosha.” Okwosha is when you spend two or three days without doing something. 

Therefore, when somebody dies, it is constitutional among the Banyankole that you do not work. It is ekyosi. It is the time for not doing work which is okwosha for four days. Since they did not have refrigeration, they would bury immediately as soon as somebody died but they would be in the ekyosi for four days, without working or doing anything. They would do the minimum, for example, being cattle keepers. Some people had to go with the cows but they would not go to the garden for four days. 

So, the Banyankole would be scandalised if they saw us doing what we are doing now. They would think that we are witches and bringing bad lack to the country. However, this is the consequence of copying European things blindly. For example, this election was just copied. I think we should find a way of sorting it out so that in future, we do not have the same madness of - Somebody is not buried and we are here engaged in elections!

I, therefore, appeal to you not to celebrate now. Do not go and celebrate: “Anita Among Oyee”, “Tayebwa Oyee” Please. What we have done is an abomination against our African culture but following the Constitution, which has some elements of foreignism. We had to do it because it is in the Constitution. 

I was talking with the Chief Justice and the Speaker – you see, those wigs they are putting on. I really feel embarrassed when I see those people. Why are you putting on a wig? What is it for? You people speak about speakers but I was the Speaker for the National Resistance Council for 10 years, from 1986 to 1996. I never put on that wig. Never! I cannot put on a wig. I am not mad. (Laughter)

I was whispering to His Lordship the Chief Justice; can’t we get -In Tanzania, they have changed. They put on something but not a wig. However, this embarrassment of having to do these things shows you the NRM line of always thinking for ourselves and getting our own solution instead of just copying. This is just symbolic; it is not really substantive. It shows something deeper, that, even in more serious things, we need to think for ourselves and get our own solutions to our problems because our problems are very different.

I had said I would speak about Rt Hon. Oulanyah later when his body is here but yesterday, when I met the Members of Parliament from Lango, Acholi and West Nile, they told me something that I had noticed myself. It was that the late Oulanyah had followed the NRM line. He was originally in UPC but he came over to the NRM. After carefully assessing and listening carefully to the message of the NRM, he went down and actually succeeded in uniting our people in northern Uganda in those three areas: Lango; Acholi, and West Nile. The NRM had, of course, been trying to unite them but it seems the late Oulanyah had done it even more deeply than we had done before.

The disunity was because of the wrong politics. In 1971, the soldiers from West Nile massacred the soldiers from Acholi and Lango - incredible killings. In 1979, when we were coming, we had to struggle with the UPC people who wanted to revenge on the West Nilers and, actually, they did. When the Tanzanians withdrew, they attacked villages in West Nile and 500,000 West Nilers went into exile. They only came back when NRM called them back. 

In 1985, the Acholi group - Okello and Bazilio – turned against the Lango group – the one of Mzee Obote and Col Ogole among others. Of course, we rejected sectarianism. So, when we came, we ignored all these and we told them to - if you are to blame, you blame the mistake maker or the misleaders, not the misled. So, we never blamed the people. Of course, in 1966, there had been a conflict between what they were calling “the northerners” and the Bantu – “the southerners”. 

The northerners were led by Obote and others. The southerners were led by Mutesa, Ibingira and others. That is how they had torn our country apart until the NRM came and rejected all these. 

So, I really want to salute Oulanyah because I heard him speak many times about this – talking about why NRM has been able to stay in Government for all this time. He would recount: “We had very many presidents in so many years. We have now had one President for all this time and one political force. Why? There must be a reason.” I used to hear him giving that analysis. 

Apparently, it had a good effect, especially when he became Vice-Chairman of the NRM in northern Uganda. I could see these people – especially in his last trip when he went around – were more united. Certainly, the Members of Parliament looked more united. That is why they were saying we should ring-fence the position of Deputy Speaker for that area. However, when we came to our caucus here, we were able to see that it was not correct to ring-fence this position because it was different from EALA. They were quoting the example of EALA. EALA has a number of positions but this one has only two positions. Therefore, you cannot easily ring-fence them without creating new mistakes.
 
I want to salute Oulanyah for this unity among our people in that area. Do not look at yourselves again as Acholi, Lango and West Nile. Please, look at yourself as Ugandans. (Applause) Go beyond that regionalism and look at yourself as Ugandans and as Africans. That is how the NRM has succeeded. 

Yesterday, when we were screening the candidates, there was one clever member of NRM, a delegate from Kalongo, he is called Amos; and there he is. He said what I know already; that the MPs are under a lot of pressure from the constituencies. People are asking for school fees from them, burial expenses from them; a lot of pressure. That is why some of the MPs turn out to be IDPs – internally displaced persons, fearing to go back to the constituencies, because of the pressures. 

This is something we foresaw and we have been trying to tell the political class, all this time, ever since 1995, when, after doing the experiments in the area near where I live now, North Ankole and the surrounding areas, I became convinced that we can overcome poverty in the rural areas. This can be done through persuading everybody to go from tici me ici keken the way we call it in Lugwere; okukolera ekida kyonka, not working for the stomach, but also the pocket. It is doable, because we have done it. 

In 1966, we started as a student movement in North Ankole. And some of the people thought we were mad. However, we said, “No, these Banyankore can change if we show them how to go about this.” We were interrupted by Iddi Amin, but later on when we came back and resumed they have changed. Those people have income, especially from dairy. 

Some of the Banyankore have income from bananas; banana became a cash crop. Others from coffee and others from tea; in some of the areas, which have milk, tea, commercial bananas and coffee; people have incomes. 

In some of the other areas like Bundibugyo, they have income. That area of Bundibugyo is actually quite prosperous. Even the areas of Masaka have come up a bit with coffee and so on and so forth. And Kalangala came up recently with palm oil. 

Therefore, in order to save yourselves economically, emotionally but also politically – not to be overly stressed by supporters who beg from you – listen carefully to our message on the Parish Development Model. If you walk with us and we implement it, it will change the people in your area. Instead of them begging from you, they will actually contribute to you. 

The other day, Her Excellency, the Vice-President, Jessica Alupo went to Kiruhura area - I do not know whether she is still here or she has left; oh, she is there – on an invitation by the women there and they gave her cows; she was given cows. So when she came back, I said, “You have been MP for Katakwi for more than 10 years. Have you ever got a cow?” She said, “No.” They had given her some hens and some turkeys but she had never got a cow. But when she went there, they gave her cows. This is because they have got something. Whenever I go for campaigns in the country side – the other time they gave me 800 cows and I took them to the Government ranch. 

Therefore, to solve the problem not just of being harassed by your constituents but also to change our society, please listen carefully to the programmes of the four sectors; commercial agriculture on a small scale, intensive agriculture versus extensive agriculture, if you have got big land. That is one sector where you will get solutions; and the models are there.

Then the Emyooga. Some of the Emyooga are in the smaller industries; some in the services plus industries, big and small. Then services general - transport, hospitality and so on, and ICT. Hon. Dr Baryomunsi and his group are working very hard in that sector. So, the pressure you have for school fees; the problem comes from the elite not listening to the NRM live. 

In 1996, we introduced free education but because of indiscipline in budgeting, UPE did not become free and compulsory education, which should have been. You still have people - teachers and others - collecting money. If there is free education and we budget for it and we cut out all these other things, you keep bringing - new cities, new districts and so - the children of the poor will study for free and they will not bother you because they will be catered for. 

Therefore, honourable members, whether you are Opposition or NRM, should know that in order to succeed, you must work for the people. And we have informed you how that can be done only that people keep meandering and going to other areas. That is how you get some of these unnecessary pressures. 

I would like to warn people who are in the habit of taking advantage of problems to do cheap politics. Actually we are going to go after them because I have heard some people saying that some people killed the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. The police are going to come and say, “You seem to have some information, please tell us.” 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah did not die in a private home. He died in a highly reputable hospital. And before that, he was in another big hospital in Dubai; and before that, he was in our hospitals here, including the Uganda Cancer Institute; everything is there. I did not know that the Rt Hon. Oulanyah was sick until when he went with our doctors to Dubai; that is when I got to know what the problem was.

For somebody educated and who is supposed to be a leader to go and say - you must come and help the police because you seem to know what we do not know. So, when you hear the police - we cannot go on with this indiscipline; it is not constructive at all!

I would like to thank the Parliament - we have sat here for the whole day in big numbers; I congratulate the NRM and the allied groups - it seems there are some allied groups who have worked together but I also congratulate the 66 for sitting and behaving properly. You can see there is no teargas here.

I would have asked the Speaker - but I do not think I have that right to say, “Is it in order for some people…” because in the morning, somebody who is on my way - when I am going to Gomba Kisozi from Butambala- said that there is a camera. Where exactly is the camera? Where is the camera you are talking about? (Interjection) I am the camera –(Laughter)– don’t you -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen.

THE PRESIDENT: You can hear that some of these people need some attention; which camera were they talking about? If you are talking about that vehicle, it is not a camera; that is something else for our security here.

So, I am very glad Hon. Basalirwa said that this has been a very good election – that it has been done properly; others were not done properly but the 300 or so MPs who are here come through an election. Those who say NRM has cheated, how can you cheat and you have almost 400 MPs in Parliament? These are the ones who are voting now.

Most importantly, let us get poverty out of our villages - and it is not a party issue but a destiny issue. Thank you very much. I wish you good luck.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency, for that wise advice. We will let the President go first then we will follow. 

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 March 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem
