

Tuesday, 27 March 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
    1. Mr Paul Mwiru

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have order please? You are not allowed to make that kind of sound in this House. Thank you very much.
Hon. Paul Mwiru, I would like to welcome you again to this Parliament. I will give you a copy of the Constitution, which has not changed since you were here; the text you have has not changed and the Rules of Procedure, which has changed. I would like to request you to internalise and use them for the benefit of your activities here.

Honourable members, I would like to inform hon. Mwiru that when we started this Parliament, we agreed on some working methods. I will have the opportunity to discuss it with him briefly: That we would hold the flag higher; we would hold the national interests higher than our individual, constituency and regional interests. We should focus more on the country and its people. Therefore, I would like to ask you to join this movement to uplift the struggle of lifting the standards of people of this country.

There are many movements but I am not talking about the National Resistance Movement (NRM). A combination of people working together is a movement but we also have the National Resistance Movement. However, what I am talking about is the combination of all Ugandans striving to move forward. I would like to therefore urge you to join this particular activity so that we uplift the standards of the people of this country. You are very welcome. (Applause)	

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have communication from the Chairman of the Anglican Parliamentary Fellowship. The Anglican Parliamentary Chaplaincy with great pleasure invites Members of Parliament to the Easter Carols Communion Service, which will take place tomorrow, 28 March 2018, starting at 5.00 p.m. However, I would like to request the chaplaincy to adjust the time to 6.00 p.m. since Parliament will end at 6.00 p.m. 

Therefore, since I am the one communicating, I will amend your notice to correspond to the order of the House that the service will start from 6.00 p.m. and venue is the conference hall. Please endeavour to attend.

Honourable members, I would like to also give you advance notice that tomorrow, we will have a motion presented by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in relation to the number of judges. He has proposed to this House that the number be increased from 52 to 82 given the number of debates we have had on the increase of the numbers of judges since 2004 to deal with backlog among others. In 2004, we passed a resolution for the same number and subsequent parliaments have also done the same. The issues are clear.  

Given that reason, therefore, when this motion comes tomorrow, I will open the debate direct so that we can deal with this matter here. We shall not bother the committee with something that is already known to the House so that we can approve the increase to allow the minister take charge and implement the resolution which he has sought. This matter will not be referred to a committee.

Honourable members, we had received 20 Ministerial Policy Statements by the 15th of March, which was the deadline. We adjourned the House to a Friday, to allow the remaining Ministerial Policy Statements to be laid on the Table but we were not able to lay all of them on the Table. Today, we have those Ministerial Policy Statements and I am hoping that this will complete the process.

Honourable members, the purpose for which the law was designed this way was to help us facilitate the budget process so that we could pass the budget by 31st May and there are processes in between. That is why these timelines are tight. If we miss out on one, we will jeopardise the whole process. It has come to my attention that most or all the Ministerial Policy Statements that were laid here before have been withdrawn from the clerk’s office.

If this is true, then honourable ministers, you know where you are taking us. This means that for the whole week when we suspended business for committees to start handling the policy statements, there was no policy statement to handle. How can we do business this way?

You know that there are timelines. The Leader of the Opposition is required to submit the alternative policy statements by the 29th of March and we should have received these statements by the 15th; the other statements from the shadow ministers should have come by the 29th. On 1st April, we are supposed to expect the budget to come in here, complete with the Appropriation Bill.  

If up to today, we are still where we are with Ministerial Policy Statements withdrawn from Parliament and it is true - I am going to find out because I was told on my way here and I will communicate properly tomorrow. (Applause)

If it is true that the policy statements that were laid here have been withdrawn, then it is highly irregular. It is an abuse of the process and the law and we will not allow it to happen.  Those who have done so will have to come to apologise to the House directly, one by one, because that is not the way to do business.

I do not want to use words which would mean the actual action you have taken and would imply what you have done to the House. Honourable members, that is the concern because ordinarily by now, we should have gone a long way. The 1st of April is just next week, when we receive the budget and no committee has looked at any policy statement. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you are coming here with the budget yet your ministers have withdrawn papers. I am hoping the information I obtained is incorrect because if it is correct, then it is not right. Thank you, honourable members. Please, let us focus on this thing. Let us do our part to deliver this budget on the timelines that we have been given by the law. Thank you.

2.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate and welcome to the House the hon. Mwiru Paul, who has just joined us right now. (Applause) I would like to thank the people of Jinja East for sending us hon. Mwiru and we promise that we shall work with him to enable him deliver to the people of Jinja East.

Like you have said, Mr Speaker, we shall ensure that hon. Mwiru works with Uganda at the centre of all his dealings, to ensure that he serves Uganda first before himself. I know hon. Mwiru has been a legislator. He will definitely do that.

In addition to that, I rise to speak about the matter you have just spoken about on laying of policy statements. As you may be aware, honourable members, the budget cycle in Uganda is so far a known process to all of us. Ministers are expected by 15 March to have laid all their policy statements so that by 29 March, the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow ministers have considered the policy statements to be able to come up with alternative policy statements.

However, just like you have mentioned, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that this process is by the day getting deteriorated. I do not know whether it is meant to make the work of Parliament hard so that when we are coming to the last days of the budget, we are told to hurry up with the process so that we do not scrutinise the budget very quickly; or whether it is meant to fail the work of the Leader of the Opposition by failing her to scrutinise these budget statements to be able to give proper alternatives.

Basing on that, I wish to pray that the Government departments take note and that a process which is documented by law is followed to the letter. It is indeed true that, when we went to look for some of the policy statements that were tabled here so that we ably prepare ourselves with the alternative statements, we could not lay our hands on them. They had been taken on grounds that they were going to be polished. Our prayer would be that by the time a document is laid here, it is not laid for purposes of decoration or meeting deadlines, but that it is a document that is going to help Parliament to legislate properly.

Therefore, I ask Parliament that with the delayed processes of tabling the policy statements, the office of the Leader of Opposition be allowed up to 13th of next month to also scrutinise the policy statements which are still coming in. This will enable us bring forth credible alternative policy statements, so that we are not looked at as the ones who are really not in order and are not guiding Government in a way to serve our people better. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, by 13 April, you will have already received the budget. I do not know what you will be doing with the policy statement when now you have a budget as well. I am just thinking aloud because this is a situation we have not witnessed before. If we extend to the 13th, then these are the resultant problems as I have already stated. I do not know.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, it would not do me bad if they tell me to keep bringing here policy statements, not alternatives, so that we bring a substantive policy option and the Government department looks at it. As it stands, I cannot say I will look at the policy statement today and be able to produce an alternative tomorrow. 

It is either meant to disorganise our working method or such that Parliament or the Office of the Leader of the Opposition is discredited. We are ready to assist the nation and Government. If any minister thinks they are not in time, let them assist us. Our team will always be ready with the statements. We can always support you and we bring the policy statements, then you can come up with an alternative to our policies. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember we had this debate here and my attitude was different. My attitude was and possibly still is that the alternative policy statements that come from the Opposition should not be a critique of the ministerial policy statement presented by the Government; so that you present a policy that the alternative government could have presented if it was in Government and the committee can analyse them together. That is what my attitude was. (Applause)

However, it looks like I was not supported. It came to be known that for an alternative policy statement to be written, you wait for the one from the Government, look at it and make a critique and analysis of the statement, which now seems to be the settled position. That is why we are seeking extensions. If it had been the other way, there would be no need to seek extension because even in the rules, they have even provided when you can do it; giving you time to look at the other policy first. It should not work that way. 

A shadow minister should, on the day policy statements are being laid, be able to lay the alternative, which in the view of the Opposition would be the proper policy for that year. Then, the two go to the committee and are examined, picking policies from here and there. If there is nothing to pick from the Government side, so be it. If there is nothing to pick from the Opposition, so be it. However, the report should come and tell the House on how to proceed.

However, the rules as for now and laws are implemented as they are, but not as they ought to be. So, we are proceeding with the law as it is now. Therefore, you have to wait, but how long you wait is a matter we have to agree on. I am just advising that by 13th of April, you would already have the budget and the Appropriation Bills and all the other budget documents. 

So, I do not know whether you still would like to start dealing with the policy statement or you would now handle them concurrently with the budget and everything else. Now, we wonder what would fit in the process. Let us see; if you still desire 13th of April, we would allow the Shadow Government to present the alternatives by 13th of April.

2.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the matter that you raised about the policy statements, there is one anomaly that we have noticed also especially on the policy statement of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

Mr Speaker, last year in September, I raised a matter in this House regarding the absence of the Board of Immigration when we had a shortage of the passports. The reason was that the Board of Immigration had expired in March. Indeed, it had expired on the 27th of March. However, to date, there is that challenge. 

Mr Speaker, it has come to my knowledge that the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Jeje Odongo, on the 17th of March did communicate names for the Board of Immigration to the President for approval. Four of these people were eligible for renewal of their contracts. They include hon. John Elyanu Eresu, Faisal Ssali Kikulukunyu, hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki, Ms Elizabeth Sylvia Nabakka Musazi and Maj. Kibrai Ambako. This is from a letter from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, it has come to our knowledge that as this letter was being transmitted to the PPS of the President, the names were altered and substituted. The minister’s signature was scanned, and instead the names submitted included hon. Justice Mukasa, Mr Erisa Hisali, Ms Sara Wasagali and Lt. Col. Donald Mugimba.

Mr Speaker, in the previous appointment, the spirit of the appointment took care of regional balance, faith and gender; but, this anomaly where somebody changed and forged the names in the minister’s letter has not been taken care of. These names which have appeared include even members of board of other organisations. There are also other Ugandans like these ones who are still eligible for renewal. Therefore, why did that happen?

Mr Speaker, the board is the owner of the budget of immigration board. Now, the Permanent Secretary of Internal Affairs usurped the powers of the board to be the Accounting Officer, and yet from the amended law, it is very clear. I have here a letter to the Minister of Internal Affairs from the chairman, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Emilio Omondo, complaining about how the PS who is also the source of the alleged tampering with the letter of the minister to change the names to bring - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. I listened to my colleague, hon. Okupa, raising his concern about the delay in establishing the board which expired. Along the way, he brought allegations about a process which is on halt. He talked about change of names and lack of balancing of regions on a process which is yet to be concluded.

As such, in Cabinet, any minister who brings nominees that have not taken care of what hon. Okupa has raised namely, balancing issues; that is religion and other considerations, he faces problems. 

Therefore, I am constrained when the process is still ongoing and yet there are details being laid down by hon. Okupa who I thought was going to react on communication. I do not know whether it is a matter of national importance which needs urgent attention. That is why I was at loss and I raised a point of procedure as to whether hon. Okupa is proceeding well. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, indeed the issue at hand was the ministerial policy statements and nothing else. We had not even reached the stage where we were raising urgent matters of public importance. The honourable member for Kasilo took liberty to introduce matters that were outside the debate, and for that, he was not proceeding properly. However, honourable members, he has said some facts. Those who have listened may want to verify even if he has proceeded improperly. (Laughter) 

Hon. Okupa, you are not going to proceed that way anymore.

MR OKUPA: No, Mr Speaker, I will not proceed that way. I will zero it to the policy statement. The issue is now on who is the owner of the budget of immigration board since the board is not there. How are we going to look at the policy statement of the immigration board when their accounting officer and the board are not there? That is where the challenge is.

However, I lay the letter on Table for those -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let them pick it from somewhere else. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the message has been well delivered. May those people take action. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Government Chief Whip?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you may need to respond to the issue I am raising as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know on what matter you have risen. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In which case, she will not respond; I will have to.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have ordered the respective ministers who withdrew policy statements to come and apologise to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said if I discover it is true, I will ask the responsible people to come and apologise to the House. As of now, I have not verified it.

MR SSEMUJJU: In that case, it would be some sort of sanction. The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, concerns complying with deadlines in the law. It is because the Leader of the Opposition raised an issue on how we would respond when they are going to submit those policy statements late.

I am just asking if you can also find sufficient sanction for those who are submitting these policy statements outside the timetable laid out in the law. Maybe, in that case, an apology may not be sufficient. Mr Speaker, you should find the appropriate sanctions for those who are going to submit the policy statements outside the deadline in the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some of the sanctions lie with you. So, let us share the responsibility. Honourable members who are going to raise urgent matters, we are going to be very brief.

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, allow me to also take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Paul Mwiru for having bounced back in the House. I can assure him of the total support of the Government Chief Whip because we are here to legislate for this country. I congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for this achievement.

Secondly -(Interjections)- yes, from the bottom of my heart. Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip did not receive any notice from any minister to withdraw a policy statement which was laid here. I did not. When I heard you mentioning that you have heard that policy statements were withdrawn, I was taken aback and it is unfortunate that on top of delaying to lay policy statements at the Table; we have that mishap of withdrawing policy statements. I apologise for that, Mr Speaker.

Last year, it was the issue of a system, which was introduced by finance ministry, which made delays in laying policy statements. The ministry made an undertaking to clear the system; today, there are other challenges.

I would like to inform this august House that the Leader of Government Business will be requested by the Government Chief Whip to come and explain to the House the challenges that made the delay of ministries in laying policy statements. We entirely agree with your guidance on failing to beat deadlines. However, I know you can use your discretion to guide us and we see how we can proceed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me outline it for you, Madam Chief Whip; 31st May, we should be able to pass the budget because a few days after that, this session of Parliament should terminate. First week of June, it is State of the Nation Address to start the new session of Parliament.

We do not have the usual time that you say, “If the time is tight, you can extend.” Now extend from 31 to when? Is it to the next session of Parliament? That is where the practical problem is. That is why this timeline needed to be observed tightly.

Therefore, it is not a matter of the Speaker’s discretion or anything; it is within the law and we should abide by it and then we will not have these problems. Now you are telling me on 27 March, that the Prime Minister is going to explain why there is a delay. I do not know. However, let us see what is there and we handle them appropriately. Honourable members, you can now see that we are going to have to work around the clock because we need the budget anyway. The country needs the budget and let us see what we can do in these circumstances.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Jinja Municipality East Constituency represented by hon. Paul Mwiru. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. 

In the VIP gallery, we have Mr Komakech John Bosco Aludi, Executive Director and Mr David Okello, Programme Manager Caritas Gulu Archdiocese; they are here to observe the proceedings. 

We also have staff from the National Assembly of Kenya, Mr Eliud Matumbai, MS Faith Nthenge, Ms Angelica Wachira, Ms Hawa Abdi. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

We also have in the gallery this afternoon, students from Metropolitan International University in Kole District. They are represented in this House by Woman Member of Parliament, hon. Judith Alyek. And about the male representative, I do not know whether it is Kole North or South but it is either hon. Okello or - they are both Okellos.

Honourable members, can we proceed? I will start from Mbale Municipality with brief comments. Let us make it brief; if we cannot do it today, we will do it tomorrow because time has really gone.

Honourable members, we all know what has happened to hon. Wamanga-Wamai. We join him in these difficult times and continue in prayers with him. 

2.40
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues of Parliament, I stand on the Floor to make a personal statement. I would like to personally thank you, Mr Speaker and your colleague the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, colleagues Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament for the condolence messages you sent to me; the words of comfort, the financial assistance you gave me, which enabled me to give a befitting burial to my late wife.

I met my wife in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs where I served for 25 years. We worked in different missions. Her last mission was in Ottawa Canada and she had risen to the rank of minister counsellor. She was only waiting for one more rank to become ambassador.

Now, while on official duty, when she was travelling from Toronto to Ottawa, she was involved in an accident. That was last year. She got head injuries, and came back to Uganda. She kept getting feelings of headache and getting dizziness all the time.

When she went to do an MRI, they discovered that she had had some brain damage. She was admitted in Ottawa General Hospital, treated and she passed on, on the 26 February, this year. Ottawa Hospital had all the equipment, medicine and doctors but what God has prepared nobody can change it. 

I would like to thank you all Members of Parliament who travelled all the way to Budadiri Sironko District to join me in the burial of my wife. Thank you very much.  From all sides, Mr Speaker, this side and that side, people travelled to Budadiri to come and indeed celebrate for me. May the Almighty God reward you? I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it might be proper for us to rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.44
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the allocation of central forest reserves to commercial tree planters by National Forest Authority (NFA).

Mr Speaker, last year, on the 12 July 2017-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we said we are dealing with urgent matters.

MS KISEMBO: Yes. Mr Speaker, NFA last year advertised to lease central forest reserves to commercial tree planters. Some of these forests were in my district, Kibaale and greater Kibaale like Luzaire, Kanaga and Nyabigoye.

Mr Speaker, the official website of NFA has published a list of successful applicants for commercial tree planting in these forest reserves.

Out of the 1,240 successful applicants only 10 are from Kibaale and the people of Kibaale are aggrieved. They feel that as local people neighbouring these forest reserves, they should be given the opportunity to replant them. My prayer is that this House prevails over this decision that we give opportunity to the local people neighbouring the central forest reserves to do the replanting so that we avoid chaos.

If this is not attended to, I foresee a problem in Kibaale; if the local people may not be receptive to those developers who are coming to plant in the forest reserves and that can create insecurity and commotion. I beg to submit.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, and colleagues, NFA is in charge of Government central forest reserves. For Forests belonging to Government which have been deforested by people, a decision was taken that these forest reserves be leased to people to plant trees to rejuvenate the forests.

I do not know which other guidelines were given while allocating these forest reserves. However, the most important issue is that we need people to plant trees - the minister in charge will be asked to liaise - I know it is not too late for the people of Kibaale so that -(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. We all know that trees could just be part of a forest. However, a forest is much more than trees. The people of Kibaale are complaining about a lost business opportunity, which should have been granted to the people in that particular locality. 

Mr Speaker, is the Government Chief Whip in order to mislead this august House that in planting trees Government is doing re-forestation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, if there were trees in those places, I do not think that private people would be engaged to plant them. I do not know whether it is about management of existing forests or its replanting depleted forests. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to inform the august House that I am a tree grower not planter. I personally benefitted in 2003 where I got a lease in Nakaseke, to plant trees in forests which had been completely depleted by the people. 

The intension of Government is to make sure that there is no other business that is done in the forests other than planting trees. You have to do an environmental impact assessment to find the species suited for that particular project. 

Hon. Kasibante, I do not know how many trees you have; so far they give out central Government forest reserves for people to plant and manage trees. When you want to harvest them, you have to revert to National Forestry Authority for a license for you to harvest the trees you have planted. You do not just wake up and harvest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was still going to rule on the point of order. I do not see the strong foundation of this point of order. So I will take it that the member wanted clarification which you have given. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. However, the urgent issue raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Kibaale has to be looked into to make sure that the local people everywhere are given an opportunity to plant -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I guided that you do not press on the microphone and start talking before I authorise you. The reason is that there are people recording the proceedings. If somebody is speaking and then all of a sudden there is cross sound - they will not know what to write. Please let us respect that. Because of violation of standard procedures, I will not allow the honourable member to speak for now.

2.52
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the eviction of over 15,000 people in my constituency in Apaa, located in Pabbo Sub County in Amuru District. This issue has been coming to the Floor of Parliament several times and we have really tried to talk and reach a solution but nothing has changed. 

I would like to refer you to your own ruling, Mr Speaker, on the 13th April last year where you ruled that the Prime Minister should come on the Floor of Parliament to de-gazette the place. I would also like to refer you to the ruling of the Speaker on the 21st June last year, where she ruled that the reaffirmation of the boundary should take place.

Unfortunately, on the 13th October 2017, when all this process was not yet done, the Ministry of Local Government went on the ground to declare that the place belongs to Adjumani District. Now, the people are being evicted from the place; the worst thing is that the UPDF are the ones evicting people.

On the 23rd March from 10.00 a.m. to about 5.00 p.m. the whole place was invaded and 384 huts were burnt down; and one man called Okello Python was shot in the back as he was trying to escape from the people who attacked them and he died. He was only 26 years old and left behind nine children. The whole place is now invaded by the UPDF. 

To make matters worse, when I went to meet the Fourth Division Commander to find out what exactly is happening on this issue, he told me that they deployed the UPDF to evict people from that place. In his communication, he said that people had been compensated and had been given alternative land but unfortunately when I went on the ground, nobody had been compensated. People have nowhere to go as there is no alternative land. 

One unfortunate situation was of a 93 year-old man, whose huts have been burnt down and he was there doing nothing. Can I find out from the Government as to why the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) is involved in violating the rights of the people in that area? 

Secondly, I would like to find out, which alternative land and who are the people who have been compensated in this particular area since those who live there have not been compensated yet. This is the land which all their grandparents occupied. I would like to also find out from Government if there is any way our people can be helped with food and non-food items at this particular moment. I beg to submit. (Hon. Gilbert Olanya rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, I think the issue is clear. Let us not extend it. Let us hear from the Government.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I would like to give only one piece of quick information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let him briefly give information.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of national importance raised by hon. Akol is very important. You remember that 12 people were killed last year with bows, arrows and pangas. We gave the evidence of the names of those who killed people in Apaa. However, up to now, no one has been arrested, no investigations have been done; the issue is just kept silent. 

Secondly, the Fourth Divisional Commander confirmed to hon. Akol that the people were given the alternative land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you there when they were confirming? (Laughter)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I have just got the information right now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has already said what he has said. You were not there, so stick to what you know.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Amuru and stay there. Up to now, neither has anyone ever been compensated nor told that land has been given to them in this particular area. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What additional information are you giving us?

MR OLANYA: The information I am giving is that the people are not compensated and neither has land ever been allocated to them – (Interjections)- of course.

Finally, we live in injustice. Justice must be done to the people who are staying in Apaa. Right now, our people are not digging, not sleeping in their houses and they are being chased like dogs and chicken. I feel that this is too much. Let the Government handle our people with seriousness or else, we shall tell our people to defend themselves. Let us try to be serious. We are unhappy about this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that does not sound like additional information.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I respect my brother, hon. Akol. It is true that as a Ministry of Local Government, we went to Apaa to declare the boundaries that had been earlier scientifically determined by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and hon. Akol was with us. 

It is our mandate as the Ministry of Local Government to do that. Recently, I was in that same place, Apaa. Our people are settled but the only areas where people were supposed to be evicted are the national parks and the forest reserves. Therefore, it is not correct when he comes here to say that the people are being driven out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these issues are serious. Let us calm down and deal with it properly.

MS LUCY AKELLO: I have very key information, Mr Speaker. I respect the minister. You said that people are living very peacefully when right now, none of us is allowed to access Apaa. Are you aware that there is a road block as you enter Apaa and you must present your national identity card? Is Apaa not part of Uganda? Are you aware that there are business people who are complaining that one has to pay money in order to access Apaa? This is what we are complaining about. 

There must be free movement for everyone in Uganda, not just for me. If you went there now, you would see a combined force of police, army and Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). There is even an incident in which one of the boda boda motorcyclists was almost killed with a rope when the guards raised the rope while he was crossing their roadblock because they could not easily recognise him. He fell off the motor cycle. These are serious issues. Let us not deceive ourselves; these are Ugandans. Why should we behave as if nothing has happened yet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should handle this matter carefully. Let the minister respond.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, it is true that when I went to Apaa, there were security forces but I never witnessed these people asking for any identification cards from anybody –(Interjections)– yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not expect people to ask you for the national identification cards. Why don’t you deal with the serious aspects of the matter?

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I even had to stop and ask them - it is just a detach, we need security - I even asked them because there were lorries loaded with charcoal that by passed them without any query.

What is true is that the people in Apaa are just renting their areas for people to cut trees. That is the reason I went there. Let us speak the truth –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Mr Speaker, the minister has just made a very nasty statement by saying that people who live in Apaa are renting their land for people to cut trees. Apaa is cultivation land and we do not have forests. 

We do not have any forest in the home of the man where a python was killed yesterday. Our people are not living in a forest but they are just cultivating their land. Trees are far away from our people’s residences. Is the minister in order to make such a wild allegation that our people are renting their land to people for cutting trees whereas we do not have trees? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, that is very difficult for the Deputy Speaker because I should only rule on the issues whose facts I know. I do not know whether there are trees or not. Therefore, I cannot rule on that issue. 

Honourable minister, can I suggest that you leave the issues of people living comfortably and talk about your role and what you are able to do as the Minister of Local Government. That is all you should do. Leave the rest to the other people to deal with.

3.05
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, why we come to a national Parliament is to look for remedies. The situation you are having, honourable minister, is that you got technocrats who declared that Apaa is in Adjumani. As a parliamentary group, we kept quiet but now you have gone to the next stage and evicted 18,000 families. Their houses have been torched. Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) has hired soldiers from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and they have created roadblocks.  That is the issue now. 

We are not going to sit here and watch 18,000 people being evicted. We have ever fought Government and ended up in peace talks after 23 years. Therefore, what we are asking for is a win-win situation. Even if Apaa was declared to be in Adjumani, can’t our people live there the same way I live in Wakiso? Adjumani is in Uganda, so why should you evict 18,000 people? That is our prayer to you, Minister of Local Government.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, let me restate what I said. There are no evictions taking place in the areas of Apaa that are not in a forest reserve or in a national park. We can crosscheck that. 

I was in Apaa two weeks ago after holding a meeting in Adjumani over deforestation. The situation was that our people living there from other districts must remain there. The law in this country is very clear that one can live anywhere, just like there are some of us living in Kampala and have never been evicted. Therefore, there are no evictions in areas that are out of the national park and the forest reserve. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could allow me process this matter. If you want to contribute, can you do so? This is because raising points of procedure means I should rule yet I do not have the facts. Can I hear from the Minister of Defence, please?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I undertake to cause the leadership of UPDF to investigate and establish the allegations, which the honourable members have raised. I call them allegations because I have not confirmed them yet. I undertake to investigate and come back to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you come back to the House on this issue tomorrow and we finish it? 

MR MWESIGE: Yes; I will quickly contact the leadership of the army and they will also quickly establish the issue. Thereafter, I can report to this House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow is okay. Thank you. There is another ministry involved. Who is in charge of UWA? Who is in charge of tourism and forestry? 

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Like you have observed correctly, Mr Speaker, the matter involves many ministries. When we are handling such a matter, the Office of the Prime Minister comes in. 

I undertake to inform the Prime Minister about this matter so that we can generate a report very quickly regarding the evictions, as they have been alleged by the honourable Members of Parliament from that area, and also on issues of provision of food. Probably, tomorrow we will be able to brief this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you know these issues get complicated yet we know them. In the year 2002, I was in this Parliament. The then Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, hon. Jovino Akaki, came here with a motion on gazetting. I was in this House. However, from the way these issues are presented, you cannot tell from the record where the location is and what the circumstances were, but we were in this House. 

The motion that was brought to Parliament was for East Madi - if I recollect properly - to be gazetted and not de-gazetted, and it was passed here. It is a matter from 2000 and it is not any older than 2002. In 2002, all of us know what was happening in that part of the country. People were living in camps. So, when they gazetted and it eventually turns out that the land that had been gazetted had people living on it, what happens? 

The issue that has become a big one to be considered was whether that land was in Adjumani or Amuru District. The Minister of Local Government has cleared this and said that they researched and it shows that it was in Adjumani. The initial position was, if it was not in Adjumani District, then Adjumani District did not have the authority to present that motion to Parliament and that was the position at the time. 

However, now it is clear that this land is in Adjumani but the same land was occupied by other people who were in camps at the time of gazettement and they have since returned to their homes, where they used to live before the gazettement. What happens to them now that the land onto which their grandfathers lived has been gazetted as of 2002? What happens to these people? 

That is the issue because they were living there before 2002 and the land was gazetted in 2002. It does not matter whether they are Acholi or Madi; it really does not matter. If they are Acholi living in Madi, there is no problem, and if they are Madi living in Acholi, there is no problem. The question is that that particular land got gazetted in the year 2002 when those people had long lived on it. So, what happens to them? That is the issue at hand.

Therefore, as you carry out all the other consultations, please let us solve the issue of the people whose land was been gazetted by Government and handle it appropriately because the laws are clear. (Applause) I do not even see why this should bring confusion. If you are acquiring private land, you have to pay prior and adequate compensation and then you notify the persons and they will leave. That is what the Constitution says, at least the last time I read it. Therefore, why are we complicating these things? Why?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I would like to just give additional information to the House based on what you have said. The issue in Apaa has a number of dimensions that the relevant ministers should report on. 

One is the question of administrative boundaries, which involves tribes. I think that is easy to sort and solve. If these boundaries are in Adjumani administratively, so be it, but let the people enjoy their land rights by continuing to stay there and use that land. 

The Acholi and Madi have lived together for years. There are many Madi in Acholi. If you go to Amuru or Pabbo, there are Madi who have lived there. There are close ties between the people of Pakele and the people in Pabbo. There are also close ties amongst the people of Palaaro in Adjumani. Therefore, our people have lived together; who is now causing all these problems? Where did the problems start? 

I think the honourable Minister of Defence was the Minister of Local Government at the time when a similar thing occurred – when the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, and the Acholi Parliamentary Group came here and issued statements. Afterwards, the Speaker advised that we should go and calm our people down. We went with the Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali and had a talk show on Radio Rupiny in Gulu, where one of the LC III chairpersons from Adjumani clearly stated that they had no problem with the Acholi but that they had problems with the Madi from Sudan. (Applause) 

These were known issues. However, what is happening now is driving a wedge between the Madi and Acholi, which is not necessary in this century. Our people have lived together and we have had no problem. Therefore, we would like to have the following done: 

1. 	The land rights for our people must be clearly respected; 

2. 	If there is no problem with district boundaries, that is fine because people will always crisscross no matter whether the land is in Adjumani or Amuru; and 

3. 	We would like things to be done based on the laws of the land. 

If you are de-gazetting an area - It has happened elsewhere and people have been resettled. The minister should tell us where the people of Apaa should go to settle; it is as simple as that. Do not speculate; tell us the truth. Why do you use the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces?

Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that I also talked to the fourth division commander and he admitted that he was involved. He further said that the person who killed the soldier will be brought to book. He never told me why the UPDF got involved yet this is not the first time. Some years back, when you were the Minister for Local Government, the police and army were heavily deployed there. As Acholi leaders, we went to the scene and met them. 

Why do you want to treat the people of Apaa as if they are foreigners or as if they are non-citizens or refugees? We are aware that there are so many refugees from Sudan in Adjumani District and many have attained citizenship. However, the people of Apaa are Ugandans; why do you abuse their rights as citizens? Why would you want to cause conflicts between the Acholi and Madi? If that part is in Adjumani District, let it be but let us respect the land rights of the people. People have lived across the border and we have had no problem.

Mr Speaker, I would like to have this matter concluded as soon as possible. We will not accept our people to be humiliated from time to time. Thank you.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I presented a report to this House on behalf of my ministry, to confirm that Apaa village is in Adjumani District and that there was no problem between the people of Madi and Acholi. 

The information I would like to provide is that there are a team of leaders, including hon. Gilbert Olanya, who sued Government over this land matter and the court issued an injunction. Therefore, even if Government was to consider matters of de-gazettement, at the moment it cannot until that case is resolved. 

I recall, even when I made that statement on this very Floor –(Interjection)– Can you listen because I am just providing information. Apparently, there are requests that Government should consider de-gazettement which has happened elsewhere, like you said, Mr Speaker. When I made the statement, I indicated that it would be important for the discussions to continue with the people who sued Government. It would be important for them to sit with the relevant Government departments to see whether the case can be withdrawn. Unless, the court case is withdrawn or concluded, the hands of Government are tied, in terms of taking any action with respect to the Apaa land issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Except evicting them? Its hands are not tied in relation to evictions? Can we have a discussion on this matter tomorrow when the minister presents this statement? Let us do some consultations on this issue and see how to tie it up properly tomorrow. Are you listening to the Speaker? That information can be presented tomorrow and I am sure it will not get stale. (Laughter)

Honourable Minister of Defence, you coordinate and when you come tomorrow, we will see how to move forward with this matter. Thank you.

3.20
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. This is in regard to a story that was aired on NTV yesterday during the 9.00 p.m. news bulletin in connection with the land at Kireka Rehabilitation Centre that belonged to Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) commonly known as Kirema. 

This land has been occupied by the PWDs for about 65 years. However, in the NTV news story yesterday, we saw forceful evictions and also complaints by the PWDs. This is because this facility is part of the land where they sit and it is also their training facility. A lot of property has been vandalised and destroyed.

My prayer is: we would like to know from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development what is happening. Even if you have a programme, must it go that violent, moreover with PWDs? I would like to hear clearly from the responsible minister about what happened and why it happened. The minister should further explain to the nation and apologise to the PWDs for what transpired. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do we have the minister responsible for this particular issue? The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development came to the office of the Speaker today and raised this issue. They said that the PDWs have been thrown out of that facility by some people. Is Government aware or was it Government? If so, can we get an explanation?

3.22
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons With Disabilities): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank my honourable colleague for raising the issue. 

I have two urgent issues to raise. First, I would like to say that the eviction was so unfriendly and it has not only happened to persons with disabilities in that rehabilitation centre. We would also like to get an explanation as to what is happening to the vocational training centres throughout the country.

Secondly, PWDs in Kampala were given land by His Excellency the President. We would like to get an explanation from the ministers of Kampala on what is happening. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can we deal with this urgent issue first? Please, you will take us away from it. Let us deal with the eviction.

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, what I am about to raise also needs a similar explanation.        
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have not finished with the issue of eviction. 

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, I have an urgent issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not on this one, please. You will raise it but not now.

3.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Sorry, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will brief us tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development? It is not Ministry of Gender that evicted these people?

MS NANKABIRWA: Dr Chris Baryomunsi, can you please respond? Mr Speaker, I beg that we organise ourselves and give the answer later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it tomorrow? Okay. This is a factual matter. Persons with disabilities were evicted from the Kireka Rehabilitation Centre. The PDWs at that facility have been evicted. We are interested in why and what the alternatives are. Please, ask the responsible people to come and explain tomorrow.

3.25
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The urgent issue I wanted to raise is on the budget. The budget is so crucial that this country banks on it to transform to a middle income status. My matter of concern is on the allocation. Now that there is lack of clarity surrounding the submission of the ministerial policy statements, this matter becomes very urgent.

As provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, the allocations of the national budget are not gender and equity compliant. Concerning equity, it is persons with disabilities that are most affected. I have perused through the few ministerial policy statements, which have been submitted, and noted that there is no allocation to special needs education, essential drugs for persons with mental disabilities, and reproductive utilities like accessible labour beds for mothers with disabilities. There is also no allocation to cater for the special needs education teachers and no allocation to take care of the production of mobility appliances and other utilities like hearing aids.

Mr Speaker, what was happening on television last week clearly shows that people with disabilities are suffering. They are going around fundraising. I attended one fundraising event with hon. Johnson Ssenyonga where blind people were struggling to raise funds to buy computers, which can be used by blind students, yet it is the role of Government to have this money allocated for such issues. I understand even in your constituency, Mr Speaker, there may not be a single school for special needs education. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I know that the budgeting process is silent. We have a budget calendar, according to our laws. Unfortunately, about one month ago, Uganda was rated second in Africa, according to the International Budget Partnership Group, in having an open budget survey but it is so unfortunate that the lack of submission of the ministerial policy statements is going to pull our ranking down.

My prayer is that we get a written submission from the ministries concerned as to what the state of budgeting is in regard to the concerns of persons with disabilities. What is the state of the disability grant? It is so confusing. Unlike the youth livelihood and woman entrepreneurship funds, the disability grant is nowhere to be seen. As little as it was, it is nowhere to be seen.

Secondly, due to the cross cutting nature of disability issues - now that even the ministerial policy statements are not yet submitted - can I request all the committees of Parliament to look at their ministerial policy statements and find out if our concerns have been catered for? If not, Mr Speaker, I beg that the Parliament does not pass this budget. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Have you made any allocations, honourable Minister of Finance? 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Safia Nalule. She has been a champion for gender and equity budgeting in our country. She did very well in ensuring that – Actually, one of the sections in the Public Finance Management Act was sponsored by her. So, I would like to thank her and pledge our support to her. 

We have been working with the Equal Opportunities Commission to scrutinize our budgets and ensure that they comply with issues of gender and equity. On the specific grant she has raised, I think we have to work with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because that budget is handled by that ministry. Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come to the House and make a statement about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is a matter to be taken up by the committee of the whole House. 

Honourable members, it is now 3.30 p.m. and we have not started on the Order Paper. I have five urgent matters to be raised. They, however, will not be raised today; we will handle them tomorrow. I know what you want to raise but we will proceed with those things tomorrow. Can we now go to the Order Paper, please? 

We had debated item No.6 but as I was putting the question, we discovered that the House was not properly constituted. I would like us to do that now and see how to proceed with the rest of the business. - Could I have the Order Paper you have? It looks like we are using different documents. Please, call item No. 11 instead.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW JPY 13.659 BILLION (USD$ 125.1M) FROM THE JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) TO FINANCE THE KAMPALA METROPOLITAN TRANSMISSION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow ¥13.659 billion from the Japan International Cooperation Agency to finance the Kampala Metropolitan Transmission System Improvement Project. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was debated but before I put the question, we discovered that we did not have the right numbers. So all I was left with was to put the question to vote and I have just done that. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

3.34
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. Do you have a copy of the Certificate of Financial Implication? Would you like to lay a copy of the Bill and the certificate on the Table?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to present the Certificate of Financial Implication -[Ms Franca Akello: “Order.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the Bill, which you intend to lay on the Table, accompanied by the requisite Certificate of Financial Implication from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Yes, Mr Speaker -[Mr Nzoghu: “Order! There is no certificate.”] - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been laid on the Table? (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implication. [Ms Joy Atim: “Where is it?”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which you beg to lay on the Table? (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I laid it on the Table. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The attendant Certificate of Financial Implication is attached. Let the record capture it. - I have the certificate dated 14 March 2018 and signed by hon. Matia Kasaija. It says, “This is to certify that the Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018 has been examined as required under Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.” Let the record capture this and we proceed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NODDING SYNDROME

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, when we last met, the Prime Minister held a meeting with the ministers of finance, gender and health to find a comprehensive solution to the issue of nodding disease. This is because the situation requires a clinical solution, food and also services of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in terms of rehabilitation. Therefore, we agreed that the three ministries should come up with a comprehensive budget to address this issue for now and for the future. 

We came up with a budget of Shs 1.3 billion, which the Ministry of Health submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is being processed. In the meantime, the Ministry of Health has released funding to the nine districts to cater for the centres as this money is being processed. That is the status of this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much money was released to the nine districts?

MR BAHATI: The Minister of Health can inform the House –(Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I have said the money we are processing is Shs 1.3 billion for this financial year and that is the request that we received. However, because this request was received after the committee which the Prime Minister set up, in the meantime we cannot wait for that process; we have to do work on the ground. The Ministry of Health has released funding to the centres in the nine districts -(Interjections)- She is around but she has told me and I can inform the House that she has released Shs 70 million as we process the funding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us first hear about the figure.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, we requested for money, as hon. Bahati has clearly indicated, and the money is being processed. However, in the meantime as the money is being processed, we had Shs 75 million in our budget for nodding syndrome and that Shs 75 million –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Here, we are speaking about the lives of young people who are dying and the minister stands here to tell us that they have arranged Shs 75 million. Is it for transport or treating those people suffering? I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for the minister to stand up and tell us that they have arranged Shs 75 million for nine districts when people are dying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have absolutely no doubt that the Minister of Health is in her correct state of mind and she has said the things she has said. How can I rule her out of order? That is what she has said. If you want to ask her whether it is sufficient, that is another matter.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I clearly said that the Shs 1.35 billion is being processed. As to when it will be ready, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can tell us. However, in the meantime, the Shs 75 million has gone to the districts.  Shs 75 million has been divided between the different districts as we await for the Shs 1.3 billion to be processed. (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometime last year, in September, this House approved a loan request as a matter of urgency, of about Shs 575 billion, to rescue cattle in Isingiro District. It grieves me in my spirit that this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a matter of procedure.

MR KATUSABE: It grieves my spirit that the same House and Government cannot see the urgency needed to rescue our brothers and sisters who are dying in the north. The procedural issue I am raising is: would we be proceeding right to tolerate the level of unseriousness attached to this critical issue? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what the minister has said. If you want to talk about it, do so but do not ask the Speaker to talk about it. 

3.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, last week, from the 21st to the 24th of March, I led a team to northern Uganda purposely to assess the impact of the nodding syndrome. This was done after many contradicting statements emerged from the Ministry of Health. In the field, we interfaced with another team of Members of Parliament who felt it was necessary to acquaint themselves with the matter we are talking about and that team was headed by hon. David Abala.

It is very sad that as a country we are treating this as a small matter. I am looking at the Shs 75 million that is supposed to be given to nine districts. If you divide Shs 75 million by the nine districts, each district will get Shs 8.3 million. 

When we reached on the ground, we interfaced with the local leaders, caregivers and victims. I beg to be corrected but the local people said, “How we wish our minister would visit us to see what we are going through”. Mr Speaker, how I wish all of us would go to those districts and see those victims. In fact, some Members said we should have the budget of the whole country given to solve that problem.

We were ushered into traumatising situations where the caregivers at some stage gave testimonies of how their children were eaten by dogs. We broke down. We saw children who were traumatised and some of them have even abandoned school. As a mother and leader, I feel this region needs more attention than what we are giving them, especially on the issue of the nodding syndrome. Mr Speaker, we have borrowed money for roads but who will use these roads? We have borrowed money to build schools but who will use these schools? If we have a heart for humanity, I suggest that the money we use to buy trees and animals is put to saving humanity.

The different teams that visited the field are going to bring their reports to the House. However, before we bring these reports for the consumption of the whole House, I am still alive to those traumatising moments in which I saw the centres built by Hope for Humanity empty and yet we could put them to proper use. I am also alive to the fact that the caregivers are constrained. We appreciate what the caregivers have received from the Office of the Prime Minister. However, their desire was that they should be more empowered more, other than lining up for a cup of beans and posho, which is not sufficient.

Mr Speaker, I feel the country has given little attention to this problem. I went to a radio station - (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for having a heart for humanity. Last week, we visited your constituency and there are about 240 victims of nodding syndrome. Two of the victims died in your constituency and 62 of them are suspected new cases and yet the report we heard here said there were no new cases of nodding syndrome. We saw everything. 

We went to the field and we are concerned. Imagine a situation where about 1,000 people are seated and out of them, about 500 are nodding and collapsing in your presence. We witnessed this in Obolo Health Centre II. It was shocking. The testimonies the victims gave moved us. Like the Leader of the Opposition said, there was an old woman who said her child disappeared for three days but later she found that the child had been eaten by the dogs. 

Honourable minister, the Shs 75 million you are talking about is not enough. I would like to give a simple example on the matter –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, as we talk about Shs 75 million, when we went to Kitgum District and interacted with the local leaders, they told us that the Ministry of Health had issued guidelines. The guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health on the management of the funds that go to the districts indicated the following:

    1. A percentage for the district executive for purposes of monitoring nodding syndrome.
    2.  A percentage for the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) for monitoring. 
    3. A percentage for the Resident District Commission (RDC) for monitoring.
    4. A percentage for the District Police Commander (DPC) for monitoring.

In the same guidelines, they stated that when this money comes, they should first remove those percentages then the remaining is the one that goes to answer the needs of the victims. 

When we were on the radio talk show, I will not shy away from saying this, caller after caller asked whether Government cares about them. They asked if Government knows whether they exist and if this is a disease that has been sent to finish them. They started talking about the poisoned Coca Cola and the posho that had crystals. They talked about many things that I felt they were saying out of despair. 

I would like to say that let us not treat this matter like any other matter or treat it lightly. If it means Government borrowing, we shall accept it. (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I was a beneficiary of the visit to your constituency and to Pader District. What we saw pertaining to nodding syndrome, even in Kitgum, is a tragedy of gigantic proportions. It is catastrophic. 

Mr Speaker, your district has received Shs 12.4 million since 2014 and they have accounted very well for it. All the money was spent on administrative and operational costs, including allowances and airtime and coordination allowances. Not a single penny has trickled down to the victims, who should be the beneficiaries.

The testimonies we were given were quite moving. Apart from children straying away – Actually, the parents of these nodding disease victims are prisoners - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are giving information.

MR NAMBESHE: Pader District received Shs 40.5 million and their accountability has been well laid down. However, all the funds were spent on administrative and operational costs. Not a penny went to the victims. This is serious and requires urgent attention.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, the other contradiction that was here was that the new cases emerging are those of epilepsy. We do not know whether the Minister of Health and the doctors in the districts went to different schools. This is because according to the doctors that we interacted with in the districts we visited, they said epilepsy is a new thing. There is no relation between epilepsy and the nodding syndrome. They are calling it a syndrome because they do not know what the disease is. Therefore, saying that nodding syndrome is the one that is causing epilepsy is wrong.

The caregivers suggested that because they are now like prisoners – You know, we would look at these victims who were burnt. Because of the nodding syndrome, the victim falls into fire and is completely burnt. You look at them and feel like collapsing. The caregivers were suggesting that they are provided with ox ploughs so that they can help in tilling the land with ease. They also suggested that they are given seeds so that they can do the planting themselves instead of waiting for one cup that will come by.

We were also told that there was money that was used to procure land. They said there has never been any land procured for purposes of nodding syndrome. However, there was money - Shs 100 million and Shs 150 million - that had been put aside for the identification of victims. The districts say they have never received this money. I propose that an audit is done in the management of the money that has so far been taken to the areas where we have this problem.

The other issue we found on the ground is that our health workers need to be helped. There was no specific health centre put aside for handling the nodding syndrome cases. The nurses that we have are the same nurses. There was also an issue –(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I stand here to get guidance on an issue of procedure. The report, which the Leader of the Opposition is giving to us, is so important and loaded with facts. I am pleading with you, if you could allow that this report is brought for us to reflect on, look at the facts and debate according to the report. We do appreciate the serious situation on the ground but without any tangible information, we are not in position to push Parliament to decide in a way that we would like it to do.

Secondly, still on procedure, I would like this Parliament to call this Government to order. If we had a Parliament worth its image, representatives of the almost 40 million people of Uganda – They are all looking at us. If it was old people suffering with nodding disease, we would say that they have eaten and lived enough, so let them go. 

Let us face facts. These are children. There is no human being on this earth who is humane and can watch these children get sick and die. We have seen how the mothers and fathers have struggled. They are forced to tie children on trees in order for them to go and fetch water – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, procedurally, I would want Parliament to call the ministry to order. If the ministry wants to get Shs 2 billion today, they can get it and they have the power to do that; we have the law. (Applause) 

They are always coming here and we have done virements. The Ministry of Health can raise more than Shs 2 billion now through virement within the ministry. So, why can’t they raise that money for the children who are dying? Let us face facts. Let us help the minister to raise that money today. Otherwise, we are talking while these children are dying. We are just talking about things but it is making me more depressed. I am not interested to hear those stories. I have seen and heard about them and it is depressing. Let us act now and we can.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come up. There is that reallocation you always do in billions; can’t you reallocate that money from defence, finance or anywhere and you load it on to the management of nodding syndrome? Is it because these children are dying in the north and you do not care?

You must find that money. We are not going to dilly-dally. We do not want diplomacy. This is leadership in practice, and to prove that you are practising leadership and you care for the people who voted for you to be here, you must act now. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was a procedural matter. The honourable member was asking whether we would proceed to deal with the report that is being presented by the Leader of the Opposition. I am also aware that a team of other Members of Parliament led by hon. Abala went to those areas. The issue is whether we should allow time to debate this report.

Honourable members, this particular debate is on the statement by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on funding the management of Nodding Syndrome. That is what we are talking about. The minister has said there has been a request sent to his ministry to look for the Shs 1,335,295,400. While they look for this money, in the meantime as an emergency measure, the Shs 73 million has been sent to the districts. That is the issue we are discussing. 

Therefore, the question is; can I bring the other reports to be able to discuss this? I do not think it would be proper at this stage because the issue is a statement by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Development on funding the management of the Nodding Syndrome. This statement attracts a debate of one hour, under the rules. Therefore, if you would like to debate, we debate. If you want to finish, we can finish.

Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I had asked you to wind up. Please conclude and then I will have the Member for Aringa North.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I was talking about the intervention that is needed. It is true the report is here with us and we are ready to present it. However, we think this report will be helpful in the budgeting process to budget more to manage this problem.

In the meantime, I am looking at the Shs 75 million being an emergency to take us up to the time when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases the Shs 1.3 billion they are talking about which will come in the next financial year. 

Mr Speaker, there have been piecemeal interventions; can’t we, like hon. Ogwal has said, look for this money - whether it means borrowing it, let us borrow it now and manage this problem. 

Mr Speaker, it is terrible. Whoever has not been there is the only person who can say let us postpone. We would like to look at an immediate solution that will sort this problem now because Shs 8 million per district is not going to help. We have always borrowed and there is no problem. This time, we are not going to oppose the loan. Let us borrow and save lives.

We are going to miss a whole generation as a country because we will run short of young people yet this country heavily depends on them. I, therefore, pray, Mr Speaker, that the Shs 4.5 billion they are allocating in the budget should be looked for now. Let them also reconsider looking for the Shs 1.3 billion now. I know the colleagues we were with in the field will supplement this. I pray that as we continue discussing the reports, we give them time to be discussed for purposes of the budget. 

However, let us find more money than the Shs 75 million to put into the problem. More of the money should go to the victims and we should avoid the bureaucratic tendency of giving the money to the supervisors when the sick are suffering. An audit of the money that we have so far put down should also be carried -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have a short debate on this matter and see how we can conclude it.

Honourable members, on 14th March when I was chairing this House, the Minister of State for Health (General Duties) said that Shs 75 million was being processed to be sent to the districts. Today is 27th March and the money is still being processed. Is it Shs 73 million?

4.11
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, may I request I sit while speaking because standing up is a problem to me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

DR ACENG: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the Shs 73 million was sent 10 days ago and it is a stopgap measure as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes through the processes of the supplementary which they have already started. That supplementary will be sent immediately it is cleared by the Auditor-General.

Therefore, the Shs 73 million was a stopgap measure in the meantime. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it Shs 73 or 75 million?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, it is Shs 73 million; I cannot remember the exact figures.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order to tell the House that the minister is lying. We have just returned and we met all the district chairpersons and CAOs but they have not yet received even Shs 1,000. 

This is the same minister - I have a letter; I invited the people of Caritas to come here. When Caritas said they got sponsorship from Caritas-Germany to give medicines to health centres, you wrote a letter refusing that sponsorship, saying that is the role of Government. I am laying the letter on the Table.

Therefore, it is the honourable minister who hates us, the people of Acholi. Is it in order for the minister to continue lying to this House when my people are dying and I have lost 82 people in Pader alone? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, could we respect the decorum of this House. Hon. Odonga Otto, some of the statements you have made were not really necessary. I would ask you to reconsider some of the statements you have made and actually withdraw them. They are not proper in the language of Parliament because our rules do not allow imputing improper motive on another. Therefore, if you could do that, then we will see how to proceed with this matter.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, to avoid diverting the House, I withdraw the last part of the statement that the minister hates our people. 

Now that I am here, allow me lay formally the letter which the minister wrote on 15 February 2013. She was still then a PS; Ref: Director General. It was dated; Ref. HDM, Director General, 140/269/01. I have a soft copy of the letter and our rules allow that.

When Caritas had requested that they got sponsorship from Caritas-Germany to supply medicines, the minister replied that “Leave provisions of medicines and medical case to professionals under the ministry.”

Therefore, I would like to be on record that I am tendering in a copy of the letter signed by her which made Caritas-Germany close their hands and not provide any assistance. However, in case I imputed bad motive, I am very sorry and you will bear with me. I have just been weeping outside the House. I have lost 82 children due to nodding disease.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, like I keep saying, this matter is not for politics but of humanity. (Applause) Anybody saying anything else would not be proper. Anybody trying to import anything else into this matter would not be acting properly.

This matter of Nodding Syndrome speaks for itself very eloquently and those trying to speak against it are the monsters we have moving around us. They are wolves among the sheep that Christ talked about. 

Anybody that tries to make this thing look small should have their brains checked because to you, this matter may be small but to those affected, it is really a big issue. Therefore, when we are talking about these matters, I don’t want to get personally involved but please, the sick children and their parents are there, the communities that they live in are there. Unfortunately or fortunately, they are represented in this Parliament because nobody would speak for them.

The sad thing about this problem is that those who should deal with it prefer to pick the little things which are not important and focus on those. They focus on the issue that it is the Opposition that is raising this thing. That is not the issue. The issue is there are mothers with sick children. How do we help them as Government?

Do not look at Oulanyah and say he is the problem; I am not the problem. I am concerned just like you should be. Let us deal with this matter properly because it is important to many people who are affected. Therefore, with some statements, people should have the opportunity to come to the Floor of Parliament and withdraw them, if they care.

May be we should start asking questions why people end up making the kind of statements they make. What are we doing to them to make them make the statements they make? May be we should start asking those questions because people are not that animated about hate or something like that. 

To what extent are we causing people to say the things they say? And we are so fast to blame them when they say the things they say, we forget our own role in pushing them to say what they say. (Applause) 

Honourable minister, really in all fairness, Shs 75 million for nine districts! Is that something you would come to the Floor of Parliament and say that you have intervened? Really Shs 73 million - have you intervened? Whether it was sent yesterday or 10 days ago, have you done anything really? 

4.20
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. This issue of Nodding Syndrome has continued. At onset of the outbreak of this disease, I expected Government to fully get involved in this.

I have heard all the reports which were given here, the information which was given by the professor who said this disease is treatable and people can get cured. One of the issues that disturbed me was that these camps have been managed by private people. Why doesn’t Government get involved? When this expert was treating people, why didn’t we have our own people trained to manage these situations? Why should we leave it to a private person?

All of us exist to do our roles to promote the good of humanity. When we campaign as politicians, we always promise good life for our own people. However, when you look at this situation, it is as if we don’t care about it.

Mr Speaker, it is very sad that when a problem happens, it becomes an opportunity for people to “eat” money. I am raising this from the issue that has just been raised here. All the money given goes to administration. What was being administered?

The issue of Nodding Syndrome, if we take it as an issue of crises that should be looked into and handled, it will be fine. When we had a debate here, it was adjourned to a Friday to seek answers for funding but there was nothing.

Therefore, I request that the Minister of Health takes this as a serious issue; when this expert comes, health personnel should be trained to manage this. Rehabilitation centres should not be left to the private person. It should be Government.

When other health issues break in the country, they are treated as issues of emergency and seriously handled. Why not this Nodding Syndrome?

The minister should come up with a better figure, Shs 75 million - really, looking at the situation and the burden of this sickness being expressed by people; everybody has expressed sympathy. As Government, we should also show sympathy about this.

We can talk about electricity and roads but these are used by human beings. However, when people have problems and we don’t pay attention to them, whom will these things be for? That is my humble appeal to Government to take this issue seriously.

When we are here, we talk as national leaders and not on a regional or tribal basis. The cry being raised by people in this House should be enough to show Government that there is need for serious attention to this issue.

Mr Speaker, I submit that we give another chance for the Minister of Health to come and give us another presentation including more money. These Shs 75 million - I am not happy about it. I beg to submit.

4.24
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was one of those who were privileged to go to Northern Uganda on a fact-finding mission. When the Acholi Parliamentary Group members speak here, may be at times, we think they are speaking out of proportion. 

I would like to implore this starting with the minister that whatever name you may want to give this disease, let it be attended to. Whether it is Nodding Syndrome or epilepsy, let it be considered as an emergency. 

Mr Speaker, I have never seen a community where you meet with over 500 or 1,000 people and many of them children, who are suffering and are either expecting or carrying babies. 

It is quite very unfortunate; I do not know whether it is true that no minister of health has ever visited this community. Can she prove to us that she has been visiting this community? And it is on that note that I would like once again to appreciate Caritas for doing a great job for this community. 

Of the many children who are expecting and have given birth as a result of defilement, very few cases have been prosecuted in the courts and the successful ones have been done by the help of Caritas. 

The Shs 73 million is very little for this group and as it has been said earlier on this is the opportunity to help these people. The rains are on and the women are asking whether they can be helped with planting materials, ploughs and oxen to help them open gardens.

These children eat a lot but the families have very little to provide to them; if they are to go to the garden it is for a short time. Let the Office of the Prime Minister respond and give this community the inputs needed as we look at a comprehensive budget. 

This will be the only opportunity for even the Public Accounts Committee to accept a virement. Can we divert resources from anywhere to help these people? We would have attended to a very noble cause to rescue the children and the people in our community. 

Today it is there maybe next time it might be in another area. Let us consider this as very urgent and let it be attended to. Thank you very much.

4.28
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It has becomes so difficult for me to appreciate the statement or the response of the Minister of Health.    

When the minister talks about Shs 70 or 75 million to be appropriated amongst the nine districts, honourable minister, what do you intend to achieve with this amount of money? Are you allocating it for radio announcements or for some district officials to drive around and try to mobilise people – (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, I have been very attentive as Members bring this issue on the Floor of Parliament especially the issues that have been raised to the minister but throughout, she is busy on her own issues. They are not even listening to what we are talking about but they are just laughing. Is she in order not to pay attention to what we are talking about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The cameras are here and the people of this country can see that when this matter is being debated – the cameras are showing what is happening and that is where we are with these matters. I cannot rule anybody out of order because – that is it. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the four of us who were consulting - the minister has requested, through you, that I  speak on her behalf; she is not very well she cannot stand up to speak here.

We have been consulting. This matter was debated in Cabinet and we agreed on the amount of money and Shs 1.3 billion is available for the quarter ending. What we are now agreeing on –(Interjection) - I am just giving information.

MR OKIN: Mr Speaker, I think it is quite erroneous for us to continue debating this in a very light manner. Last week, we pointed out very clearly the issues that affect this community. These centres have been closed and need urgent attention -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just state the point of order.

MR OKIN: The Minister of Lands just stood up insinuating that they sat down and allocated only Shs 75 million. Is she in order not to look at the urgency of the matter of re-opening these centres?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would really help if the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development whom I hope also attended Cabinet said something. Now I am hearing that money has been approved.

The honourable Minister of Lands said that money has been approved; the honourable Minister of Finance said that they are looking for the money; now which is which?

4.33
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to somebody who spoke before. Our Speaker here is very passionate about this issue he recruited me – (Interjections) - I have been dealing with him on this matter. I have not been there to see for myself so I am depending on what you people are reporting to me.

I discussed this matter about two weeks ago; we cannot continue sitting in this Parliament talking when people are dying. I promised this House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that I adjourn the House?

MR KASAIJA: No, we must take a decision and now so that our people in Northern Uganda do not die and those who are in difficulties are assisted to live as normal a life as possible. 

Therefore, the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Health wrote to my PS asking for Shs 1.3 billion. I have the money, but my problem is the procedure of processing it to her - (Interjection) - leave that alone, no, listen. Leave that alone. 

I can promise to come back to the House tomorrow to indicate to you how we are going to transfer this money to the Ministry of Health for them to do what they want to do with the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Leader of Government Business.

4.36
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully since I arrived in this House and I would like to sympathise with the situation. Indeed, we have to join hands and see how we can get this out of the way.

Therefore, I would like to propose that we stop this debate now and call on the Clerk to provide for, on the Order Paper, a supplementary budget that we should pass and see where the Ministry of Finance, Planning And Economic Development will say that they do not have money. That way, we shall ask the Ministry of Finance to bring the money immediately. (Applause) Otherwise - that is my proposal - that is the only way we can get these things done. Thank you.

4.38
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have heard all the submissions about the Nodding Disease Syndrome and it is not the first time that this issue has been in this Parliament. As you have said rightly, this is a case that affects all of us and as representatives of Ugandans, whenever there is a problem, we come in to solve it. 

As you recall, there was a problem in one region, which I do not want to name. We came here and appropriated a lot of funds to that region that you recall was a priority. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said that he has the money but does not know how to get it. Whenever the Minister of Finance needs money, whether it is appropriation or supplementary, he knows how to get it and we have always given it to him. 

Mr Speaker, I am now talking to the two ministers of finance to help you on how to raise this money. We are not helping the people in Northern Uganda but rather our people; the citizens of Uganda. 

Therefore, unless you bring a request to this Parliament for us to help you approve this money, we are not going to approve any other money for the supplementary, our salary or travel allowances until we approve the money for the Nodding Disease Syndrome. It seems we are not serious. This is not a political issue; it is one that affects all of us. When I speak, everybody else has said it; we shall not approve any money. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.42
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I were a lawyer submitting to court, I would say that I have nothing useful to add to the submission of the honourable member who has just spoken. However, since I am submitting in the national Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, permit me to proceed.

Mr Speaker, it is not the first time that this Parliament is dealing with a matter of life and death. We have had situations like this before. I sat, listened and have even watched your own recording about this syndrome. What we see happening in the nine districts affected by the Nodding Syndrome calls for a very urgent action on the side of government. 

I did not want to look or just stick to one ministry or minister such as the Minister of Health but I want to look at government in that holistic manner, especially the executive arm of government.

I would like to appeal to you as people who have children. We have seen these children who are future Members of Parliament, ministers and heads of state. I would like you, especially our colleagues on the front bench, to kindly help the ministries of Health and that of Finance to look for resources urgently such that we attend to this matter regarding the children of this country. 

I hope I am being heard; I can see the two ministers of finance consulting. Honourable ministers, we would like to appeal to you that Shs 75 million cannot attend to the issue at hand. We can crucify the Minister of Health or that of Finance but this is a problem on the side of government generally.

Why are we handling the issue of Nodding Syndrome in a very lackadaisical manner? We are not proactive. We are moving at the speed of a snail seeing these young children on NTV and other news media. 

Honourable brothers and sisters, let us have a human heart. Try to imagine if your own child or you and I had suffered from Nodding Disease and we were not attended to while we were young. Would we be here representing the people of Uganda? 

Honestly, I appeal to you, the powers that be, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of resources; if it means putting to halt other activities, let us raise the Shs 1.3 billion requested for by the Ministry of Health such that these monies are wired to the affected districts. I beg to submit. 

4.45
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have a very big problem within the Ministry of Health itself. I am very sure that within the ministry, there are “touchables” and these can be investigated and believe in me, it is true.

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2017/2018, allocation of money for the Nodding Disease Syndrome was Shs 4.5 billion. Out of that, so far, they have used Shs 1.8 billion. That simply means we have a balance of Shs 2.7 billion. 

Now, here we have a minister coming to the Floor of this Parliament shaming this country internationally; how do you tell the world that there is an emergency whereby people are dying and government itself is only raising Shs 8 million for a district? 

Mr Speaker, I am glad that the minister himself came here and said there is money and he is only waiting to see how the money can be dispersed. Now, with the previous experience, a lot of money has been released in the name of the Nodding Disease Syndrome. You find that 80 per cent of that money goes to administration. 

Today, with all the powers that you have as Speaker of this Parliament, I pray you direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release this money tomorrow and I sacrifice myself to monitor that. I would like to be a witness in the purchase of these drugs. 

I would like to sacrifice my official vehicle to follow up until these drugs are delivered to the right places. I was actually very disappointed. How do you tell us you have already sent Shs 75 million? Why do you send Shs 75 million instead of saying that money should be used to purchase medicine, which would be delivered to the affected districts? How do you tell us you have sent money? For who and to who? 

What is the budget for burials of Members of Parliament? It is Shs 69.1 million. However, you are now telling us that you have sent Shs 75 million to the affected districts. My prayer, therefore, Mr Speaker, is you direct the ministry. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member has asked the Speaker to direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release money. Honourable members, that is the only thing I do not do and I have never done. Hence, I am not going to start with this one even if I have already been accused of directing. That is something that I will desist from doing. 

Honourable members, generally, the Deputy Leader of Government Business came here and made some requests. This matter of the Nodding Syndrome came before this House for the first time on Tuesday, 13 March 2018. It was on the Order Paper of 14th. The ministers came and left. They requested that they come back on the 15th and it was on the Order Paper of the 15th. They came back and made statements. They promised to come back the next day, which was a Friday 16th, with a statement that could help. It turned out that there was no statement that could help the emergency phase of this intervention. We even sat on Friday and they asked for time. The House was adjourned to today 27th and they are still asking for time.

Honourable members, I am going to suspend proceedings for 15 minutes to allow the ministers consult and advise us on how to proceed with this matter. 

(The House was suspended at 4.45 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.10 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suspended proceedings to allow consultations among the ministers so that they guide us on how we can proceed with this matter. Can we proceed now, the Leader of Government Business?

5.11
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, we used the 15 minutes you gave us to consult and we think we should be given until tomorrow to produce the money – the Shs 1.3 billion – (Interjection) - Yes, this is what we are going to produce tomorrow. Even if you give Shs 200 million, you can’t give this money all at once. Let us produce Shs 1.3 billion immediately and we start-off. The rest will follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, do we adjourn until tomorrow?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, let us adjourn until tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request from the Leader of Government Business is to adjourn the House.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. I would like to appreciate the position which the First Deputy Prime Minister has just communicated to the House. I would wish, through procedure, to understand whether the government will come with the requirement that will be needed as well as the phases because they may not be able to offload the money – as they have said – at once. However, we want to know the first disbursement so that we can prepare how to handle it. 

Why am I saying this? Mr Speaker, we have the budget which was approved specifically for Nodding Disease. Actually, I was shocked when the minister earlier said we would need a supplementary budget. Once the budget is approved – and in this Parliament we go through the legal procedure of approval – the government does not need a supplementary. They can only be able to prove that they have spent over and above what was given to them, which in this case, they have not been able to prove. 

Humbly, the procedural matter is: How much money are they giving? We are not borrowing that money. It is from the budget, which we had approved. How much money is it and when are we getting the first dispatch and when is the second one so that we know what to communicate to our people who are suffering with the Nodding Disease? I beg for this clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, it is a clarification rather than a procedural matter. She rose on procedure and it turned out to be a clarification. I do not want you to fall in the same trap. Let the minister make the clarification. Honourable, would you like to clarify on the matter raised by the Member?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister has requested this House that we come tomorrow to tell you how the process is going to go. We have already received the request of Shs 1.3 billion from the Ministry of Health. Therefore, all the details will be given to the House tomorrow.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the Prime Minister has requested that we adjourn the House until tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 March 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
