Thursday, 5 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I would like to remind the honourable chairpersons about the communication from the Speaker dated 4 March, which you have just received. The subject is “Giving priority to sittings of the House.”

Yesterday, we had an occasion where the committees continued sitting and the House had already started and we got some confusion because some of the matters that we were supposed to be dealing with were in committees and that caused a bit of a problem. Please let us prioritise 2 O’clock of every sitting day of Parliament and handle business of the plenary so that we do not have any gaps in the way we handle business. The communication is from the Speaker to the chairpersons.

We know that there are issues that are competing for our time at the moment. However, we would like honourable members to arrange themselves in such a way that priority is still given to business of the plenary so that while we do other things, we also focus on delivering on the purposes for which we are here as Members of Parliament. Our term is still on until next year in May and we have to continue doing that for the people of this country. That is what I urge honourable members to do so that we move this country forward when we have the mandate and the people’s trust to do just that. Thank you.

(Hon. Ssebagala rose_)- On what matter do you rise?

2.14
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Our rules of procedure are clear in as far as petitions are concerned. When we bring petitions to this House, they are handled within 45 days. I brought a petition from the people of Komamboga, Mpererwe in Kawempe North Constituency regarding the oil pipeline that was supposed to pass through their land. Ever since I brought it in April 2013 up to now, it has never seen the light of day in Parliament.

It really demoralises me and I am under pressure. People are not using their land and I do not have answers to give them. It is my humble appeal, Mr Speaker, that since this matter has taken a long time, you intervene for solutions to be found.

2.15
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think what hon. Latif Ssebagala is raising is very important because I also presented a petition here about the Uganda Scouts Association. Their land at Kaazi has been attacked by people we do not know. The Kabaka gave the scouts 120 hectares at Kaazi but as we speak, out the 120 hectares, 40 hectares have been grabbed.
 	
A petition was presented to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I think it is important that committees stick to the 45 days rule of dealing with work in their committees otherwise people become discouraged in regard to appealing to this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have spoken on this subject a few times but it looks like it is becoming necessary for me to be repetitive on this subject and I do not have any problem doing that as it is important for me to do that until we yield to our rules and start following them. 

People approach this Parliament through petitions because they have urgent matters that press them and they have confidence that this House can help them solve those problems and help them find solutions to those problems. When we delay with these matters for two or three years, we will not have helped these people. 

I, therefore, urge the committees that have petitions before them to come to this House and deal with these matters. If the subject matter has already been overtaken by events, come to this House and inform us as such so that we remove that from our list of our pending business. That will help us in the way we appear to the public. 

I, urge you, chairpersons and members of your committees before whom some petitions are pending to do the needful and bring these matters. It is true this particular petition was brought to me and the House in April 2013 but to date, nothing has happened and the problems continue. The same applies to the petition concerning the land for Scouts and Guides, which has also taken a long time.

Members, let us do something about this and that is the only way we will continue deserving the confidence that the people have placed in us. Thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, what really confuses us is that at times, when we talk to the chairpersons, they say they are waiting for an opportunity to be put on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, how does the Speaker schedule business on the Order Paper before he has seen a report? You submit a copy of the report to the Clerk’s office and a copy to the Speaker. That is the only way you activate the process of getting it on the Order Paper. Even if a report is ready and it is on your desk and it stays there for years, if it does not show up before the Clerk and before the Speaker, it will remain in your cupboard. If it is ready, bring it to the Clerk’s office and give a copy to the Speaker. That is the only way this matter will be put on the Order Paper and we will proceed with the business.

There is no way anybody can say, “We are waiting for the matter to be put on the Order Paper” because that does not happen with the Office of the Speaker. Business that is ready goes to the Order Paper straight; it is almost automatic.

2.20
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I think what we have to do as petitioners is to follow up on our petitions in the committees otherwise, in the Catholic Church, when we go with petitions, you present them in the church, you continue praying and you get answers from God regarding what you have petitioned. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about confessions? West Budama South, on what matter do you rise?

2.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, on the same matter of petitions. I think our rules may need to recognise that presentation of petitions is one way of representation of the members of our communities. 

I believe that the last business meeting had something to do with this and I hope that the Clerk will be able to update us regarding the various committees and how far they have gone. This is one way in which our people get represented in this House. It is never a petition until it is a matter of urgency. It is either that 45 days are not enough or we need to do something about it because there is backlog accumulating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the 45 days are not enough, you can come back to the Speaker and ask for an extension of the period, which will be granted.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee is around. Let him say something.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have already communicated on this subject. Let us leave it at that. Honourable member for Bungokho, you have heard the subject matter. Please, get these matters out of our desk and come back to this House.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.27
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:

    i. Buhanika Sub-County, Hoima district
    ii. Kimengo Sub-County, Masindi District
    iii. Bukiende Sub-County, Mbale District
    iv. Lwasso Sub-County, Mbale District
    v. Bukonde Sub-County, Mbale District
    vi. Busiu Sub-County, Mbale District
    vii. Ikumbya Sub-County, Luuka District
    viii. Bulongo Sub-County, Luuka District
    ix. Irongo Sub-County, Luuka District
    x. Kameke Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xi. Kamuge Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xii. Muduuma Sub-County, Mpigi District
    xiii. Namwiwa Sub-County, Kaliro District
    xiv. Nyabuharwa Sub-County, Kyenjojo District
    xv. Lyantonde Rural Sub-County, Lyantonde District
    xvi. Burere Sub-County, Buhweju District
    xvii. Masinya Sub-County, Busia District
    xviii. Chepkwasta Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xix. Sipi Sub-County, Kapchorwa District
    xx. Wakiso Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxi. Mpunge Sub-County, Mukono District
    xxii. Kapeka Sub-County, Kiboga District 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. They stand committed to Committee on Local Government Accounts to handle within the framework of the rules and guide the House on how we can proceed with the subject matter. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT 
TO INQUIRE INTO THE RECURRING ILLEGAL LAND EVICTIONS IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that when this matter came back, I was advised that a decision had not been taken. I have gone to the records and I have found that indeed this motion was moved by the honourable member for Wakiso District for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to inquire into the recurring illegal land evictions in the country.

The motion was debated but the decision on whether the inquiry should be conducted by Government or by a select committee of Parliament was deferred to a future date and that date is today. Can we have some guidance on how we can proceed with this matter? The information I have is that the Rt Hon. Deputy Leader of Government Business communicated to the House that a Cabinet sub-committee had been established to handle this matter and come back to the House within one month. 

That is what the Hansard says. 

Is that the way to go so that we wait for them to come back in one month and resolve the matter? If you are unsatisfied with what they have reported then we can take the necessary steps because there is a way out already offered by the Cabinet. 

MS SENINDE: Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues because they overwhelmingly supported this motion. However, resolution number (6) reads, “Government expedites the adoption of the proposed legal aid policy so that the poor are also able to acquire free legal services.”

I think the controversy came on (4) where it reads, “Government conducts an investigation by setting up a commission of inquiry into the alleged malpractices in the land registry.” The controversy came from some members wanting to make amendments to this resolution. They wanted the House to set up a select committee and the Speaker inquired whether we have enough time to set up a committee.

What I had moved was that Government conducts the investigation. Dear colleagues, much as we may want to do that work, we must look at realities. Do we have the time to do it? Are the funds available? Even if we said that we should give this work to a committee of Parliament, the committee may not find time. We have given committees work and at the end of the day, we have not yielded results in time.

In my opinion, as the mover of this motion, I would request that we leave it as it is; we leave the responsibility to Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is a valid concern being raised and at this point, the Speaker is speaking. The Hansard also indicates that the Deputy Leader of Government Business, who was in the House, stated that there is already a committee of Cabinet handling this matter and he undertook that he would report to the House in a month’s time from that date. I do not know how much time is left from the month he pledged.

I am sure there is work going on already. Can we adopt the motion as it is and then leave that timeframe that the Prime Minister undertook to come back to the House; that one month?
If he does not come back in that one month, we will raise the same question with the Prime Minister so that we do not have too many matters being sent back to committees when committees are already overwhelmed with what they already have. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the earlier guidance you had given would be the most appropriate one. That we can allow the Cabinet to make an inquiry and they report in one month. If we are not satisfied, we can have a select committee. The only problem I have is that the mover of this motion was actually a member of a Cabinet Sub-Committee on Lands, which was headed by hon. Nantaba. She may want to help us understand why that committee failed and why she thinks this time round, another government sub-committee will work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion and we move forward? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, there was a Motion that was moved and the mover of the motion had actually pulled down the prayers. We are in tandem with your guidance. However, what do we do with the prayers that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will adopt the motion as it is which includes the prayers. I am going to put the question to the motion.

MR WERIKHE: We had wanted to amend some of the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then why not say that?

MR WERIHKE: I would like to make some amendments, Mr Speaker, to the prayers of the mover. On prayer number 3, I would like to move that the prayer reads as follows: “The Minister of Internal Affairs provides clear guidance on the actions of the police in the way Court orders are executed” and not “intervened”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, is that acceptable to the mover of the motion?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you accept it?

MS SENINDE: It is quite clear, I accept it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: The second amendment is on prayer number 5: “The Judiciary mainstreams the handling of land cases to ensure their expeditious hearing and determination.” I beg to move. 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I accept that amendment. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard an amendment that, “The Judiciary mainstreams land-related cases” and it sounds a bit ambiguous. Can it be brought down into graspable terms so that we know what is meant -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the original text?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, the original text reads, “The Judiciary assigns more manpower to the handling of land cases to ensure their expeditious hearing and determination.” 

When my colleague moved an amendment to remove the words, “Assigns more manpower” and instead put “Mainstreams the handling”, I have no problem with that unless my colleague has another amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the two are not the same. 

2.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Once upon a time, we had a problem regarding commercial cases in that they would remain unattended to for a very long time. However, the Judiciary took a decision that commercial cases are attended to as expeditiously as possible. Resources, which go beyond manpower were allocated and assigned to the handling of commercial cases. 

My view is that what this resolution is seeking is that the Judiciary considers land cases and gives them priority from the point of view of budgetary allocation, manpower allocation and other things. This is so that when land cases are taken to Court, they are handled as expeditiously as possible. If you restrict it to manpower only, we would run into a problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, would “Resources” instead of “Manpower” take care of that? Manpower and money are resources. I did not notice that the honourable member was standing so I was happy.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, in light of that, I would like to correct the language to read as follows, “The Judiciary streamlines the handling of land cases to ensure their expeditious hearing and determination.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Streamlining does not include adding more resources. It means arranging. If you are okay with it, we will adopt it.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I can guide the House on what the intention was. Like we ably indicated in the debate, many land cases have taken such a long time that at the end of the day, people have lost interest in those cases while others have been put in prison. We have always known that justice delayed is justice denied. That was the spirit in which we brought this recommendation. We feel that the Judiciary should give priority, to some extent, to land cases so that they are disposed of and -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning referred to the way commercial cases were handled and he said they were handled under a project called the Commercial Laws Reform Project for the comprehensive programme that led to review of the laws and also the creation of infrastructure to handle specifically commercial cases. The High Court then established a Commercial Division of the High Court. We have passed that stage in terms of land because we already have a Land Division in the High Court. 

Therefore, what are you saying here? Is it a question of resources? We already have a division of the High Court called the Land Division. Therefore, is it resources or streamlining? 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, let the Judiciary streamline. In view of the fact that we have that division in the High Court, why is it that land cases still take so long to be resolved? Why do they take centuries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, would the solution be streamlining? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Given the description hon. Seninde gave, streamlining is not the right word. In my view, we would urge the Judiciary to prioritise land issues by providing additional resources to ensure expeditious handling of cases. “Prioritised” may be a better word and then we can add -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we do not want something like that. We want a comprehensive -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Given time, I can formulate it. However, the recommendation should include prioritising issues of land. We can then give a detail say by providing additional resources to ensure expeditious handling of land related matters. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That particular proposal presupposes that there are many land cases still pending. You have already guided that there is a division of the High Court in charge of land.

This Parliament cannot therefore urge the Judiciary to prioritise the matter that they already did. The procedural issue I am seeking, on which I shall need your guidance, Mr Speaker, is whether in view of your guidance, we still need that particular proposal; to urge the Judiciary to do the things that they have already done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we tidy this proposal?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a prayer, which if adopted, becomes a resolution. You cannot afford to have something that is not clear and specific. It comes from the background and that is that despite having the land registry, which is given there, the problem is delay due to inadequate man power.

I therefore thought that the way it is framed here was very clear; that the Judiciary be assigned more man-power. If we adopt this, then we know what we want. If we simply say “Prirotise”, “Mainstream”, “Streamline”; it is hazy. We know what we want. I therefore would like to propose that we leave it as it is. It was very clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we say “Resources” instead of just “Manpower”, so that the resources have to do with manpower and money. Is it more appropriate? 

MR MAGYEZI: Then I would like us to amend it to read as follows: “The Judiciary allocates more resources, for expeditious handling of land cases”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for that correction, because I am not a lawyer. At least the principle is understood and if that is the best language, I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put a question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I would like to move an amendment on prayer number (7) to read as follows: “Government spearheads the operationalisation of the National Land Policy.” The government, not only ministry of lands - 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I did not want raise up again, but we were about to take a decision asking Government to inquire and then come back to Parliament within one month. In the same motion, we have made conclusions and are proposing solutions.

The procedure which I am raising is whether it is still necessary for Government to go and inquire and then come back when we are actually proposing solutions as if the inquiry has already been done and we have reached a conclusion as Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The action of the Cabinet arose from this situation. So they have just moved ahead of the motion; it does not make the motion useless. All we need to do is confirm what we are saying as Parliament and let them do what they are doing.  Since they have undertaken to come back to Parliament, within one month, that will be to our advantage that at least one of those resolutions that this House passes, will have recourse in a month. Let us finish with this motion; Government is coming back in a month’s time and then we hear what they are saying about this. We can take it from there. So, can I now put a question to the motion?

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether we have captured my amendment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have not.

MR WERIKHE: Okay, may I move an amendment to prayer number (7) to read as follows: “The government spearheads the operationalisation of the National Land Policy.” Instead of having the Ministry of Land and the Ministry of Local Government alone, we are actually urging Government. There are many other stakeholders who are going to ensure that the National Land Policy is operationalised. That is why we want Government to be the one doing that rather than only the ministries of Land and Local Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you ask Government to spearhead anything? Asking Government to spearhead, who else can spearhead anything?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read through the motion which hon. Seninde moved. I also read critically the prayers that she listed. I found no problem with her original prayers. I, however, have found a problem with some of the amendments that have been moved and she accepts them.

The manner in which the prayers were mentioned was in the spirit of the motion.I would like to highlight for example, two or three issues for some statements, which she is accepting that actually should replace the original statement.

One is “Intervening” versus “Clarification”; for clarifying the roles of whichever. Then two, is “Streamlining” versus “Prioritisation”. In my view, I would like to suggest that we maintain the original prayers that she listed. Her prayers are very clear and precise. When we are -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you oppose the amendments being proposed now. We cannot go back on what we have decided on.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that we cannot afford to be ambiguous. For example, in the amendment, hon. Werikhe was moving that we urge Government yet we know the particular ministries that handle particular matters. Government is too broad and for us to be specific is better for this House, so that we know who is accountable for what. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is an objection to the proposed amendment. I put the question to the amendment -

MR WERIKHE: On number (7) - I think I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can I now put the question to the motion? I now put the question to the motion for the resolution of Parliament to urge Government, to inquire into the recurring illegal land evictions in the country to be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday was Prime Minister’s question time, and we were given assurances for some of those questions to receive the responses today. I have seen the Minister of Finance around and I believe this should be the time for the Minister of Finance to respond, especially on the issue of the new procedure that we should now follow regarding the budget process in accordance with the new Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Isn’t it procedurally right that now the Minister of Finance presents to us how we should proceed from now in terms of the budget process? I believe we also have to do the constitutional amendments and Parliament should not be stampeded in these two processes. We should be given time to perform our duties well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Member. I had been served with a copy of the brief on that issue by the Government Chief Whip. I am waiting for the proper time to allow the person responsible to make the presentation. This is not the appropriate time. We will be handling it a little bit later.


BILLS
COMMITTTEE STAGE

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDENT) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had started on this Bill. We adopted some clauses. We stopped on clause 5. We were handling clause 6. I am hoping the Chair has clarified those issues so that we can move to clause 6 now.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 6 was harmonized and I would like to beg that I move an amendment to section 11 of the principle Act by:

    1. Replacing sub clause 5 with two new sub clauses, that is 5 and 6, to provide as follows: Sub clause 5 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable what are you proposing to do in the principal Act?

MR SSIMBWA: We are deleting sub-clause 5 and introducing a new sub clause; that is 5 and 6. Sub-clause 5 to read as follows: “A person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing authority under sub clause 4 may appeal to an appeal authority constituted in: 

    (a) Every state authority by the Executive Director.
    (b) Every municipal town authority by the Town Clerk.
    (c) Every district authority by the Chief Administrative Officer.”

Justification: To provide for the establishment of an appeal authority in each local government or urban authority.

Sub clause 6: “A person aggrieved by a decision made by the appeal authority under subcluase 5 may appeal to the Minister.”

Justification: To provide for appeals from the appeal authority to the Minister. I beg to move

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clearer now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman. We are a National Parliament and we have Rules of Procedure, well laid down and we have a requisite number that is supposed to be in this House when we proceed on any Bill. May I inquire whether we have the number to proceed with this pass this Bill at any stage?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clerk, can you ascertain the number?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.58
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable Members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House to report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish this procedure.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.58
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered clauses 6, 7 and 8 of the Bill entitled: “The Trade license (Amendment) 2012” and passed them. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.59
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now include the statement from the Minister of Finance at this time? Can you call that Item? Okay, I now alter the Order Paper to accommodate the statement that was promised by the Prime Minister yesterday to brief on the implications of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 on the budget calendar.

STATEMENT ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE 
PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015 ON THE BUDGET CALENDER

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the brand new Minister of State for Finance in charge of General Duties, and this being my maiden statement, shall I be heard in silence? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are assuming the powers of the Speaker. Honourable minister, when were you approved by Parliament? (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, colleagues, this is a brief statement on the implication of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 on the budget calendar. You will recall that Parliament passed the Public Finance Management Bill 2012, on the 27 November, 2014. And I am very thankful for this. 

I am also glad to inform you that the President assented to the Bill on the 23 February, 2015. We are waiting for the gazetting of the law to come into force as per Section 1 which reads: “The Act shall come into force upon assent by the President and publication in the gazette”.

The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 consolidates and amends provisions in the Budget Act, 2001 and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, which is now repealed and introduces section for the management of petroleum revenue. Today I would like to concentrate on the application of the Act on the budget calendar.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, you will note that the Act reduces the budget preparation and approval process from twelve to nine months, ensuring that the budget is approved before the commencement of the new financial year. 

Under the Budget Act 2001, the budget was approved months into the start of the financial year and Government had to operate under vote-on-Account which often times affected the implementation of capital projects.

The activities below compare the timelines in the Budget Act and the new deadlines provided in the Public Finance Management Act.

Under activity (1), submission of Sectoral Budget Framework Papers and detailed Budget Estimates by Accounting Officers to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This was under Section 9 (2) of the Budget Act and this was required by 15th February.

The new Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that this should be done by November 15 of last year 2014; most of these were submitted in January 2015. Submission of the National Budget Framework Paper with the preliminary detailed estimates to Parliament under Section 9 (5) of the Budget Act was to be submitted by 1st of April.

The new Public Finance Management Act, 2015 is expected by December 31, 2014. This should have been done - we are yet to discuss this in Cabinet, hopefully on the 11th March that is next Wednesday and subsequently submit this to Parliament by 16th March, once Cabinet agrees to it.

Under item (3), Approval of the National Budget Framework Paper by Parliament is to be done in the Budget Act by 15th of May and we are proposing that this be done by 1st February and it was already done.

Under Item 4: presentations of the Ministerial Policy Statements to Parliament; under Section 13 (13) of the Budget Act, it is to be done by 30th June. In the new Act we are required to have it done by 15th March and we propose that this now be done by 1 April 2015.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, under item NO.5 presentation of the annual budgets to Parliament in the Budget Act, would be done by 30th June and we are proposing that this be done by the 1 April 2015.

Under item No.6, consideration and approval of budget by Parliament; section 14 of the Budget Act, this is to be done by October of the year - we are proposing that this be done by 31 May as per the new Act and this is still within the time frame.

Under item No.7, Budget Speech, Article 155 (1) of the Constitution, the Budget Act and the new Act, put it at October and the new Act puts it at 31st May - the Budget Speech is constitutional and both Acts agree that it should be done by 15th June.

Under Item No.8, the budget comes into operation, Section 13 (5) of the Budget Act, by 1st July and these again are tallying. The Budget will come into operation by 1st July, hopefully without the vote-on-Account.

Honourable colleagues, you will note that my ministry tried to bring forward the timelines in budgeting for this financial year as much as possible in anticipation of the coming into force of the new Act. 

However, it was cognisant of the need to prepare the spending entities to bring forward their planning processes; and the need to adjust our own budgeting system, knowing very well that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament do not allow us to anticipate.

Under item 2.4, from the above, you note that we have lagged behind on the following activities, whose timelines could not be enforced because there were no enabling laws to do so and these are:

    i. The sectors should have submitted their sector budget framework paper by the 15 November 2014.
    ii. The National Budget Framework Paper and detailed Budget Estimates should have been submitted to Parliament by 31 December 2015.
    iii. Parliament should have approved the National Budget Framework Paper by 1 February 2015.

A proposed way forward, Mr Speaker, and colleagues is, consider that we have already missed some of the critical deadlines, which are part of the critical path towards meeting the target of Parliament approving the budget by 31 May, 2015. 

We propose practical timelines as follows: 
    (i) Combining the submission of the National Budget Framework Paper, detailed estimates and ministerial policy statements to Parliament by 1 April 2015. 

    (ii) Considering and Approving the Budget by Parliament by 31 May 2015.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to request you to consider the proposed guidelines. My ministry is currently drafting regulations to guide the implementation of the Act and we are also preparing a simplified guide to the budget process to enable honourable colleagues and the general public to appreciate the provisions in the new law accordingly. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you proposing a new law? This calendar you are proposing- is it a new law?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker. This proposal is now in line with the new law.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard clearly what the honourable minister read. He said - and I was here as we passed the new law. The Budget Act was not repealed and it is a process, which we follow in Parliament here. If it was not repealed and it remained as it is, it means the process of the Budgeting Act with Parliament is still the same. What is missing is the time we have lost because I expected that by February, we would have got the figures and the committees in March could have dealt with it so that we get indicative figures. The clarification I am seeking is, are we still following the Budget Act or are we following the Public Finance Management Act?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I have said that the Public Finance Management Act has been assented to by His Excellency the President and one more activity remains to make it come into force and that is the gazetting. We expect that within the next 14 days, this will have been done. It is our prayer that we do consider the timeline of the new law. 

Yes, I agree that the Budget Act was not repealed but the new Act substantially amends the timelines in the Budget Act. Therefore, this prayer is to alert Members of Parliament on the implication of this new law on the timeline. 

Once we agree to this timeline, then we are going to move into bringing the various products and activities to Parliament within this timeline that I have just read, so that we would be in position to pass the budget for this financial year by 31st May. It will enable us to read the budget when already the budget has been approved and passed by this Parliament. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much for recognising that you and I cross the Nile twice to come here. Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from my brother, the honourable Minister of State for Finance, is to effect that when this new law came into being and was assented to by His Excellency the President, in that particular law, there were timelines to effect. However, you are proposing dates to your convenience as a ministry and it makes me ask whether you are now rewriting this new law, which has been assented to?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to process this.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I can only see –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because we understand the Budget Act was not repealed. Therefore, if it was not repealed, I believe we need to follow the procedure. What are supposed to follow now because since the Budget Act is still in place and we are supposed to follow it as it is, we need your guidance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a legal interpretation question. An Act passed later on the same subject substantially repeals an earlier Act even when it does not say so.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would further like to seek clarification on whether acting on this Act will not have any legal implications in future since we still have one stage of gazetting it in the papers. Thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I seek, Mr Speaker, is that the Public Finance Management Bill had one of its objects as to repeal the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act; those were the two Acts that were supposed to be repealed and to be replaced by that Public Finance Management Act 2014.

I seek clarification from the honourable minister: Was there an amendment to the object of the Public Finance Management Bill to the extent of that you are now telling Parliament that the Budget Act was not repealed and yet it was one of the objects of this Bill when it was presented to Parliament and passed into law as the Public Finance Management Act, 2014?

DR BARYOMUNSI: We know, honourable minister, that there are activities carried out by local governments that precede some of the national level activities in the budgetary cycle. I would like to know to what extent you have involved local governments because they are supposed to carry out activities like budget conferences and so forth. Have you brought them on board in light of the new law? 

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. From Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, yes, all ministries, departments and agencies and local governments have been alerted to the likely effect of the coming into force of the Public Finance Management Bill into an Act before the finalisation of the budget process this financial year. Therefore, they are all alerted.

To the honourable Commissioner, Rose Akol, yes, we are aware of the object of the Bill which clearly indicated that we were to repeal the Public Finance and Accountability Act and also proposed to repeal the Budget Act. However, the Budget Act was saved although substantially this new law actually repealed a number of the key sections and once this law comes into force, we may, as Parliament, use more of the new law as far as the amended areas are concerned and also the timeline.

The request for clarification from hon. Elizabeth Karungi, Commissioner Rosemary Seninde and hon. Wadri, yes, we are still left with one item and that is the gazetting and once this gazetting is done, then this law will come into force. We are right now working on the regulations to implement this law and all these are going concurrently and before the gazetting is finalised, we would have finished with this to enable us to implement this law. 

As you recall, this law is very important to the fiscal discipline in this country and we think that it is good for the country and all of us to use this new law.

Our appeal is that which we have alerted Parliament on and that once it is agreed to, we would start looking into how we can implement the budget process using this timeline. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to - there is not much we can do with this in terms of what we need to do. What does not make sense is that I can understand that the President assented to the Bill on 23rd February but what I do not understand is why up to now it has not been gazetted. The gazette is published every day; so, why has it taken this long to be gazetted? That is what I do not understand, honourable minister.
The minute you submit it there, it will be published; so, why should it take from the 23rd February to today, 5th March and it is not yet been gazetted and it is Government? It does not make sense. 

Honourable members, the minister is proposing that key aspects of the budget process which now have been overtaken by events, for example a budget framework paper should have been submitted by 31st December last year. Parliament should have worked on it and passed it by 1 February 2015. All those dates are in the past and the law has not yet been gazetted.

The Minister is proposing combining the submission of the National Budget Framework Paper, detailed estimates and ministerial policy statements, all those to Parliament by 1st April. Honourable minister, today it is 5th March, why would you want to take the Budget Framework Paper to 1st April? 

Then consideration and approval; the Budget Framework Paper should advise what the discussion will be on the policy statements. How are you bringing them all together and yet there is still time for you to bring the Budget Framework Paper early so that at least we can look at it, while in the meantime you will do the policy statement? 

Why should the Budget Framework Paper also wait for April because the proposal you are making is completely outside any law but we are taking it as Parliament, as a practical solution to a situation we are confronted with which we should handle pragmatically. Is there a way you can bring the Budget Framework Paper earlier so that this Parliament can immediately act on it and then we see how to assist the ministry and deliver by the dates you are hoping to, please?

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, for the guidance, Mr Speaker. We propose that the Budget Framework Paper with the preliminary detailed estimates will be taken to Cabinet on 11 March 2015 and once Cabinet approves this, then on 12th March we can have it submitted to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But here, you have said 1st April?

MR OMACH: Yes, I am agreeing to your proposal so that we expeditiously prepare and send it to Parliament immediately much earlier.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would help both the Executive and Parliament to interface in this and move it forward. On 12th March, the Budget Framework Paper will be before Parliament so that the committees can immediately work on it quickly and we move from there. Is that okay?

MR OMACH: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have members of Kinkiizi Makerere University Students Association from Kanungu District, represented by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Elizabeth Karungi. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them -(Applause)

We also have students and pupils of Nsono Child Development Centre in Namayingo District. They are represented by hon. Stephen Mayende and hon. Margaret Makhoha, the Woman Representative for Namayingo District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them; you are all welcome. Thank you. (Applause)

3.27
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the guidance you have given on the way forward. I would also like to propose that since the policy statement in accordance with the new law is supposed to be laid on Table by 15th March, it would be appropriate that as you look at the Budget Framework Paper, Government also provides us with a policy statement so that we try to match the two. 

Then if the Budget estimates are be laid on Table by 1st April - because there was no transition given in between the two laws; so, what we are trying to do here is find how to work within the limits of the current law but also for Parliament to find time to adequately consider the Budget. I would believe that if we are given the Budget Framework Paper by 12th March and the policy statement around the same time or a week after, it would help Parliament so that by 1st April, we look at the Budget estimates. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that is really proper. Honourable minister, maybe you can take this and give guidance to the different sectors so that these documents are also brought quickly. It helps Parliament also to participate in fast-tracking this process so that at least by the date assigned, we finish with the Budget and we do the formal passing on the date that the Budget will be read by the President.

3.29 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a question that you had put to the honourable minister but to which he has not responded and that is the issue of gazetting. Does it take effect before the Act is gazetted? Can you tell the country when you will gazette?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, you have guided -(Laughter)- and we have obliged.

MR OKUPA: There is no law, if you have not gazetted it.

MR OMACH: Yes, the Speaker has guided and we shall oblige. We are going to make sure that the gazetting is done immediately and the process is known in Parliament. (Laughter)

3.30
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the absence of the law which the minister is talking about - the new law - I request that he withdraws his statement because he is proposing that as Members of Parliament, we should consider his proposals but we cannot consider his proposals without the law being gazetted. We can only consider them after the gazetting. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you heard me say that the proposal of the minister is not premised on any law now; it is premised on operational principles. (Laughter) 

Members, please let us move on. There are issues with items 6 and 7 and we shall defer them to Tuesday, next week. Let us go to item No. 8.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS 
ON HEALTH INSTITUTIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The report was presented and it is the debate that is due.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and it is due for debate. I now propose the question for your debate. The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the health institutions for the year ended 30 June 2010. That is the motion that I now propose for your debate and debate starts now. Can I put the motion to vote? Should I put the question?

3.33
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for diligently looking into the Auditor-General’s report that unearths massive financial impropriety in utilisation of the Shs 10 billion.

At policy level, you will agree with me that the whole mishap was as a result of a politically conceived programme that was brought very close to electioneering time, to the extent that there was no particular ministry which, under normal circumstances, should have taken lead in the implementation of this otherwise good programme -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Terego, there is a rule on relevance. We are debating item No.8 which has to do with health institutions. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: I reserve my comments for the next because I was prepared for the Shs 10 billion spent on small market holders. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the health institutions for the year ended 30 June 2010? If there is no debate, can I put the question?

I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the health institutions for the year ended 30 June 2010 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS 
ON THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND MULAGO REFFERAL HOSPITAL 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

3.35
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): I thank you. I beg to present to this House the Public Accounts committee report on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2010, Volume 2 Central Government, covering the Ministry of Health and Mulago Hospital. 

The committee interacted with the accounting officers of the two sectors and now begs to report. During the year under review, the sector faced cross-cutting challenges and shortcomings and these include:

Domestic arrears

The entities, especially hospitals, had queries related to domestic arrears on utilities (water and power). This arose partly from lack of special consideration for the nature of services and clientele served by these entities, where water and power are key in their service delivery, and consumption that could not easily be controlled. The budgets for this particular item across all entities fell below the actual consumption requirements. 

Human Resources for Health

The hospitals had human resource challenges especially the medical professionals. Some of the entities had staffing gaps in the medical category of more than 50 per cent of the establishment. The glaring staffing gaps compromised the ability of the entities to fulfil their core mandate of providing healthcare services to the population. 

Expired drugs 

The entities had stocks of expired drugs, arising from receipt of drugs that were not highly required or had short shelf life, and change in treatment guidelines like in the case of malaria. This was compounded by the fact that entities lacked the capacity to destroy the drugs and the National Medical Stores that is charged with the responsibility to collect and destroy such drugs did not play its part.

Stores management

The entities did not have qualified staff to manage stores. This resulted into poor management of the stores, including lack of proper record keeping.

Land Titles and Opening up of Boundaries

The entities did not have in their possession land titles. The accounting officers were not aware of the boundaries of the health facilities and had their land encroached on by private individuals.

Update assets registers

The entities had shortcomings in recording information in the assets register. A new format was introduced during the year under review, but appropriate training was not carried out. As a result, most entities had problems in conforming to the required format. 

Having alluded to the above general observations, allow me move to the specific audit queries, as raised in the Auditor-General’s report:

Ministry of Health

Outstanding advances 

The Auditor-General observed that advances amounting to Shs 555,765,894 remained unaccounted for contrary to the legal requirement for all advances to be accounted for at the end of a financial year.

The accounting officer informed the committee that advances amounting to Shs 326,505,194 had been recovered and only Shs 173, 273,567 remained outstanding. Plans had been put into place to recover the outstanding balances from salaries of the officers who had failed to account. 

The accounting officer further assured the committee that an advances ledger had been put in place to monitor advances and ensure timely accountability to avoid similar occurrences. Further, one of the officers who had failed to account, Dr Kamba, had been convicted for non-accountability of funds. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed with concern that the ministry had maintained an officer who had been convicted on its payroll. The committee recommends that the then accounting officer, Mr Mohamed Kezaala, should refund the outstanding Shs 173,273,567 advanced to the various officers. Dr Kamba should be relieved of his duties in accordance with the Government standing orders.

Inadequately Supported Accountability
The Auditor-General observed that officers were advanced funds amounting to Shs 107,169,133 and accountabilities submitted did not indicate the areas visited. Activity reports were also not available for review by audit.

The committee, basing on the audit verification report, observed that whereas the Auditor-General had reported Shs 107,169,133 as having been unaccounted for, Shs 12,787,000 had been double counted in the audit figure, thus agreeing to the accounting officer’s amount of Shs 94,382,133. 

The committee further observed that out of Shs 94,382,133, advances of Shs 93,732,133 had been adequately supported with activity reports, leaving a balance of Shs 650,000 not adequately supported.  

The committee thus recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for the unaccounted for Shs 650,000 and be made to refund the same.

Bank account

The Auditor-General revealed that the ministry’s Treasury General Account (TGA) was overdrawn by Shs 1,971,859,543 without authority.

The accounting officer also explained that this arose out of a technical error by the Uganda Revenue Authority. The ministry made initial payment of Shs 300 million based on URA instructions and at the same time the URA, through an emergency notice to Bank of Uganda, recovered Shs 2.2 billion directly from the account leading to the overdrawing of the account. This culminated in a double payment to URA and subsequently led to the overdrawing of the account. 

The committee observed that whereas there was over payment of Shs 1.9 billion to URA, the same was not recovered as there was a mere adjustment in the books of accounts of Ministry of Health to clear the overdrawn position.

The committee recommends that Shs 1.9 billion be recovered from URA and be paid back to the Consolidated Fund. 

Amount not returned to the Treasury

The Auditor-General reported that a total of Shs 37,390,616 remained unspent on the ministry’s expenditure accounts and was not returned to the Consolidated Fund. 

The accounting officer explained that ministry bank accounts, including the revenue account that had a balance of Shs 37 million, were closed at the end of the FY 2009/2010, and balances were transferred to the Consolidated Fund as required by the financial regulations. At the time of audit, these transfers had not been reflected in the books of accounts. 
 
The committee observed that whereas the accounting officer claimed to have returned Shs 37.3 million to the Consolidated Fund, he fell short of adducing any evidence to that effect.

The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for failure to return the above sum to the Consolidated Fund thereby violating the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the regulations there under.

Previous year payments effected in the Financial Year 2009/2010

The Auditor-General observed that payments amounting to Shs 1, 179,809,162 relating to the financial year 2008/09 were made in the year under review contrary to regulations.

The accounting officer explained that while the requisitions relating to these payments had been initiated towards the end of the financial year, the actual authority for spending the resources for the activities were provided in the year under review. The funds had been committed and the ministry had an obligation to settle its commitment with the suppliers.

The committee observed that whereas in the FY 2008/9 Bank of Uganda used a manual system to clear and post transactions which would remain open even at the end of the financial year to provide for late payment presentation, repayment of bounced EFTs and error corrections, the Ministry of Health proceeded with new transactions other than those specified in the above category such as salary payment.

The committee recommends that management should have all balances at the end of the financial year returned to the Consolidated Fund. Any spending after the close of the year should be against the appropriation for the new financial year.

Domestic arrears

Payables not adequately supported

The Auditor-General observed that out of Shs 1.3 billion payable to various entities, Shs 158, 479,604 had no adequate supporting documentation like invoices and Local Purchase Orders (LPOs). Out of the total payments without supporting documents, Shs 67.1 million related to utility bills which did not require the raising of an LPO.

The accounting officer explained that the Shs 36.5 million were requisitions for funds from staff, which do not require LPOs and invoices. The balance of Shs 54 million was genuine claims by Monitor Publications and the New Vision Company, which were reflected and paid. 

The committee observed that whereas the accounting officer appeared before the committee, other than admitting the lack of documents supporting the liability and promising to remove them from the books, the adjusted books of accounts were not availed to the committee. The committee observed that recognising unsupported payables facilitates is fraud.

The committee recommends that payables after the close of the financial year should not be honoured without supporting documents. The accounting officer should desist from recognising unsupported liabilities as this results in payment of goods and supplies not received.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer should be held liable for recognising unsupported payables and be made to refund the money.

New outstanding commitments

The Auditor-General observed that the ministry incurred domestic arrears amounting to Shs 35.4 million contrary to the regulations that prohibit accounting officers from committing Government unless funds are available.

The accounting officer explained that a review had been done and it was realised that this was a system generated liability and that the LPO should have been cancelled but was not done because of the inability of the system to reverse the entry.

The committee observed that the accounting officer recognised a non-eligible commitment to Government as a domestic arrear whereas no goods had been supplied. If it was not for the intervention of the Auditor-General, Government was bound to lose Shs 35.4 million

The committee recommends that there should be regular internal reconciliations and supervision to weed out non-eligible commitments and cautioned the accounting officer.

Un-reconciled amounts reflected as domestic arrears 

The Auditor-General reported that the ministry’s indebtedness to other institutions was reflected at a much higher amount than what the ministry recognised in its own books of accounts. Shs 137,460,840, for instance, was recognised as the ministry’s indebtedness to National Medical Stores and Shs 48,055,080 to Uganda Telecommunications. This is contrary to the available documentary evidence that the ministry owes National Medical Stores and Uganda Telecom Shs 4.153 billion and Shs 53 million respectively. 

The accounting officer agreed with the observation. The ministry only captured Shs 137 as domestic arrears for National Medical Stores instead of Shs 4.1 billion and Shs 48 million to UTL instead of Shs 127 million

The committee observed that there has been a consistent failure on the part of the ministry to reconcile its indebtedness. If not checked, this can lead to loss of colossal sums of money to Government.

The committee recommends that a comprehensive reconciliation is made to confirm the indebtedness to other institutions to avoid possible litigations.  

Mischarge of expenditure 

The Auditor-General observed that Shs 620 million meant for medical and agricultural supplies was utilised on payment of salaries for intern doctors and sensitisation workshops. This act was irregular and contrary to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and further explained that funds were diverted to pay intern doctors who had threatened to go on strike and whose services were important, given the critical shortage of human resources for health in most health facilities at the time.

The committee observed that the accounting officer mischarged Shs 620 million without authority for virement from the PS/ST. This is contrary to the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the regulations there under. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always seek for appropriate authority before making any virement.

Refund to GAVI

The Auditor-General revealed that the ministry refunded Shs 1.8 to GAVI in respect of funds that were misappropriated at the ministry. This irregular payment had not been budgeted for and such refund should have been done by the implicated officials.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation that the funds were spent on an activity that had not been budgeted for. This was done in response to a Cabinet directive requiring the Ministry of Health to refund the money as a precondition for release of more funds by the donors. 

The accounting officer further submitted that the GAVI Global Fund Account was opened in the Bank of Uganda to recover the sums misappropriated from the individuals implicated. The amount refunded by the time of meeting the accounting officer was Shs 311 million, leaving an outstanding balance was Shs 703 million. 

The Shs 877 million, an equivalent of US$ 500,000 captured as having not been accounted for by Mr Mohamed Kezaala, was confirmed to have been remitted to UNICEF headquarters for vaccines procurement.

The accounting officer did not seek authority from the PS/ST as required and the retrospective authority that was sought was rejected.

The committee further observed that Shs 877 million, an equivalent of US$ 500,000 captured as having not been accounted for by Mr Muhammad Kezaala, related to UNICEF H/Qs for vaccines which was different from the GAVI monies unaccounted for by the ministry.

The committee further observed that planned activities of the ministry were affected by the diversion of Shs 1.8 billion paid to GAVI.

The committee was disappointed to note that whereas GAVI funds were stolen by individuals, Government/Cabinet directed a refund of the stolen monies from public funds. Moreover, Government has not followed through the process of ensuring that the implicated individuals refund the stolen money.

The committee further observed that whereas the Government is contractually bound to refund the money misappropriated from GAVI, the act of diverting funds budgeted for other activities negates implementation and delivery of services.

The committee recommends that US$ 500,000 that was erroneously paid to GAVI should be recovered. 

The committee further recommends that Government should take all appropriate measures to recover the money from individuals who misappropriated it and those found culpable should be prosecuted.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for diverting funds from planned and budgeted activities without authority from the PS/ST.

Nugatory expenditure

The Auditor-General reported that expenditure of Shs 419 million that could have been avoided was incurred in settlement of interest charged by contractors for delayed payments. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation that Shs 419 million was paid out in respect of interest settlement and explained that this was due to factors beyond the control of the entity. Funds were not released at the time contractors submitted their certificates of completion.  

The committee observed that whereas the accounting officer claimed late release of funds, there was no evidence to that effect. The committee recommends that Shs 419 million be recovered from the accounting officer.

Sale of motor vehicles

The Auditor-General reported that an auctioneer was contracted in 2008 to sell the ministry’s vehicles and Shs 108 million was realised from the sale. By the time of the audit, Shs 80 million had been remitted by the auctioneer, leaving a balance of Shs 26 million.

The accounting officer clarified that the balance of Shs 20.4 million – not Shs 26 million – was still outstanding from the sale of the ministry’s vehicles by M/s Kamugasha Agencies Limited. The outstanding balance was cleared on 14 April 2011.

As a result of the initial failure to remit the proceeds of the sale of the ministry’s vehicles and the inconvenience to the Government, the ministry’s contracts committee recommended that Kamugasha Agencies be blacklisted by the PPDA and should no longer engage in any public procurement and disposal function.

The committee noted the action taken by the accounting officer and the recovery made and recommends that in future, there should be timely follow-ups on the proceeds of sale –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I do not intend to interrupt my honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, this document was sent to our iPads 30 days ago and we read it all. It is a huge document of about 50 pages. Isn’t it better for him to read the summary and observations so that we debate it, in the interest of time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable chairperson is proceeding properly. (Applause)

MR MWIRU: Lack of Contracts Committee Approval: The Auditor-General reported that goods and services worth Shs 340 million were procured without the contracts committee approving the award, contrary to section 76 of the PPDA Act. 

The accounting officer explained that Shs 207 million was paid to Classic Clearing and Forwarding to clear health related items under a framework arrangement and did not require a contracts committee’s approval. Shs 40 million paid to Tyre Masters went through the normal procurement procedures. The only instance when the procedure was not followed was the procurement for hotel accommodation at Nile Hotel for a retreat to prepare ministerial policy statements. The accounting officer regretted the omission and submitted that the officer had been cautioned for failure to follow the right procedure.

The committee observed that Shs 92 million spent for hotel accommodation at Nile Hotel for a retreat to prepare ministerial policy statements was spent without following the procurement process and the preparation of ministerial policy statements was not an emergency. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for flouting the PPDA Act and the regulations there under.

Lack of stores cadre

The Auditor-General reported that the care, custody and accounting for inventory, plant and tools was vested under the control of the Principal Office Supervisor, who lacked the requisite stores management skills. It was further reported that there was no segregation of duties in the stores management function. The Principal Office Supervisor received records and issued all stores, in addition to requisitioning for some purchases. 

The accounting officer submitted that the advice of the Auditor-General was noted and the posts of Senior Stores Assistant and Stores Assistant were declared to the Ministry of Public Service for onward transmission to Public Service Commission for advertising. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had posted a Principal Stores Assistant, who had reported for duty.

The committee noted from the documents on file that the accounting officer had brought the matter to the attention of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service and the posts were subsequently filled. 

Understaffing

The Auditor-General reported that only 542 positions were filled, leaving 94 positions vacant. The accounting officer agreed that at the time of the audit, the posts under UVRI and the NCRI were vacant. This was because UNRHO had just been created as an autonomous body responsible for recruitment of staff in the two institutions. Appropriate approval was being awaited from the Ministry of Public Service. Eventually, 78 posts were filled.

The committee noted from the documents on file that the accounting officer had brought the matter to the attention of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service and the posts were subsequently filled.

Contract staff appointments

The Auditor-General reported that the revised terms and conditions of service of the Uganda Public Service circular standing instruction No.6 of 1989 abolished temporary staff appointments and required the existing ones, if any, to be phased out within six months. The ministry employed 82 persons on temporary terms for over a year, contrary to the Government requirements.

The accounting officer explained that the ministry’s structure had not been reviewed for two decades, resulting into a number of vital positions not being established, hence the recruitment.

The committee observed that the accounting officer appointed staff on a temporary basis, contrary to circular standing structure No.6 of 1989. The committee recommends that the Public Service Commission takes action on the accounting officer for failure to comply with the circular standing instructions. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should always monitor ministries to ensure that circular standing instructions are complied with.

Procurement of Antiretroviral and Artemisinin Combination Therapies 

The Auditor-General reported that there was no memorandum of understanding between the ministry and the National Medical Stores, which was responsible for the purchase of government medicines, to ensure that there were proper deliveries from the company and that there were adequate stocks and distribution of these medicines. 

The accounting officer submitted that the ministry had entered into MoUs between the stakeholders – the ministry, NMS, local governments and development partners where applicable - in response to the audit recommendation.

The committee observed that the ministry had entered into an MoU with NMS, local governments and development partners albeit after the audit. The committee further observed that the accounting officer exhibited incompetence in the management of procurements from NMS. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for neglect of duty and failing to satisfactorily perform the duties of an accounting Officer.

Payments for utilities

The Auditor-General reported that a total of Shs 914 million was paid to utility firms during the year under review. There was, however, an un-reconciled balance brought forward of Shs946 million in respect of three utility accounts, which had remained unresolved. 

The accounting officer explained that utility bills were being regularly verified by the Principal Office Supervisor before payment was effected as advised by audit. The ministry also indicated that a taskforce had been put in place to reconcile all the utility accounts.

The committee observed that the accounting officer was paying for un-reconciled utility bills. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for any resultant financial loss. The committee further recommends that the ministry submits to Parliament a report of the taskforce on the utility accounts reconciliation within one month from the date of submission of this report.

Assessment of delivery of outputs

Assessment of performance of the ministry indicated that several planned activities were either partially completed or were not undertaken at all. Failure to undertake planned activities hampered achievement of the ministry’s intended objectives, especially service delivery, to the population. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation that some planned activities were not implemented as scheduled. This was as a result of a delay in release of funds by Ministry of Finance in respect of the Government of Uganda’s contribution towards the procurement of the imaging and theatre equipment for hospitals and health centres IV planned for the year under review.

The committee observed that failure to implement some of the activities was as a result of diverting funds to refund misappropriated funds to GAVI, moreover without the required authority, and partially failure by the Ministry of Finance to release funds on time. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should desist from diverting funds meant for specific planned activities.

Asset management

The Auditor-General reported that the assets kept at the engineering department were in a very poor state, vandalised and had lost value. Further, the Auditor-General reported that old stores that had been listed for boarding off in UNEPI stores had not been done. 

The accounting officer explained that the problem arose from the disposal of injectable materials and cold chain equipment, which was complicated given that the process had to follow WHO recommended disposal procedures that had huge financial implications.

The committee observed that whereas the disposal involved injectable materials and cold chain equipment, which required adherence to WHO recommended disposal procedures, there was inordinate delay by the accounting officer to comply with the said procedures. The committee recommends that the accounting officer expedites the process of boarding off the stores.

Human Resource Management

Staff performance appraisal

The Auditor-General reported that some seconded doctors and staff on probation were not being subjected to annual performance appraisal. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that this arose from the misunderstanding on the part of local governments who considered seconded doctors as staff belonging to the centre and not subject to appraisal by them.

The committee observed that whereas the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, subsequently, DHOs and CAOs were sensitised and charged with the responsibility of monitoring and appraising the performance of seconded doctors.

The committee further observed that the Ministry of Public Service does not seem to take interest in performance appraisals of staff seconded to local governments and those on probation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should strictly carry out timely monitoring and supervision of seconded staff appraisals and those on probation.

Updating of records 

The Auditor-General reported that personnel files were not updated on a regular basis and could not, therefore, be relied on when making staff related decisions.

The accounting officer explained that following the Auditor- General’s advice, the human resource management records’ validation exercise was undertaken in the ministry to ensure that staff records had basic information on their bio-data. An officer was designated to closely supervise the records management function in the ministry.

The committee observed that the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and took remedial measures to address the anomaly after the audit. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible on his own plea of guilt for failing to observe the guidelines on staff management.

Study Leave without clearance

The Auditor-General reported that some doctors had gone for further studies without clearance as required by Government regulations, while some of those cleared to undertake their graduate studies had taken a longer time than authorised.  

The accounting officer submitted that hospital directors had been sensitised on the need to obtain authority before an officer is permitted to undertake a long course.  It was also a requirement that before one is granted study leave by the Health Service Commission, he or she should be bonded and this was being strictly enforced.

The committee observed that the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, although addressed the committee on the remedial action taken after the audit, which, in the committee’s opinion, did not address the audit issues.

The committee further observed that the continued absence of doctors and other health workers who are on the payroll and not on station grossly affects service delivery.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failing to observe the Public Service Standing Orders and Regulations. 

Inspections

Masafu Hospital in Busia District

The completion date overshot by 12 months on this contract. The liquidated damages of Shs 134 million were not deducted from the payments to the contractor. Shoddy work was done on the male ward. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible and be made to refund Shs 134 million paid to the contractor. The accounting officer should also ensure that the contractor rectifies the defects in the male ward contract.

Butebo Health Centre IV, Pallisa District 

The committee observed that there was shoddy and incomplete work done by M/s Arm Pass Technical Services. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that the contractor rectifies the defects in the male ward. The supervising engineer should be held liable for failure to supervise the contract and causing financial loss. The company and its directors should be blacklisted from any future Government contracts.

Mbale Hospital

The committee observes that the accounting officer reported that the defects fell within the defects liability period and had been corrected. The committee noted the accounting officer’s explanation.

Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital

There was delayed completion ranging from 12 March 2009 to January 2010 due to delayed payments by the ministry. Certificate 2 was paid seven months after it was issued. 

The committee recommends that since the contracts follow a procurement plan, the ministry should always ensure timely release of funds. 

Kambuga Hospital

The committee noted the shoddy and incomplete work done by M/s Lubmarks Investment Ltd. 

The committee recommends that the supervising engineer be held liable for failure to supervise the contract and for causing financial loss. The company and its directors should be blacklisted from any future Government contracts.

Itojo Hospital

The committee observes that there was shoddy and incomplete work done by M/s Coronation Developers (U) Ltd. The accounting officer did not provide the certificate of completion to the committee.

The committee recommends that M/s Coronation Developers (U) Ltd be blacklisted from future Government contracts. The accounting officer should ensure completion of works and provide a certificate of completion.

Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project (II) ADF Loan

Ineligible expenditure

The project financing agreement stipulates that ADB funds should not be used to pay for any transfer fees or bank charges. Contrary to this requirement, the project incurred a total of Shs 2 million in respect of bank charges and transfer fees. 

The committee noted that the accounting officer did not observe the conditions in the financing agreements as enumerated above, which would have caused imposition of penalties. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should strictly adhere to the financing agreements in such arrangements. 

Accounting system

The Auditor-General reported that the project implementation unit maintained a manual accounting system to record all its accounting ledger books, rendering accounting, including the preparation of financial statements, laborious and prone to errors. 

The accounting officer explained that project management unit was due to be connected to IFMS being rolled out to all government institutions and it was, therefore, not found necessary to have a standalone and expensive accounting system for the project.

The committee observed that it was logical for the accounting officer not to procure a standalone accounting system for the project yet Government was rolling out IFMS system to all government institutions. The committee recommends that the ministry fast-tracks the connection to the IFMS system.

Budget performance

The Auditor-General reported that during the year under review, the approved budget for the ADF loan component was Shs 22 billion. However, by the close of the financial year, the project had received Shs 15 billion, representing 68.7 per cent, leading to a shortfall of Shs 7.1 billion. 

A further analysis of the project financing indicated that the cumulative loan disbursements to the project as at the end of the third year of implementation was about 52 per cent against the planned 65 per cent. This reflected slow progress in the implementation of the project activities given the fact that more than half of the project period had elapsed. The overall objectives for the project may not be attained within the anticipated period of time.

The accounting officer explained that the disbursement rate had risen to 84.4 per cent by February 2012 with the last date being December 2012. The remaining balance of 15.6 per cent to disburse largely accounted for the delayed civil works, the retention percentage on the contractual civil works to cover the defects periods and the CT scan for Mbarara Hospital.

The committee observed that 21.3 per cent of the budget, translating into Shs 7.1 billion, was not released due to the delayed commencement of civil works and low absorption capacity. The committee further observed that despite receiving 68.7 per cent of the budget, project performance was at 52 per cent.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for failure to adhere to procurement plans, which occasioned delayed commencement of works and low absorption capacity, hence Government missing out on Shs 7.1 billion for the year under review. This led to delayed service delivery and paying interest for the extended period. 

Utilization of ambulances

The Auditor-General reported that in a bid to improve health service to the communities, the project procured a total of 26 vehicles labelled as ambulances that were handed over to the health centres IV and hospitals as per plan. 

However, during field inspections, it was noted that there was a challenge of maintenance and sustainability of the said vehicles. Some of the health facilities visited had their vehicles parked due to lack of fuel and some needed to be serviced. This implied that the vehicles in question were not being fully utilised.

The accounting officer submitted that following the Auditor- General’s observation, the use of vehicles labelled,   “ambulance” had been streamlined. The health centres that had the said vehicles had been advised to include the necessary maintenance costs and other running costs within their respective recurrent budgets.

The committee observed that the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation but hastened to add that he had taken remedial measures in the subsequent financial year.

The committee further observed that whereas the purchase was intended for ambulances, land cruisers and double cabin pickups labelled as “ambulances” were procured contrary to the specified project guidelines.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for neglect of duty leading to denial of ambulance services to the communities. The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for the procurement of land cruisers and pickups instead of ambulances and if there is any resultant financial loss, he makes good the same. 

Procurement 

The Auditor-General reported that the project experienced anomalies specifically in the evaluation processes of certain tenders that resulted into administrative reviews. For instance, a review of the evaluation process for the remodelling of Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital indicated that the criteria used to disqualify one of the bids was not justified and had led to unfair elimination of Excel Construction Limited at the preliminary stage of evaluation on the basis of invalid bid security. 

Although the decision was overturned by the PPDA through an administrative review, the actions and decisions made during this evaluation indicates weaknesses within the procurement process of the project, which undermines the transparency and fairness principles enshrined in the procurement law. Such errors could have cost the project in terms of uncompetitive prices and legal fees. 

The accounting officer explained that the project had carried out all planned procurements with only a few complaints from the bidders. All complaints that were received had been handled in accordance with the procurement law.  

The bid security by Excel Construction Limited for the remodelling of Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital was initially disqualified by the evaluation committee basing on the advice of the Solicitor-General under the cover of his letter dated 12 October 2009.

During PPDA’s review of the case, PPDA found the Solicitor-General’s opinion erroneous and reversed the decision. The entity had taken note of this shortcoming in the evaluation process and had devised mechanisms for selection of members of the evaluation committee who are well trained and conversant with procurement law to minimise the repeat of the same.

The committee observed that the ministry by taking heed of the Solicitor-General’s advice was in compliance with Article 119 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which provides for compliance with the Solicitor-General’s advice.

The committee took note of the action of the accounting officer and recommends that the services of specialised people should be enlisted while carrying out evaluation of bids.

Delayed implementation of key project activities

The Auditor-General reported that there were significant delays specifically in the implementation of the civil works for the remodelling of the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, the construction of health centres and the procurement of necessary medical equipment for these health facilities.

The accounting officer explained that the delays were partly attributed to the delays in the procurement process and to the slow pace of works by the contractors who were engaged in many other sites. 

Whereas the procurement for the remodelling of the Mbarara Hospital was initiated in Mbarara Hospital, re-development, Phase 1 was 100 per cent complete by December 2011 and was due for commissioning. The remaining activity at the Mbarara Hospital site was the installation of a new power supply for the new blocks. 

For the 39 health centres, lot two were 87 per cent complete, lot three were 87 per cent complete and lot four was 90 per cent complete. The remaining works had been scheduled for completion in April/May 2012 based on the contractors revised work plans and extended contracts.

The rehabilitation and construction of the 39 health centres under three lots that commenced in August 2008 was behind schedule.  

However, as at October 2011, the status of progress was at about 85 per cent completion rate. The major cause of the delay was the Value Added Tax (VAT) exemption introduced by Government of Uganda that negatively affected the contractors’ cash flows. 

Twenty-three out of the 39 health centres had been completed, handed over and were in use. The remaining health centres were scheduled for completion in the financial year 2011/12.

Observation

The committee observed that the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation but subsequent to the audit had taken remedial measures to address the audit issues as enumerated above.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for failure to adhere to procurement plans, which occasioned delayed commencement of works and low absorption capacity, leading to delayed service delivery.

DANIDA Health Sector Programme Support Phase II 

Slow pace of utilisation of resources 

The Auditor-General reported that the programme unit budgeted to spend Shs 39 billion during the financial year ended 30 June 2010 but only spent Shs 14 billion representing 37.2 per cent of the budgeted expenditure. 

The process of effecting payments in the Ministry of Health tended to delay due to the bureaucratic processes. This slowed down resource absorption. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and attributed this to delay in completing the construction of the six nursing schools and the School of Pharmacy at Makerere University, leading to untimely preparation of certificates and change in modalities of transferring funds for credit lines for National Medical Stores and Joint Medical Stores, which delayed the absorption of money for medicine.

The committee observed that the non-timely completion of construction affected the absorption of the programme funds thus affecting the planned and budgeted activities.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to carry out proper monitoring and evaluation of the planned activities leading to delay in completion of projects.

Possible misuse of funds 

The Auditor-General reported that there was possible misuse of funds during the year under review. For example, on 23 September 2009 several cash withdraws of Shs 18 million and Shs 12 million totaling to Shs 48 million were made and later handed over to collect qualitative data for the annual health sector performance report financial year 2008/2009. No activity report and accountability of the money released was availed for audit. 

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and explained that the responsible officer Dr Kamba was arraigned before the courts of law and convicted for offences related to misappropriation of the sums in question and sentenced.

The committee noted the accounting officer’s submission that the matter was subject of a court proceeding and to which the court had pronounced itself by sentencing the officer. 

Failure to recover the unutilized funds from the staff 

The Auditor-General reported that during the audit, management was reluctant to implement prior year audit recommendations. For example, it was recommended that an officer refunds a sum of Shs 6,891,142 he received on 22 January, 2007 as field allowance for Masaka Regional planning workshop that never took place but by the time of the audit, only a total of Shs 1.7million had been recovered as per receipt No 0444965 dated 1 March 2010. 

Further, a hotel in Masaka had been paid a total of Shs 6, 549,153 for the same workshop as per receipts No 1415 and 1416 dated 12 February 2007. These funds had not been recovered from the hotel at the time of audit in November, 2010.

The accounting officer explained that the officer was interdicted to pave way for the investigations in transaction. The officer was successfully prosecuted and convicted by court.

The committee observed that whereas the Treasury accounting instructions require accounting officers to account for money advanced within 60 days from the date of disbursement, failure of which the accounting officer is mandated to deduct the same from the officer’s salary, the accounting officer failed, refused or neglected to do so, leading to financial loss to government.

The committee recommends that the sum in question amounting to Shs 11,740,295 be recovered from the accounting officer. 

Poor cash management

The Auditor-General reported that effective cash management is one of the basic pillars of sound financial management. There were instances where huge sums of money were withdrawn in cash for workshops and other activities including payments to hotels instead of issuing cheques. 

Workshops would then take place months later. For example, on 12 February 2009 an officer was given Shs 18, 462,700 to cater for the West Nile Regional planning workshop which took place on 2nd and 3rd April 2009. Accountability was submitted on 3 July 2009. 

Another officer, on 12 February 2009 was given Shs 9.2 million to cater for Tororo Regional planning workshop which took place between 2nd and 3rd July 2009. 

Another officer was given Shs 40.8 million on 6 June 2010 for regional dissemination of communication strategy on rational use of medicine, an activity that had not taken place at the time of audit in November 2010.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and submitted that the entity had changed its modalities of paying hotel services.

The committee observed that the accounting officer did not apply acceptable financial management principles by paying cash to activity officers other than paying the service providers.

The committee further observed that at the time of the audit and the accounting officer appearing before the committee, Shs 40.8 million, which had been paid to the personal account of the activity officer on the 6 June 2010 was still unaccounted for and the activity had not been carried out. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to observe laid down financial management procedures in disbursement of public funds.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for causing financial loss of Shs 40.8 million and made to refund the same. 

Retrospective authorization and approval of procurements 

The Auditor-General’s review of internal controls over the procurement of goods and services for the programme revealed a case where procurement of goods and services was made before the approval and authorisation by the contracts committee. For example, on the 21 September 2009, printed national laboratory policy materials were delivered on 29 September 2009. An LPO was issued on 23 November 2009 before the approval by the contracts committee. 

The goods delivered were printed materials, which implied that the instructions to print must have gone out much earlier than the 21 September 2009.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation and regretted the omission. The committee observes that this was deliberate abuse of the procurement procedures by the officers involved.

The committee recommends that the officers involved be held responsible for flouting the PPDA Act and the regulations there under. 

Honourable members, now I move to Mulago Hospital. The one I have just finished was the Ministry of Health.

Over expenditure on employee cost

The Auditor-General observed that the entity overspent on employee costs by Shs 135,000,000 without authority. The accounting officer explained that the costs were incurred on salaries which were at the time being processed on a straight through process, and the hospital only maintained book entry. This was a short coming of the old system at Bank of Uganda that has since been replaced with a new system.

The committee observed that whereas Shs 16 billion had been voted under employee costs in the year under review, Shs 17 billion had been spent, creating a variance of Shs 135 million.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible, for spending over and above the allocated budget item, without authority and proper explanation.

Domestic arrears
Audit revealed that during the year under review, the hospital incurred a total of Shs 1.1 billion as domestic arrears, contrary to the commitment control system of the government.

The accounting officer explained that the arrears related to utilities - water, electricity and rent - whose provision fell below the amount requested, and whose consumption could not be terminated. The hospital had however put in place measures like cutting down leakages, as a cost cutting measure.

Observation

The committee observes that consumption of utilities by individual staff of the hospital was being billed under the entity, and there was in some instances, lack of individual meters at the residences of hospital staff.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for negligence of duty thereby causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that staff residences be billed separately from the hospital.

Release not credited to the Treasury general account

The Auditor-General reported that a release amounting to Shs 646,000,000, issued by the Accountant General on Release Advice No. 20142, dated 30 November 2009, was not credited to the hospital’s Treasury General Account, with Bank of Uganda.

The accounting officer informed the committee that management noticed the omission during the general reconciliation, and that this arose from laxity of the Accountant General’s Office, in carrying out monthly reconciliations. It was not possible to effect a retrospective funds transfer, because the account had been closed.

The committee observes that whereas Shs 646,000,000 issued by the Accountant General, on Release Advice No. 20142 dated 30 November, 2009, was not credited to the hospital’s Treasury General Account with Bank of Uganda, the motive could not be ascertained as to whether it was done with criminal intent.

The committee recommends that CIID carries out further investigations to ascertain the whereabouts of the money.

Letters of credit

The Auditor-General observed that letters of credit amounting to Shs 997,143,121, whose details of the items/services delivered and their supporting documents were not availed for audit.

Furthermore, letters of credit worth Shs 1.2 billion were opened with Bank of Uganda in favour of a company for procurement of a CT-Scan, though evidence of the performance was not availed to the audit team for audit.

The accounting officer informed the committee that the letter of credit for the CT-Scan performed fully and the CT-Scan was delivered and was fully functional.

Observation

The committee observed that whereas the Treasury Accounting Instructions require the accounting officer to keep documents for audit and court purposes, and whereas the National Audit Act makes it an offence for an accounting officer not to avail documents to auditors, this accounting officer failed, refused or neglected to avail documents to auditors, for opened letters of credit amounting to Shs 2.2 billions.

The committee further observed that while the accounting officer appeared before it, he provided explanation relating to the Open Letters of Credit worth Shs 1.2 billion, while he did not provide an explanation for the Open Letters of Credit worth Shs 997, 143,121.

The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for failure to provide documents to auditors as required by the National Audit Act.

It further recommends that the accounting officer should be made to refund Shs 997,143,121 spent without any supporting documents.

Assessment of delivery of outputs

The Auditor-General observed that some of the planned outputs of the hospital for the year under review were not fully implemented despite the fact that the hospital received all the funds for the activities, as budgeted.

The accounting officer explained that targeted outputs were estimated based on previous averages. It was normal for actual outputs to be higher or lower than the targeted outputs, due to higher numbers or severity of illness, resulting into higher costs than estimated. 

The committee observed that the entity received 100 percent of its budget, and performed at 95 percent, which was a commendable performance.

Salary bank account

The Auditor-General observed that, a new bank account number 001.292161.1 that the hospital opened with Bank of Uganda, had an opening debit balance amounting to Shs 3 billion, and the account remained with the debit balance throughout the financial year.

The accounting officer informed the committee that, this was a result of the old salary payment system, where Bank of Uganda would effect salary payments, on salary accounts for each vote, and then transfer the same amount, from the Treasury General Account to cover the debit on salary account. 

During the first quarter of the year under review, salaries were paid but the transfer from Treasury General Account was not effected by Bank of Uganda. This left a debit balance on the salary account, which was brought forward at the beginning of the financial year 2009/10. Since then, salary accounts were not being closed every end of year.

The committee observed that this matter was taken up by the accounting officer, Ministry of Finance, planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda and reconciliation was done as verified by the Auditor-General. 

Utilities

The audit revealed that the quarterly deposits amounting to Shs 764,000,000 and Shs 1.7 billion were made to NWSC and UMEME respectively, during the year under review and a further Shs1.3 billion and Shs 300,000,000 was paid to NWSC and UMEME respectively, in settlement of domestic arrears.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and explained that management had instituted measures to carry out regular reconciliations of the utility accounts, with the service provider. Bills, receipts and reconciliation statements, were being kept by the management’s accounts section.

The committee observed that the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and therefore recommends that he be held responsible for failure to avail bills, receipts and reconciliation statements to the auditors.

Lack of a procurement plan

The Auditor-General observed that the hospital had no procurement plan for the year under review to guide the procurement of goods, works and services.

Whereas the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, the committee observed that it was a serious omission on the part of Mulago Hospital, to carry out any procurement without a procurement plan. It was further noted during the committee interaction with the accounting officer, that there was a poor functional relationship between the accounting officer, and the procurement unit.

Committee recommendations 

One, that the accounting officer be held responsible for flouting the PPDA and the regulations there under. 

Two, that a more detailed investigation be undertaken on the same procurement with a view of establishing value for money.

Three, that the Parliament sectoral committees should always be keen on work plans and procurement plans, before recommending the passing of budgets. 

Lack of performance security

The Auditor-General noted that a contract to construct PPS Pharmacy was awarded to a company at a contract sum of Shs 132,234,731,which was later revised to Shs216,064,731, an increment of 63 percent.  Though PPDA gave a waiver for the variations, the entity did not obtain the requisite performance security contrary to the requirement of PPDA.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and regretted the anomaly of not having a performance security for the contract. 

The committee observed that the contract had glaring variations in the provisions of the contract. This could have been done to deliberately knock out other deserving bidders, and variations done to benefit the firm to which the contract was awarded.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always follow the procurement laws, and regulations while handling procurements of the entity.

The committee further recommends that the PPDA Act should be reviewed with a view of limiting the discretionary powers of the entity, to grant waivers for the revisions of contracts above 25 percent of the contract price.

Vacant posts

The Auditor-General noted that out of 1,083 approved posts at Mulago Hospital, only 1,011 were filled, leaving a total of 72 posts vacant. And the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. 

The committee noted laxity on the part of the accounting officer for failing to bring to the attention of the recruiting agency, the vacant posts and only did so after the Auditor-General’s observation.

Committee recommendations

One, that the Health Service Commission expeditiously fills the vacant positions.
Two, that the accounting officer should always submit vacant posts to the Health Service Commission on time. 

Expired staff contracts

The hospital employed a number of staff under the Private Patients Scheme and paid them from NTR collections. There were however employees whose contracts had expired but continued receiving salaries without renewal of those contracts.

The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation.

Committee Observations and recommendations
The committee observed that it was irregular to maintain and pay individuals whose contracts had expired.

We, therefore, recommend that the accounting officer be held responsible for maintaining and paying individuals whose contracts had long been expired and that accounting officer be made to refund the money paid out as salaries. 

Staff training arrangements

The Auditor-General observed that the hospital had no staff training plan. Training in the institution was done in an ad hoc manner and the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation.

The committee observed that the absence of a staff training plan hampered organized capacity building hence affecting the entity’s capacity in as far as service delivery is concerned.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the entity should develop a staff training plan to enable proper capacity building.
 
The committee further recommends that the sectoral committee on health should ensure the existence of a capacity building plan before recommending voting of resources.

Payments to intern doctors

The Auditor-General reported that the hospital used recurrent budget funds and funds from the hospital infrastructure account amounting to Shs 369,620,006 to pay intern doctors as part of their remuneration, which money should have come from the Ministry of Health. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation.
 
The committee noted that during the year under review, Ministry of Health diverted funds amounting to Shs 620,320,432, inclusive of workshops, to cater for salaries and allowances of intern doctors. In the same financial year the Auditor-General established that Mulago Hospital had diverted Shs 369, 620,006. 

The committee was concerned about the possibility of double payments and failure to implement planned activities as a result of this double payment.

The committee further observed that whereas Ministry of Health took over payment of intern doctors with effect from March 2010, the accounting officer of Mulago Hospital continued paying food allowances to a tune of Shs 369, 620,006 to the intern doctors without regularization. 

The committee recommends that Mulago Hospital undertakes to regularize the food allowance.

Payments to relief staff Shs 101, 220,252
The Auditor-General reported that the hospital diverted Government of Uganda hospital recurrent funds amounting to Shs 101,220,252 to pay relief to staff that were to be paid from user fees from the Private Patient Services. The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation. 

The committee observed that by time of audit, the accounting officer had not submitted this category of staff to the Health Service Commission and Public Service Commission for phasing out with a view of embarking on the process of filing the gaps.

The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for not phasing out the relief staff as instructed by Public Service Commission and paying Shs 101, 220,252 to relief staff. 

Supply of drugs and medical sundries by National Medical Stores

The Auditor-General noted shortcomings in the supply and delivery of essential drugs and medical sundries by NMS to Mulago Hospital. The shortcomings included delayed supplies, stock outs of drugs, inability to supply specialized drugs and medical sundries, supply of poor quality drugs and lack of reconciliation between funds disbursed to NMS and deliveries made to Mulago Hospital. 
The accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, and submitted that corrective measures had been put in place and a smooth working relationship between the two organizations had been established.

The committee observed that delayed supplies, stock outs of drugs, inability to supply specialised drugs and medical sundries, supply of poor quality drugs and lack of reconciliation between funds disbursed to NMS and deliveries made to Mulago Hospital affected service delivery during the period under review.

The committee observes that whereas there is National Drug Authority, an entity mandated to deal with quality of drugs, supply of poor quality drugs by NMS still goes on.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the National Drug Authority should strengthen inspection and testing of drugs imported and locally manufactured to   ensure that they comply and/or meet international set standards. 

The committee further recommends that the Minister of Health puts in place a mechanism to harmonize requirements of the hospitals and the procuring agency means should be devised to address the current challenges in the implementation of the policy on the procurement of medical drugs.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chair of the Committee on Public Accounts and all the members who belong to it, for this very elaborate report on this sector. 
Honourable members, are we in a position to debate this report? Tomorrow is Friday and we will not be sitting. If it is not possible to debate it, since we have just received it, that is also okay. We can defer it to next week but if we can debate it, let us proceed.

CAPT. MUKULA: I am always prepared because I have been in this House for many years. However, there is no doubt that this is a very elaborate report. It touches a social contract between the people of Uganda and us who are in government. I therefore suggest that we start the debate so that we can be able to enrich this report by making adequate and effective recommendations.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether it would not be better for the minister to come with some kind of updated statement to give us what has been done since this report is of 2010, rather than us pronouncing ourselves on issues, some of which may have been overtaken by time. I know, for example, some issues concerning National Medical Stores and those on staff recruitment have been worked on. I would like to propose that the minister brings a statement before we can discuss this report.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have been gracious enough to allow the chairman of the committee to present the report, word for word. We listened and we have the copies on our ipads. We have other pending businesses for next week. My proposal is that we give this report at least one hour and discuss it. For sure I do not see any argument or reasons for delaying the debate on this report. 

We have taken notes - the Minister of Health is present and I believe she can respond where required. I suggest we should proceed to debate this report.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very important report. The Auditor-General has raised important issues, which we see in our hospitals every day. I request that we go and internalize this report of 50 pages to note important issues before we debate it. 

If we debate this long report now, we shall not have internalized each and every page with the recommendations of the committee plus all the issues raised by the Auditor-General. I propose we go and study it before we debate it next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, normally where a report is simple and not complicated we go on to debate immediately. The rule says after presentation of the report in the House, we should give time to members to debate. 

However when the report on the subject is simple and not elaborate, we always proceed to debate it because people would have understood quickly. We have just been using this to expedite our work on reports. If you feel this is a fairly complicated subject, we can use the rules to push it to next week.
 
MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no doubt that this report is very elaborate, good and useful, moreso on the service delivery to the people of this country. 

Mr Speaker, as you can see, the House is divided. There are some members saying we debate the report. But others are saying this report is very good with so many issues concerning referral hospitals that need to be internalized, and so that we should not start on the debate now.

I suggest that you let the members who are ready to begin debating the report. The debate can however continue to next week for those who would like to internalize the report further.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we start the debate?
 
4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and as noted by members, it is very detailed. Therefore, in order for us not to waste a lot of time, I would like to propose that we allow members to debate it. I will capture the issues that will be raised and will come with a response next week on Tuesday.

I may not be able to respond to some of the issues now because I am just seeing it now. But also there are issues that took place several years ago. Thank you.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the minister’s statement - she would be the most ready person in this House now. I do not see why we should debate today when we equally have members who are claiming they are not ready.

Why can’t we move together when she is ready on Tuesday, other than doing half debate today? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to move with the minister on the same page? I do not think it really makes sense for us to start on the debate today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge with breaking debate is that you lose the momentum, go back and restart. For matters like this, you should start, debate and conclude. That is why we are deferring this debate; it requires time. That is how the honourable member for Terego started debating a report that was not on the Floor. (Laughter)

MR	SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her suggestion. The chairperson of the committee read the report and we all listened to it. However, it looks like we were not internalising it while it was being read.
My suggestion is: let us debate the report and if there is anything remaining, the minister can come back before we conclude debate on it. That is better than just saying that because it is 50 pages - what were you listening to all this time when the chairman of the committee was reading it out? We have been having this report on our Ipads for some days.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you are aware that most of us here attained senior six -(Interruption)- as a basic qualification. In school not all of us were top graders. Some of us took and still take time to comprehend things to debate them critically.

In addition, you saw what happened to the earlier report. We passed it but after haphazardly debating and then postponed the debate to another date; it wasn’t good. Parliament could not link up because we only just passed it, something that was unfortunate. If we do it the same way, we will come back on Tuesday and still fail to make a strategic connect.

Therefore, my humble appeal is that we do a comprehensive debate when we are ready to enable us make the right decision. I beg hon. Magyezi and hon. Mawanda to take our indulgence and agree that to have this debate on Tuesday next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we come to the close of business today. House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 4.46 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 March 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)























 


