Thursday, 14 March 2013

Parliament met at 3.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to amend the Order Paper to permit a presentation of a petition on the fisheries sector in Amolatar District by hon. Okello. There will also be a motion on roads, which hon. Ekanya requested permission for yesterday. I will allow hon. Alaso to present a report from their visit to Namibia as part of Parliamentarians for Global Action. I will permit hon. Baryomunsi to raise some issues. I will also permit hon. Osegge to present a motion.

I would like to inform you, honourable members, that after today we shall be giving you a short recess for Easter. We want you to also use next week to go and speak to your electorate on many issues, to report what you have been doing but also to educate them about the Marriage and Divorce Bill. 

I want to also ask you to educate yourselves about the Bill rather than talk about what is being said on the radios. Please read the Bill. You will also be provided with the existing one because there is an impression that these are new laws. These are not new laws; there is the Marriage Act, the Divorce Act, the Bahai Marriage Act, Marriage of Hindus Act, Customary Marriages Act. What the law is doing is putting them in one document. That is what is being done. So, we want you to educate the voters about that. 

We shall supply you with the Divorce Act, which is already law in this country. We will also supply you with the Marriage Act and the history of the process of amending this law, which we expect you to use to educate your electorate so that we can all understand what we are doing. After that, you can have your Easter break and we shall reconvene on the 2nd of April to complete our business. 

Now, I want to permit hon. Nebanda to make her maiden speech before we go to other items.

3.23
MS ANDIORU NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my maiden speech. I wish to thank honourable members, especially you, Madam Speaker, for the warm reception that you have given me ever since I came into this House. It enables me settle in and also start my transitional process safely.

You realise that I have come into this House two years after you were sworn in. That means that I have a lot of mileage to cover. So, I hope that the honourable colleagues will help me catch up as I do not intend to surpass them. 

In the NRM manifesto, we made pledges and we need to work really hard so that they are implemented. I hope that we shall commit ourselves to ensuring that they are implemented. I also hope that your doors will be open for me. As you may realise, there are issues that need to be handled and we also need to work together for the benefit not only of Butaleja but for the country as a whole.

Madam Speaker, you may remember the circumstances that led to a by-election in Butaleja. I lost my sister, the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. Allow me to register my sincere appreciation and thank you for the support and the condolence messages you extended to the family, the people of Butaleja and Uganda as a whole. As a family, we shall always be indebted to you for the support extended to us.

I spent a bigger part of my life in the UK pursuing education and employment. Therefore, I did not have ample time to study the plight of our people of Butaleja but during the campaigns, I observed a few things. The health centres did not have enough facilities and drugs; staff, teachers and all Government employees are poorly paid. I, therefore, call upon my honourable colleagues to work together so that we improve the welfare of our people in Uganda as a whole and also in Butaleja. If you thought health facilities are badly off, you need to visit the roads in Butaleja and the different parts of Uganda. Many mothers and children trek long distances in search of clean water and yet it is a human right to have access to clean water within a distance of half a kilometre.

Finally, I will try my level best to emulate my sister but I cannot be her. Therefore, I request you not to judge me as such and support me to measure up. Once again, thank you, Madam Speaker. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Hon. Nebanda, we wish you well and as you know, you are welcome.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, may I, as directed by rules 30 and 31 of our Rules of Procedure, lay on the Table the following reports:

i) 	Apac Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with a report and opinion of the Auditor-General therein. I beg to lay.

ii) 	Hoima Regional Referral Hospital audit report and opinion of Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay it on the Table.

iii) 	Nakaseke-Butalangu Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay it on the Table.

iv) 	Otuke Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay on the Table.

v) 	Lira Municipal Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those reports of the Auditor-General are remitted to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back expeditiously. 

3.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to present a report of the Parliamentarians for Global Action meeting held in Namibia and the Windhoek Plan of Action on the Arms Trade Treaty.

From the 7th to 9th of March 2013, Members of Parliament from Ghana, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Liberia, Tanzania, Uganda, Namibia, Malawi and the Democratic Republic of Congo gathered at Windhoek for the purpose of preparing an African Parliamentarians’ position on the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). This meeting was organised by the Parliamentarians for Global Action. Hon. Huda Oleru and I were privileged to represent this Parliament.

Background 

The United Nations is due to consider a proposal to enact a treaty on small arms and light weapons in a meeting, which will take place beginning Monday, 18th March to the 23rd this year. WorldGovernments, hopefully, will agree to a final position of this very important issue on small arms and light weapons referred to as the Arms Trade Treaty. This landmark proposal at the UN is an attempt to deal with illicit trade on arms, poor arms regulation and management. Currently, this elaborate proposal is summed up in what is called the chairman’s draft of the ATT. 

Justification

The treaty is very important to combat illicit and irresponsible trade in arms and seeks to enlist commitments from governments, arms dealers and brokers to ensure that arms do not get into wrong hands to foment conflict, instability, crime and violence at household and community levels.

There was a detailed bit of proceedings but I will say that it was opened by the Deputy Speaker of Namibia National Assembly, who made an appeal that nations present should review their national laws and policies to follow on the UN programme of action on small arms, to increase awareness and dangers of small arms and light weapons, and to create a comprehensive framework to manage them.

The German ambassador had graciously funded the meeting and he reiterated their commitment to the need for this treaty. We also had presentations on African perspectives, what other countries were doing in regard to the Arms Trade Treaty and the gender perspectives of the treaty. 

At participant level, we highlighted the need for political stability, formal conflict resolution mechanisms, democratic governance, regional approaches to deal with border porosity and institutional development and accountable leadership in Africa. In particular, we emphasised the need to involve women in conflict resolution since women and children bear the brunt of any conflict. 

Participants pointed strongly to a need for the inclusion of related ammunitions into the provisions of the treaty. The treaty is currently structured to provide options. The first option is the option of small arms and light weapons but there are proposals by governments and countries that you cannot only regulate small arms and light weapons and you forget to regulate the related ammunitions that go with them. That is embodied, in the drafters’ language, in the formula of 7+1+1. There are ammunitions that are already listed in the category of 7 but when you add the other +1, it means you are including the related ammunition for purposes of regulation.

Way forward

The meeting came up with the Windhoek Plan of Action. I would like to take the House through this plan of action because this is the crux of the matter. The Windhoek Plan of Action reads as follows: 

“Deploring the enormous cost in human life and injuries worldwide caused everyday by inadequate regulation of international trade in conventional weapons, in particular small arms and light weapons and related ammunition;

Informed, in our actions, by the disproportionate impact of armed violence on women and children and the lack of engagement with women and children in conflict resolution;

Recognising the urgent importance of addressing the illicit trade in conventional arms, including small arms and light weapons and related ammunition, in reducing violent armed conflict and armed violence among other critical efforts;

Mindful of the urgent need to take immediate steps to address the scourge; 

Mindful also, as Members of Parliament, of the important responsibilities we have in always representing and promoting the best interests of our people;

Aware of the upcoming Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) Conference, to take place at the United Nations Headquarters in New York from 18 to 28 March 2013;  

Determined to ensure that, as Members of Parliament, we discharge all our obligations in legislation, representation and oversight to support the adoption of a strong ATT;
Determined also to ensure that, in parallel, our national laws are formulated and implemented in greater compliance with the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons;

We, therefore, as Members of Parliament from 12 African nations gathered at the National Assembly of Namibia from 7 to 8 March 2013 undertake the following Plan of Action and to promptly:

1. 	Reach out to our respective national governments and delegations to the ATT Conference through meetings, correspondence and other effective means of communication to advocate for constructive and positive engagement by our delegations in support of a strong ATT.

2. 	Highlight the importance of a strong ATT within our Parliaments and relevant Parliamentary committees, including scheduling hearings and meetings, introducing Parliamentary motions, statements and/or questions on  the ATT.

3. 	Reach out to media outlets in our countries to discuss the importance of the ATT, promote greater awareness of it among our people and the need for its swift adoption.

4. 	Discuss and communicate, by all effective means, with our respective ATT delegations...” - In this case, we are talking about the government delegation which is going for negotiation – “...the main provisions of the draft of the Arms Trade Treaty with a view to ensuring meaningful engagement by our ATT country delegations on these vital issues at the upcoming ATT Conference.

5. 	Highlight the importance and desirability of an ATT agreed by consensus to our national governments while at the same time leaving the door open for possible alternative means of adoption of this Treaty, in the event consensus proves to be unattainable.

6. 	Reach out to our fellow Members of Parliament in neighbouring countries and the world to draw attention to the Windhoek Plan of Action, the ATT Conference and the imperative need for Members of Parliament around the world to rally around and support the adoption of a strong ATT.

7. 	Highlight the critical importance of addressing the gender dimension and including small arms and light weapons and related ammunition in the negotiation of a strong ATT. In particular, urge our national governments to have gender sensitive delegations to the ATT negotiations.

8. 	Urge our respective national governments to push for strong provisions to assist States with adequate resources for the proper implementation of the treaty in the negotiation of a strong ATT.

9. 	Sensitise arms producing countries at the ATT negotiations about the impact of arms transfers, in particular the need to monitor trading routes and destinations for such transfers.

10.	Review our respective country’s legal and regulatory compliance with the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons and identify possible areas where national law can be formulated or improved in order to bring about greater compliance with the UN Programme of Action by our respective countries.

11.	Urge our respective governments to regularly submit detailed national reports on the implementation of the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the UN Register on Conventional Arms.

12. 	Advocate for the prompt signature and ratification of the ATT by our respective governments, once it is established, as well as drafting and introducing the legislation necessary to give it effect within our countries without undue delay.

We agree to inform the PGA of the steps we have taken pursuant to this Plan of Action...
Done in Windhoek, Namibia on March 8th 2013.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that as Parliamentarians for Global Action, we wish to reiterate our support for a strong ATT. I want to call on our Government to provide a timely briefing on the Arms Trade Treaty to the Parliament of Uganda and to provide regular updates on the UN Plan of Action. We believe that our laws need to be reviewed to capture this development, especially the enactment of a law governing auxiliary forces, the amendment to the present arms law and other related matters.

Madam Speaker, thank you for sending us to this meeting. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Alaso and your colleagues. Wouldn’t it better if we asked our defence committee to follow up this matter so that they can help us to get a report from Government? Okay. Honourable members, we ask the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to take up that plan of action, look at it, check what Government has done and give us a report within three months so that we are in line with the programme. Thank you very much. 

3.44
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise this matter of national importance which concerns Kanungu District. I had alerted the Minister for Works and Transport to be around because the issue I am raising is with respect to how we can access Kanungu. 

In 1988, the Government of Uganda promised to tarmac the road connecting Ntungamo via Rukungiri to Kanungu. In early 2000, the component from Ntungamo to Rukungiri was tarmacked and it ended there; the other part extending to Kanungu has not been tarmacked. We later on had many discussions with Government and Government even agreed to extend the tarmac to Rubabo County in Rukungiri. 

Sometime back, the government advertised a number of roads - about 19,000 kilometres of road - to be upgraded to tarmac level, including that road. I had wanted the Minister for Works and Transport – the Prime Minister is here - to tell us exactly what has happened to that plan to tarmac those various roads including that extension to Kanungu.

Why I raise this is because last year in May, the main bridge which connects Kanungu to the rest of the country broke down. This bridge broke down after another one, which connects Kanungu to Kasese and DRC, had also broken down. I stood here in the middle of May 2012 and raised this important issue and Government responded that immediately they were going to fix the problem; now this is March 2013. I know the two bridges were advertised because I have been following the matter. I even attended the opening of bids on 16 November 2012, but recently, I read in the press that UNRA is having an internal fight where the contracts committee is recommending one contractor and some members of management prefer another contractor.

Madam Speaker, you have sent us for recess but the Members of Parliament from Kanungu cannot address this Marriage and Divorce Bill unless they have updated members of the community about the issue of the bridges and the tarmac road. So, I beg you to clear me, that I first get that update from the ministry before I even proceed to Kanungu. 

Just in December, during Christmas time, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, who is also a Member of Parliament from Kanungu, was trying to go to Kanungu and failed. The only small route which we use had flooded and he could not access the district. Luckily for me, I was in the police cells so I did not get that predicament. (Laughter) He failed to access Kanungu with his heavy vehicles. That is why when I was arrested in Fort Portal, I had changed the route to go through Fort Portal and pass via Kasese and negotiate through the park in order to access Kanungu. Ordinarily, that is not our route to Kanungu. 

It is extremely difficult now for the people of Kanungu to move in and out of Kanungu. When the bridge collapsed, I used my personal resources to construct a temporary bridge to enable people who move on bodabodas and on foot to cross. So, right now, the majority of the people in Kanungu, even those who own vehicles, drive up to Rukungiri and then board a bodaboda through the gouge to reach Kanungu, do their business and then board abodabodaand go back to Rukungiri. It is more expensive to travel from Kanungu to Rukungiri compared to travelling from Rukungiri to Kampala. It is a very big crisis.You cannot address any gathering in Kanungu on any matter unless you talk about the status of the bridges and the roads. 

I want the minister or Government to help us with an explanation on, first of all, why they could not use emergency modes of procurement to have these bridges fixed immediately. They should also tell us why there are these unnecessary delays that are causing a lot of suffering for the people of Kanungu, whom I represent in this House. That is the matter that I wanted to raise for Government to assure me that sooner than later, the people of Kanungu will be able to travel to and from of Kanungu with ease like the rest of you. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the Minister for Works and Transport will be able to come and assure you before you proceed for your recess. Otherwise, you might be internally displaced or should we get you a helicopter to rotate you in Kanungu? (Laughter)The Prime Minister wants to say something about Kanungu.

3.51
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sympathise with our colleague and the people of Kanungu for what has happened with the bridge. I am also glad that he has reported that this road is one of the 19 roads that had already been contracted by the Government, and of course, the Government is waiting for reaction from the various people. 

This is a Government commitment. Like the people of Kanungu, I think the rest of Ugandans are eagerly waiting. So, I want to assure the Member and those Members where the 19 roads are to be worked on that these roads will be done and they should work to join hands with the Government. 

I also want to inform my colleague – (Ms Kabaale rose_) -Hold on, I will give way; just one minute. [Hon. Member: “She is your daughter.”]I want to inform my colleague that going to a police cell for two or three days is normal because it is part of occupational hazards. (Laughter) At least, he is lucky as this is training for only three or four days; what about some us who have been there two or three years? (Laughter)Do we hang ourselves? So, I want to encourage him not to over drum up this issue of going to cells and so on; otherwise, I do sympathise with him and I am sorry. (Laughter)I am sorry, Madam Speaker, but can I allow my daughter to give me information.

MS KABAALE: I thank you, MadamSpeaker. I thank you, General. It is very good that I went to Kanungu with the Committee on Government Assurances and we reached the bridge where DrBaryomunsi provided three long poles on which the motorcycles passed.

I would like to inform you that people who were contracted to do the work abandoned the machines in Kanungu and they are not doing any work and yet we have information that payments were done. The committee has not given their report, but since DrBaryomunsi has brought that issue to the House, we would like to inform you that the contractor was paid and he was given a certificate of completion but the Kanungu people do not have the road there. The machines are abandoned and we took pictures and we can provide them next week. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Osegge, three minutes. (DrBaryomunsi rose_)- It seems the Kanungu road is still causing problems.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. I want to thank my sister for the information but the bridge she is referring to is another one, which was supposed to supplement the other ones that broke down.

 That bridge that also connects Rujumbura to my constituency had been promised by Government in the colonial times but a few years back, in the Eighth Parliament, Government provided money to the tune of Shs 1.8 billion to have that bridge constructed. A contractor called MK Engineers was procured. When they had done like 15 percent of the work, the Ministry of Works and Transport made full payment and even issued a certificate of completion to show that the bridge had been completed. I remember that I raised this very issue here with the President in one of the meetings but the contractors are at large and have not even refunded the money. They have never even been asked to report to Police and record a statement. 

So, what hon. Olivia KwagalaKabaale is reporting is true; the Committee on Government Assurances visited that site and people are just frustrated. This is the frustration that I was raising for the people of Kanungu. I am not sure whether we are now part of this country or we belong to the DRC because it is easier to go to DRC than to come to the rest of Uganda. 

With respect to the cells, you should arrest people when you have reasons. I do not think we take pride in just going to prison, particularly if you are being arrested for nothing. 

3.57
MSANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to present a matter of national importance concerning the districts of Soroti and Busia. 

World Vision International has provided 500,000 pieces of mosquito nets for the districts of Busia and Soroti. According to World Vision, this cost them a whopping US$2.5 million. They are doing this in a bid to complement the efforts of Government to prevent malaria and to protect the mothers and children of Uganda. 

The nets were meant to be distributed to every household in the two districts at an average of two mosquito nets per household - Soroti, with a population of 322,000 people and Busia approximately 268,000 people. World Vision International had already done the necessary survey and verification of the households and it is said, according to the information from World Vision, that the Ministry of Health had already sent officials per sub-county to supervise or oversee the distribution of these nets.

However, suddenly a telephone call came, purportedly from MsRuth Aceng, the Director-General of Health Services in the Ministry of Health, instructing them to halt the distribution of the nets, saying that they had got instructions that the process should be halted and should await the official launching by the President of Uganda in the month of April 2013. There is a perception that there is an attempt to divert these mosquito nets to other districts. Thisfear is premised on something that happened in the year 2001 when mosquito nets once again destined for Soroti and provided by AMREF were suddenly taken to Pallisa District. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister, who I do not see here, so probably the Leader of Government Business, to clarify on behalf of the people of Soroti and Busia whether it is true that the ministry has halted the distribution of these mosquito nets awaiting a presidential launch. Secondly, if this is so, could the minister tell this august House if it is prudent to allow the people of Soroti and Busia to continue suffering and dying of malaria yet a solution was proffered? 

Can the minister as well satisfy this House that there are no political motives behind halting the process just to obtain political expediency by his Excellency the President? Can the minister show this House why she should not be held politically responsible for the suffering of over 500,000 Ugandans who would have otherwise been aided by an NGO to alleviate their suffering, owing to the fact that the World Vision was only supplementing the inadequacies of Government via health service delivery?

Madam Speaker, the people of Soroti and Busia also ask if the minister is aware that the pregnant mothers, the current mothers and their children and their husbands, who think this should have reduced their health bill, are waiting for a response of this House before they go to the street and demand for the distribution of those nets. As we talk, the nets are already in Busia in a warehouse but because the process was halted, they cannot move forward. I also ask this House to pronounce itself on this issue and direct the Minister of Health to release these nets for distribution with immediate effect. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:Honourablemembers, the matter is important but we cannot pronounce ourselves on it until we have heard from the minister,so that we know whether the minister owns the nets or they came from somebody else. So, I direct that the Minister of Health answers as soon as we resume before we can take a decision on whether they can go to one direction. So, after Easter, we want an answer on this one. 

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. LatifSebaggala, please be quick because we have only 15 minutes left of private members time.

4.02
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Pursuant to rule 39(1) of our Rules of Procedure, permit me to raise a matter of public concern. 

As a result of the massive evictions, which took place in Wakiso District last month, His Excellency the President, YoweriKagutaMuseveni, put to a complete halt all land evictions and transactions related therein, which have been going on throughout the country following that tragic occurrence conducted by a company called Zion Estates in Wakiso. Whereas the humanitarian act of the President was timely, it is equally unconstitutional and may not be a remedy to the land question especially when it does not bear a timeframe. 

Since the passing of the 1988 Land Act and subsequent Land Acts, land problems in Uganda have been on the increase. The presidential intervention is primary evidence that the existing land law has not assisted bonafide occupants of land in freehold, leasehold and mailo tenancy systems. The intervention of the President is also evidence that land no longer belongs to the people as articulated by Article 237(1) of the Constitution because the intervention equally negates all court related evictions. So, this is a serious matter. 

I, therefore, humbly demand the following: That the Leader of Government Business produces in this House a comprehensive response to the issues I have raised above, including a timeframe, presidential measures that will provide a permanent remedy and a lasting solution to the 20-year old land problem. 

Since this regime came into power, we have had massive evictions throughout Uganda. I smell a rat. Isn’t the presidential intervention likely to land Uganda in a similar situation to where Idi Amin landed Uganda in 1975 when after spotting a problem, he pronounced himself with a decree - the Land Reform Decree - which never produced any sound results? The Government of Uganda should look at the concerns I have expressed very intelligibly because without a solution, we have a real problem.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I did inform you that I have a related problem in Najjanankumbi. Those of you that have been going to Entebbe have seen that on one side is NajjanankumbiI Parish and on the other side is NajjanankumbiII Parish. About 13 years ago, there was renovation of that highway to Entebbe in preparation for CHOGM. My people, led by Mr Robinson Kiviiri and six others, submitted to the Ministry of Works land titles to enable Government compensate those whose areas were affected. For the last 13 years or so, my constituents who I have just mentioned have been demanding from the Ministry of Works a return of those titles. Up to now, those titles have not been returned.

Keeping the land titles for such a long time, in my humble view, is as bad as evictions. Someone is trying to evict you in a different but silent manner by keeping your title for 13 years. I demand that the Ministry of Works and the entire Government of President Museveni returns those titles to my people. You owe a living to them. Do not suffocate them. By suffocating them, you are being unconstitutional and if you cannot afford to keep your promise, you better get away and we come in. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I think you would assist your people better if you reduced that issue into writing, stated the addresses of the titles, the owners and the claimants. To say that for 13 years your people do not have land; who are they? Name them and indicate the title deeds. For the statement on evictions, I think the Leader of Government Business will respond.

4.08
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Even the other one, Madam Speaker, I think we need more information. Who are these people evicted, where and so on, so that investigations can start. Meanwhile, I will ask the Minister for the Presidency to come with a report here but we shall need more information from the honourable member. (Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House and the ministers are aware that on this day of the week, Members of Parliament raise issues of national concern from their constituencies that in most cases require urgent response. Issues in question today include, among others, the mosquito nets, collapsed bridges and works abandoned with a certificate of completion already awarded. For all the issues so far raised, there is no relevant minister present to clarify or give appropriate information in form of a response.

Madam Speaker, is it, therefore, procedurally okay for us to continue raising issues, with the Leader of Government Business just comforting people on how they should not worry, yet Members cannot get right and appropriate answers to take back to their constituents? Is that procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER:I have been directing on every issue. I directed the Minister of Health to come and give answers on the nets. I directed the Minister of Works and Transport to come and give answers on the roads. I also directed the Prime Minister to come and speak on the issue of evictions. I have been directing on all of them. 

But RtHon. Prime Minister, we think you should respect Thursdays because the first one hour is left to private Members’ issues. So, the ministers should be here because that is the only day that Members are free to raise their issues.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I think we shall remind the ministers. However, for your information, for the whole of today we had to just divide ourselves – some of the ministers are still attending a Cabinet meeting and some came here. Also, it is important that some of these issues are raised to us earlier. This will help ministers to prepare because they will be expected to explain. What I know about Thursdays is that – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rule 35 of our Rules of Procedure requires ministers to attend the House to respond to questions raised by Members. So, is it in order for the Third Deputy Prime Minister to say that Members should inform ministers about the issues in advance yet the rules require them to attend House for that purpose? Is it in order for the Third Prime Minister to start referring us to Cabinet meetings, which do not form part of this House?

THE SPEAKER:RtHon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, you know that the responsibility of a minister is that they have to be ready all the time. So, there are issues for which we cannot wait by first writing to you so that you can organise yourselves. Sometimes you just have to get up and answer. So, we expect ministers to be here. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)No. Let us hear from hon. LatifSebaggala. 

4.13
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I wish you would respect the Chair. Thank you very much. 

While debating the Local Council (Amendment) Act, 2012 last week, I raised an issue to the effect that Kampala ceased to be under local government after the coming into force of KCCA, and indeed even in the report of the committee it was indicated that the elections of Kampala would not be part of the Local Council (Amendment) Act of 2012.I recall you directed the Minister of Local Government to get in touch with the Minister in charge of Kampala to harmonise their positions before presenting the amendments.

Now that we are going away for a mini recess and this being one of the issues that ourconstituents might raise, I request that you direct those concerned to work on this issue. This is important because it is clear that local council elections for local leaders in Kampala will not be carried out under the Local Council (Amendment) Act, which we passed on Tuesday. 

I also request that you guide us on what we will tell our constituents and how best we can move on with this issue. I am saying this because I know that the committee recommended – (Interruption)

MRSEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. LatifSebaggala, for giving me this platform. Madam Speaker, you will recall that one time I tabled a petition from Kimwanyi Zone in Wandegeya Parish where there is no local leadershipand the area has been experiencing many murders. At one time, two people were killed, four women survived being killed too and some others were raped. Children of those people have been left without parents. 

This is happening because there is no chairperson in that area and the entire committee no longer functions. It is only recently - some of you might have seen some footage on television –thatPolice went to give medication to some of the victims in that area.So, as my colleague has said, we need elections for local leaders done in Kampala expeditiously. Otherwise, there is a breakdown in law and order.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving that information. Madam Speaker, as we plan to start the budget process, the minister was clear to the effect that the budget of Shs 40 billion for the upcoming local council elections will not take care of local council elections in Kampala. We need urgent intervention so that elections for local council leaders take place on the same day throughout the country. 

THE SPEAKER:RtHon. Prime Minister, the issue of local council elections is really becoming quite stressful. The tenure of many of the local council leaders expired and so many of them are pretenders while others are imposters. Actually, in some places, nobody is in charge.So, I direct that when we resume, the minister should come back with a plan for the elections for KCCA.Both the minister in charge of KCCA and the local government ministers should tell the people of Kampala when they will go for elections. They should really try to comply with the election programme for the rest of the country.

That concludes the private Members’ business. Let us go back to the Order Paper items.

PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF BULEGENI TOWN COUNCIL IN BULAMBULI COUNTY, BULAMBULI DISTRICT ON THE ALTERATION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF BULEGENI TOWN COUNCIL

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Wamakuyu Mudini to present this petition from the people of Bulegeni? I need help because everybody is bringing petitions to my office on this same issue. I want to see it out of my office. Can someone volunteer to present it so that I send it away? There is something about Bulegeni Town Council. I have a copy here. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, please help us. Just read the heading and the prayers and we send it away.

4.18
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure, I wish to present the humble petition of the people of Bulegeni Town Council in Bulambuli District presented by me. (Laughter)

The subject matter of the petition regards the alteration of the boundary of Bulegeni Town Council leading to the creation of Kamu Sub-County,Bulambuli District.

The petitioners are people from Bulegeni Town Council, Bulambuli District, who are concerned about ethnic tensions that have been stirred by the alteration of the boundaries of BulegeniTown Council and the subsequent creation of Kamu Sub-County. 

The petitioners aver that:
(a)His Excellency the President of Uganda, while at an event during the tour of Sironko District in 2006, pledged to ease service delivery to the people of Bulegeni and to foster self-governance by upgrading Bulegeni Trading Centre to a town board.

(b)In 2010, the President of Uganda fulfilled his pledge by granting Bulegeni Trading Centre a town council status, which was subsequently called Bulegeni Town Council

(c)Upon the elevation ofBulegeni Trading Centre to a town -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, just go to the prayers. Leave the body and just go to the prayers.  

MR EKANYA: Whereas in this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:
(i)	The people and the local communities of Kamu and Bulegeni areas be involved in making decisions of issues affecting them.

(ii)	The Minister for Local Government revokes the decision creating Kamu Sub-County because the local communities were not consulted.

(iii)	Parliament consults with opinion leaders in the concerned areas and assesses the suitability of Kamu Sub-County being annexed from Bulegeni Town Council.

(iv)	Parliament urges the Electoral Commission and all the relevant authorities concerned to expedite the process of conducting elections for the establishment of Bulegeni Town Council.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto your humble petitions have appended their signatures. 

I beg to lay the document.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya. I send it to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to handle expeditiously. As you have heard, it has to do with elections and democracy. 

Let me now invite hon. Okello to present the petition from Amolatar, the title and prayers.

In the meantime, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Victoria Nile Primary School, Jinja. They are represented by hon. Balyeku and hon. Nabirye. They are in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.22
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, in presenting this petition, I move under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Your humble petitioners are fishers of Lake Kyoga Basin, Amolatar District, seeking the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the operation of authorised officers appointed by the honourable Minister of State for Fisheries and matters incidental thereto. 

Wherefore by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

1. 	Government develops a proper lake-wide coordination for harmonious execution of the Fish Act, Cap. 197

2. 	The enforcement of the Fish Act should be halted until Government develops strategies aimed at protecting and promoting fundamental human rights enshrined in Chapter 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

3. 	An audit on what has been happening is carried out from the period of August 2011 to date, with specific focus on legal compliance by all parties and the impact of taskforce intervention in as far as curbing illegal fishing is concerned.

4. 	Government institutes an investigation into cases of harassment, torture and deaths arising from the conduct of the Police Marine Patrol Unit and authorised officers or taskforce during operations on Lake Kyoga; and those found to have committed crimes must be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the law.

5. 	Government ensures that authorised officers are persons of integrity and high calibre, with capacity to supervise and coordinate activity of enforcement teams constituted by fisheries personnel and special police trained on fish matters.

6. 	Government ensures that the enforcement teams are facilitated financially and logistically through their line ministry to avoid corrupt tendencies that come with deployment of un-facilitated officers.

7. 	That Parliament prevails to ensure that Government gets revenue from proceeds paid in court through sale of seized fish products.

8. 	Government commits to undertake fish caging in all the waters of Uganda and presents a budget plan and programme accordingly.

9. 	The Minister of State for Fisheries presents a report to Parliament with detailed plans on the introduction of fish farming in each district within a reasonable time as determined by this august House.

10. 	In future operations by authorised officers, people are handled in accordance with the principle of the presumption of innocence.

11. 	Through you, Madam Speaker, the relevant parliamentary committees do take a visit to assess and ascertain the gravity of this problem in Lake Kyoga Basin and come up with appropriate sustainable recommendations for the operationalisation of the Fish Act, Cap. 197

And your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this petition, dated this 14th day of March 2013, on the Table. I thank you. 

MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my honourable colleague for the petition he has presented. Since the Fish Act does not talk about Lake Kyoga alone and these operations are being carried out in all fishing communities, I pray that if an audit is to be carried out, then it should involve all the fishing communities in the country including those on Lake Victoria and other lakes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I send the petition to the Committee on Agriculture but I invite those Members who have similar issues, from the lakes, to go to the committee and present them so that they are also considered. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

4.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I wish to draw your attention to this motion which is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XI(ii) enjoins the state to stimulate technological and scientific development, among others, by adopting appropriate policies and enactment of enabling legislation;

AND WHEREAS Article 111 of the Constitution establishes a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state;

AWARE that Chapter 6, objective 3, strategy 2 on page 141 of the National Development Plan for 2010/2011 to 2014/2015 provided for the establishment of a Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, whose mandate would be strengthening the institutional mechanisms to support science, technology and innovation development;

AWARE that all the East African Community partner states have established specific ministries of science and technology except Uganda where science, technology and innovation falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;

NOTING that Chapter 16, Article 103, of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community specifically recognises the fundamental importance of science and technology in economic development, and that the Partner States shall undertake to promote cooperation in the development of science and technology within the Community through the creation of a conducive environment for promotion of science and technology among others;

FURTHER noting that the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, in executing its mandate under rule 173 (d) and (e) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, discussed this development and empowered the chairperson to communicate the committee’s decision and request to His Excellency the President of Uganda in a letter dated 21 March 2012;

RECALLING that His Excellency the President observed in his reply dated 28 March 2012, that the idea of a separate ministry of science, technology and innovation is a good one and that he was still concentrating on energy, railway, roads, scientific innovation and commercialisation of agriculture;

RECOGNISING that the designation of a specific ministry of science, technology and innovation is a means of pushing the science, technology and innovation agenda of not only Uganda but the region as a whole as persons of professional relevance will be appointed to hold the relevant positions to push the agenda;

CONVINCED that science, technology and innovation should be prioritised in the overall development strategy of the country by establishing a ministry of science, technology and innovation to be charged with overseeing the implementation of the comprehensive Science, Technology and Innovation Policy that was adopted and approvedby Cabinet in 2009 and which provides a mechanism for increased capacity in science, technology and innovation for eventual improvement in national productivity and competitiveness and better standards of living for the people of Uganda in line with the National Development Plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
That a ministry of science, technology and innovation be established or in the alternative, the current Ministry of Information and Communication Technology be upgraded into a ministry of science, technology and innovation.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Is it seconded? Yes minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (MrAsumanKiyingi): I thank you. Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure seeking guidance on how this motion will be handled. I have in mind the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution, which clearly spellout - if I may read Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, as amended:

“Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf ofthe Government—
(a)	 proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makesprovision for any of the following—
(i) 	the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;
(ii) 	the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;
(iii) 	the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or
(iv) 	the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or

(b) 	proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.”

Madam Speaker, looking at this motion, the prayer at the end is that Parliament should resolve that a ministry of science, technology and innovation be established or in the alternative, the current Ministry of Information and Communication Technology be upgraded into Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation.In my humble view, Madam Speaker, proceeding on this motion would be a direct affront on Article 93 unless it is introduced on behalf of Government. However, the mover of the motion has not indicated so and to the best of my knowledge, the motion is not being introduced on behalf of Government.I just seek your guidance on how we should proceed. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable member, who is moving closer to the centre of power, has ably made his point as far as Article 93 of the Constitution is concerned. However, at the same time, we also need to be aware of the fact that Parliament comes up with such motions in the best interest of service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, I know my honourable colleague, hon.Obua, who has moved this motion, is not privileged to be in Government and therefore in the Executive as demanded by Article 93.However, the guidance that I am seeking from you is, now that this motion certainly means well in its spirit and also means well in the spirit of promoting science and technology in this country, can the honourableminister who has just stood to pronounce himself against this motion, citing Article 93, interest Government in this motion so that you are able to take it over? 

Can you interest yourself in it because we as a Parliament feel that this is good motion and it enhances service delivery in as far as the Executive is concerned?The guidance that I am asking is whether hon. AsumanKiyingi can interest Government in this noble motion so that we can benefit in it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I feel distressed when there are attempts to stifle initiatives of Parliament. (Applause) Many reports on the Floor of this House have demanded for that ministry. I do not think that this motion offends Article 93. What it is saying is, change the name by adding the words, “science and technology” to the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. That is what he is saying. (Applause) There is a Ministry of ICT and they are saying that we add two names there to catch the other areas. That is what they are saying. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Rosemary Namayanja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.We do take note of the concerns that are being raised in the motion. I will just request, because it requires re-organisation or approval by Cabinet, that at an appropriate time, the Prime Minister will come and give a position in that regard.

THE SPEAKER: Normally, when we make resolutions, we send them to Government in writing that on such a day, Parliament sat and made this resolution, so that you give us your views. But to stop the process in the middle; no, I think that is not right. Does the Minister of Internal Affairs want to say something?  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I just wanted to refer to the statement that we are trying to stifle the work of Parliament. That is not the intention. Even the petitioner himself said that he consulted the President.The group consulted the President and the President acknowledged that creating this ministry of science and technology was a very good idea but please, give us time and let us concentrate–(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)Please, let me finish. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, what is the panic about? Why are you panicking? Honourable minister, please allow the mover to justify. 

MR DENIS OBUA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. When we discussed the subject matter as a committee, we looked at the various provisions in the Constitution.We were even cognisant of the provision of Article 93 but we were compelled to proceed with an alternative in our prayers. That is why the first one says weestablish the ministry in conformity with the provision of the National Development Plan. If you cannot do that, proceed and upgrade the current Ministry of ICT and change the name to Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. You can retain hon. RuhakanaRugunda as the minister; the portfolio is the one that changes. You can retain hon. Nyombi as the Minister of State.We had all this in mind. Can I now proceed and justify the motion.

Madam Speaker and members, first of all, the drive to move this motion, I must admit, was discussed and agreed in a formal meeting of the Committee on Science and Technology. Secondly, we were compelled to move this motion and we drew our zeal to move this motion from the various authorities, which we have quoted in this motion. We drew our zeal from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as the first authority; from the National Development Plan, which was signed by the President.In the National Development Plan, in the foreword, the President states:

“I call upon all Ugandans to embrace the principles stated in the National Development Plan and apply them in the development and implementation of national programmes and projects. While respective Government sectors will align their policies and strategies with the NDP, I urge the private sector, civil society and academia to work together with Government and to align their development efforts towards achieving the National Development Plan objectives and the country’s vision.”It is signed by none other than Y.K. Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda.

The third authority is the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community. The fourth authority is the National Science, Technology and Innovation Policy which was approved and passed by Cabinet in 2009. The last authority is the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, from the onset, it must be clear that as a mover of this motion, seconded by 14 Members of Parliament, we are not reinventing the wheel.The will and commitment are already there; it is in black and white. We are simply saying that this is a wakeup call and we are reminding them of the commitments made.We are saying, talk and walk the talk. Practice what you preach. This is the essence of this motion. 

Madam Speaker, as part of the East African Community, I think we must make a commitment and walk the talk. Currently, it is only in Uganda where issues of science, technology and innovation are under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.To be honest with this Parliament, this ministry gives this subsector very little and optimal political attention and yet science and technology is the mover and shaker of the world; it is the alpha and omega of the world, currently.

Madam Speaker, Kenya as a member state of the East African Community has a Ministry ofHigher Education, Science and Technology; Tanzania has a Ministry of Science and Technology; Rwanda has a Ministry of Education and Scientific Research; Burundi has a Ministry of Science, Technology and Scientific Research. This is awake up call. Apart from opposing this motion on the Floor of Parliament, it would be incumbent on the Cabinet ministers here present to remind Cabinet of the commitment we have made as acountry.

Madam Speaker, in Uganda, institutions under science, technology and innovation are scattered. The subsector itself is under Ministry of Finance; the National Council for Science and Technology is under Ministry of Finance; Uganda Industrial Research Institute is under Ministry of Trade. There is no point of convergence. There are many other institutions. I think we need to create a point of convergence.That is why we are even saying, when we upgrade the Ministry of ICT, we can make ICT a department within the ministry, re-align the sector and bring all the relevant sectors and create departments within the ministry; simple!

Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table two documents.The first one is a letter dated 21 March 2012 addressed to the President.The subject matter is,“Creation of the Ministry of Scienceand Technology”.Here, the committee even proposed that the current ministry be upgraded and transformed. I beg to lay this letter on the Table for the record of Parliament. 

I want to read verbatim, because it is a short one, the reply of his Excellency the President, dated 28March 2012.It is addressed to the chairperson, Parliamentary Committee on Science and Technology.It says, “Creation of the Ministry of Science and Technology.I have received your letter of 21March 2012 regarding the above subject. I thank you and the committee for the ideas you have put forward. The idea of a separate ministry of science and technology is a good one.However, I am now concentrating on energy, the railways, the roads, scientific innovation and commercialisation of agriculture.The time for those additional structures will come later.”It is signed by YK Museveni, President.

As a committee, we know that the National Development Plan has a timeframe; it is 2010/11 to 2014/15 and we are in 2013. So, in our considered opinion, the right time alluded to by the President is now. Next year is 2014. By 2015, this National Development Plan will have expired.So, that is the spirit behind this motion, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay this reply on the Table for the record of Parliament. 

Finally, I want to say that science is not static; science is evidence based. I believe we have adduced evidence beyond any reasonable doubt to justify either the creation or upgrading or justification in favour of this motion.

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we conduct work on behalf of this Parliament. We are reporting back to this House and requesting this Parliament to uphold the decision, with all the authorities quoted, so that this decision becomes a decision of Parliament as an institution and not a committee of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I pray that Members support this motion so that this Parliament pronounces itself and the communication goes to the authority.After all, a decision of Parliament through a motion such as this one is just advisory; it is not mandatory. But it is my cardinal responsibility as a Member of Parliament and chairperson of this committee to remind you of the commitment you have made. This is the gist of this motion. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

4.50
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent,Nakifuma County, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament for the establishment of a ministry of science, technology and innovation.

There is no doubt that at this stage, Uganda needs a credible national science and technology centre for economic development and transformation; there is no doubt about that. A substantive minister of science and technology is needed purposely to spearhead and champion the development of scientific, technological and innovation achievements of this country.

As already mentioned by the chair of the committee, the attention given to issues of science and technology by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is really at the minimum. At times, I am even tempted to say there is no attention at all. A substantive ministry will facilitate the establishment of regional science parks as provided for in the National Development Plan, which has just been shown to you by the chairperson of the committee.

The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology is right now running a mandate that would be run by a substantive ministry, and they are doing it with meagre funds and few staff. This is substantially curtailing the efforts of promoting the development of science, technology and innovation in Uganda. With all the science and technology activities under one roof, we shall not only be able to achieve the millennium science initiatives but we shall also harmonise the duties and activities of all the scientists to avoid duplication, as the case is in some of the organisations today.

Madam Speaker, I recall that with your permission, I attended the India-Africa Science and Technology Ministers’ Conference, which took place in March 2012 in the India Capital of New Delhi. I want to report that it was amazing that among the 54 states at that conference, only and only one honourable minister, Mr JacanOmach from Uganda, was from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and in charge of science and technology; it was amazing. The rest were substantive ministers of science and technology.

If we all agree that scientific and technological pursuit is an effective catalyst for social development and economic transformation of any nation, and that returns on science are likely to be the single greatest cause of a long term rise in economic advancement of our nation, then the only way to go is to have a substantive Ministry of Science and Technology. I beg to submit.

4.55
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. We now live in a global village that has gone scientific. So, we need to move with the world or else change will change us.

In last year’s State-of-the-Nation Address, H.E the President acknowledged the role of scientists when he said thus: “The only public servants that deserve pay rise are the scientists because they contribute decisively to the economy and their contribution is unique.It is not easy to replicate…”This House has also acknowledged the role of scientists. Just a few weeks ago, our committee presented a report on the African Space Research Programme, which was appreciated by members. Many of them called on Parliament to increase on the funding to the sector of science and technology – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nauwat, you are a member of the committee; not so?

MS NAUWAT: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: If you are a member, this is your motion. Members, please do not confuse me. If you are a member, you cannot speak to the motion. Let us hear from hon. Monica Amoding. I hope you are not a member of this committee too. I think it is not fair for you to want to contribute when you know you are a member of the committee that presented the motion.

4.56
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Let me start by thanking the chairperson and the committee for coming up with this motion, which I think is very brilliant and timely. This is because the times are full of revolution of innovations. 

In that regard, I want to inform the House that just last week, our committee was in Harare to benchmark a Bill on industrial property. One of the lessons we learnt there was to the effect that in Africa, we still have a gap. Yes, we are going to legislate on that Bill in this House, but we may not have the innovations to support it in regard to industrial property. So, what we will see is an influx of innovations from the western countries or innovations from China and the Asian countries flocking Africa and seeking to be registered to do business here. There is no innovation taking place in our own environment.Therefore, I think what the committee is trying to propose will move us in the right direction.

I cannot agree less with this committee that we need a ministry in charge of science and technological innovations or whatever they want to call it. I really want to support the creation of such a ministry because I know that we have waited for a long time to move in tandem with the world. There is nothing we call innovation in our country. I think they are raising this issue because there is no organised body that can encourage such innovations.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that this committee is moving in the right direction. They have proposed a proper way to approach this issue. So, I urge Government to listen to this and also ensure that-(Member timed out.)

4.59
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the committee and the mover of the motion for doing what was long overdue. 

Last time, we were debating science and technology in secondary schools and I did mention that ICT should have been a subset of science and technology. I did mention, and I want to repeat here, that we are missing an opportunity by having UPE and USE without setting the foundation for science and technology right from primary. We need to vocationalise our secondary education and make sure that science subjects are compulsory instead of some of the subjects we have there. 

It is very important to also emphasise here that many times, including in the last Parliament, very good motions and recommendations to Cabinet from Parliament have been killed under the guise of Article 93 of the Constitution. I think that is a bad spirit. We have three arms of Government; let us allow Parliament to be the other think tank of Government.After all, it is advisory.

As the mover has said, we need convergence and confluence of all scientific efforts. I know Prof. Nyiira is now on the front bench; he should be the one to passionately talk about the need for this ministry. He was in the council,I knew what his views were that time and I still think – I know he is a man of integrity - he still espouses those very strong views of the need of the council. I am sure he should be allowed to speak. Of course, I do not know about the collective responsibility which may hold him. (Laughter)

I want to give testimony in line with what other countries are doing. Egypt, before the chaos, was already attracting all gurus of science in a city, in a new area. You go to Gujarat in India and you see whoever is mighty in science- (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that a ministry of science, technology and innovations be established due to the following reasons:

First and foremost, here we have had some innovations. There is somebody who has discovered an aeroplane –(Laughter)- and the Office of the Vice-President went to launch it in Jinja. But when you scrutinise, for us we are not scientists, but he is not genuine. So, we need a fully-fledged ministry so that they can monitor, supervise and even check on such quack people- (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague is that as COSASE, we visited that site in Jinja but what the Vice-President and his team are calling an innovation of a plane is just an assembly of a wheelbarrow. (Laughter) What  happened is that when the wind came, it blew off the so-called aeroplane and the next thing that man did was to say that since the aeroplane has been blown off by wind, he went into satellite development and in two weeks, the Vice-President was there launching.

So, as a government, we need a ministry of science to coordinate these innovations. When we asked this gentleman who supervises him, he said he is above even National Council of Science and Technology; their understanding cannot match his. (Laughter) So, he is not supervised by anybody. That is why we need a ministry of science and technology to coordinate.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you. You have heard, Members. In addition to that, we encourage those who are innovating; for example, there are larvicide innovations taking place and Ministry of Finance has bought them land in Mbarara but who is supervising them? Who is following up to see to it that larvicide is developing there? There is Ministry of Health, but they are not well coordinated. Which ministry should coordinate them? It is this ministry that we are advocating for to be established.

In addition to that, there are many companies that are coming here but who is supervising them? Who is monitoring to see to it that we have wellattended to and well organised science and innovation development in Uganda?  That is why I support the establishment or amalgamation of some relevant departments into one, like that one of ICT today, to bring other related departments into one - (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would, any day, any time, support this motion, but I would support this motion with caution. What my brother on the other side raised is of fundamental importance, and I think we should take note. 

Of course, before I support him wholly, I would like to say that it leaves extremely bad taste in the mouth of well-meaning Ugandans for anybody to want to throw out the baby with the birth water.This is a good idea that should be adopted. If there is any technical problem that will not allow this Parliament to proceed on this motion, I would least expect people from the government side who pride themselves in talking about scientific development and industrialisation to scuttle this kind of debate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw–[Mr Asuman Kiyingi: “Clarification”] - I am very clear about what I want to say. (Laughter)

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, my learned colleague, for giving way. When we rose on a point of procedure and constitutionality, we were not trying to scuttle the noble efforts of this motion. I actually support this motion. All we are saying is that if we are doing things, we should do them right. If there is a constitutional provision which is categorical and clear, there is no reason for us to circumvent it. Our understanding is exactly that. I totally support this motion and I have said so to the mover, but I am saying why don’t we move constitutionally and legally?

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker- (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) I do not take your information because you do not take any either. Next time you take other people’s information also. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was outside when I heard my brother raising that matter. What I want to inform my brother there and the House is that actually, science is a priority of the government. On that, nobody is going to challenge us. That is why it has become a compulsory subject in O’level. (Interjections) You should know; if did not know, you better know. 

Now, what I want to say is to confirm what my brother has said, that we in the governmentare not opposed to this but then we must follow procedure. If you want to get out of this House, you will always know where you are getting out through but if you go through the roof - (Laughter) - you may get out of here, yes, but you may not be able to land with both legs if you break your legs. 

So, I am saying that to save time for all of us, let us involve the minister responsible because even after we have passed the motion, it is still will go back for implementation to the - [Hon. Member: “Minister of Finance.”] – not to the Minster of Finance but the Minister of ICT. Let us wait - 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you are really unnecessarily wasting our time. Whenever we adopt motions here, we communicate to the government. We write to the Prime Minister and say, “this motion was passed and it is for your attention” Where he takes it, that is his business.But there was an attempt to arrest that motion. The mover had hardly moved, it had not been seconded and he attempted to arrest it. That was in bad faith. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: But I have not finished, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker – 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Honestly, let me finish what I want to say so that I am on record.(Laughter) My brother, let us all agree together that we in the government have a procedure that you all know. After finishing here, we are the implementers.As you have said, Madam Speaker, you will inform us but then after getting the information, the person who is to start implementation must go to Ministry of Finance and get a certificate of financial implications. Now, if that certificate is not got, then that will be the end of the whole thing which is very bad and unfair to all of us. So, why don’t we start together so that we move together since we are not opposed to this thing? I thank you, my brother, for giving me way. 

MR STEPHEN BAKA: Madam Speaker, it is now clear that the Members are determined to move this motion and the spirit is very good. We cannot back down on it because of procedural issues from Cabinet.

However, what I wish to put across for your guidance is that clearly, moving the motion as it is would be an affront on the Constitution. If it is agreeable to the mover of the motion, what if we amended it to make it a persuasive motion, persuading Government to accept ourprayers?– (Interjections) - As it is now, moving a motion to create a ministry would be an affront on the Constitution,Article 93, as it has been said. But we could persuade Government and then we would be free to proceed with our debate, and it can be amended at an appropriate time.

MR AYENA: If I was allowed to finish my submission, all these people who have spoken would have found themselves very irrelevant because that is exactly where I am moving. 

The motion is cascaded in two parts. The first part is asking for creation of a ministry. Failing that, it is saying can we find a way of accommodating this within an existing ministry. The operating words in this Constitution - You know there is no way you can circumvent the Constitution, and that is why I am giving a word of caution that much as we are very excited about debating this motion, we must take caution that we maybe firing outside the target –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You allowed them. Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, provided that the second tier ofthe suggestion can be accommodated without any or serious financial implications, it is correctly within our competence to debate and adopt the motion that the Ministry of ICT should accommodate the functions of science, technology and innovation. In that case, we shall be within the Constitution.For that matter, I would like to persuade my younger brother, who is now an elevated Member on that side, to take this advice.If he has taken it, let him speak out and support the position. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done and the movers of the motion. 

I rise to support the committee on the motion that Parliament should establish aministry of science, technology and innovation. I also want to agree with the committee on the second option that the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology be upgraded into a ministry of science, technology and innovation.

To me, this is a good idea because when we establish a ministry of science, technology and innovation, I would urge the ministry to strengthen and work through institutions like secondary schools and other tertiary institutions that handle science and technology.If this is done, I think we will be promoting sciences in the country and our country shall benefit a lot as it will reduce on the issue of lack of employment after finishing education. You know that our curriculum carries a lot of hard subjects and we waste a lot of time teaching this and that, but when we go and concentrate on the teaching of sciences in the secondary schools, we shall achieve what we call job creation for our children. 

We can also strengthen our research centres to do research on the issues of health so that we know what is affecting our country. For instance, up to now, the cause of nodding disease is not yet known because we do not have such research centres where we can really find out what the causes of those problemsare.I think that if we also strengthen our science institutions – (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. You now know that all the training institutions like the technical schools are under the Ministry of Education and Sports. Therefore, I really feel that the creation of so many ministries will bring about duplication of activities. We have somany ministries in Uganda whereby a minister may not know the roles -

THE SPEAKER: Are you opposing the motion?

MR OLANYA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: By giving information? No way. 

MS JOY ACHENG: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that my colleague misused the opportunity that I gave him. But what I was trying to say is that it strengthens our institutions, our departments and we shall benefit a lot. For instance, honourable members, had you started on the idea of science and technology, we would not be inviting or hiring foreigners to work in our oil sector. We would be doing our own oil production and it may also reduce on the exportation of – (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion but I support the enlargement of the ICT ministry and not the creation of a brand new ministry. The focus should not be on creation of ministries; in this country, we have many ministries which are ineffective. We have some glorified departments in the name of ministries of Luwero, Masindi, Bunyoro and Karamoja and they are ineffective and simply glorified departments. So, the focus for us should be what we are creating. That is the job to be done? 

I had an experience in China. China has very few ministries but one institution where the Chinese earn so much money is science and technology but they call it the Academy of Sciences. They have invested a lot of money in it and they pay their best brains from schools. We have them as well; put them in this good working environment and give them a lot of facilities, pay them good money and they do research and innovations. Here, the ICT ministry in Uganda has no innovation budget. I sit on the Committee on ICT and as you know, the process should have the innovation part of it –(Interjections) - money from South Africa, but there is no money. So, let us maybe just create a ministry without giving them money but we should think of how to make Uganda move forward in the technological world but not just creating ministries to increase the number of people sitting on the Frontbench. It is not useful at all – (Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Wafula Oguttu for giving way. The information I want to give is that the Committee on Science and Technology was created by this Parliament to oversee how we can move ahead with improving science and technology in the country. But I see their frustration. It is as if they are telling us that in ICT, they have also got frustrations. I think that is why they have decided to come to Parliament to say, “Why don’t we have all issues of science and technology and innovation put together so that there is a central body coordinating them?” Because if you hide science and technology under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and they give it little attention and then ICT is also on the other side which is supposed to drive, then there would be need for Parliament to urge Government to come and put this together so that we can improve on science, technology and innovation. 

The minister was trying to read Article 93 - the mover of the motion and the chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology - there is need for us to agree not to put away that part of the Constitution so that they sit and see how this can be implemented. We are not going to debate it for the purpose of debating and thereafter Government pays no attention to that. I think that is where we need to agree so that in the interest of Ugandans, science and technology is moved forward to another level.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. Of course, I agree that we should have a Ministry of Science, Technology and ICT but it is just for supervision. The focus and money should go into research by the technical people; not bureaucrats and not politicians. That is how we will move this country forward. Who knows where the science and technology commission is located among you MPs? It is a very important organ hidden somewhere down the valley in Ntinda; you have no reference to it. So, we are looking for a department in institutions which are well built and well facilitated where nothing is done but research and research. Thank you very much. 

5.25
MR ALEX NDEEZI (PWD Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion but I want to make one clarification. Hon. Bakka Mugabi, hon. Asumani Kiyingi and the Leader of Government Business have expressed concern in regard to Article 93 of the Constitution. They are worried that we are handling the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution. I want to say that when it comes to matters of national importance like this one, the Frontbenchers and the Backbenchers must all move together as a team - (Applause) - I wish to allay their fears. There is no need to wait because this motion does not impact a charge on the Consolidated Fund. It does not impact on the taxes. This motion is on a budget. What will impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund is an instrument to be issued by the President under Article 111 of the Constitution that is, if the President agrees to this recommendation. With this advice of the motion, he will, under article 111 of the Constitution, restructure a Cabinet by saying that we include science and technology in the formation of the government. 

So, I want to emphasise that we are not at all moving unconstitutionally. We are not violating the provisions of Article 93. I, therefore, request Members who are worried by this hampering of Article 93, to side with us and have this motion successful. 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have four other motions on the Order Paper. Let us complete this one.

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, I am so happy for this opportunity and I thank my colleagues for recognising the passion I have for science and technology. Madam Speaker, you will realise that Government and for that matter His Excellency, the President, actually accepted this element in principle when he indicated that the idea is good and actually that was meant to reflect the realisation that a country like Uganda is at a point of take-off and it cannot do without science and technology. In fact, I would like to indicate that there are so many innovations that are taking place in Uganda today but they are scattered and because they are scattered, we cannot lay our hands on those innovations but they are there. 

There are small scale industries all over places; we don’t capture them but they are there. We have clusters of innovators, scientists, young people who are venturing into science and technology and they don’t have a framework within which they can operate to be able to bring their ideas and innovations on board and therefore, Madam Speaker, I believe the idea is not that Government is not willing, actually the idea is the implementation modalities – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that it is this same House that enacted the Copyright and Patent Acts. These Acts were passed with the intention of protecting technological developments. So, what Parliament is doing today is to just pass a resolution. The passing of this resolution will only enhance the implementation of the Patent and Copyright Acts, and regulations made thereunder. So, it is all about protecting technological developments and science. Thank you.

PROF. NYIIRA: Thank you, for that information. Basically, Madam Speaker, I am just indicating that the way Uganda is developing today requires us to have effort put in the development of science and technology. I am saying this because we are now going into areas like that of oil exploration. We are also moving into areas of improving our agricultural aspects to bio-technology. But we are also moving into areas where innovations are going to be so important to us, for instance, in the case of Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 

We have seen what our universities are doing. For the first time, the concentration of scientists and engineers in the universities shows that we have got the capability; what we need to do is to consolidate all these areas. 

For that matter we need a framework. That is why we believe, as Government, that definitely the idea is quite good. It is just a question of prioritisation. And you know, the President has indicated clearly that the areas that we are going to focus on, especially when we have our own resources are going to be industry, scientific innovations and agriculture. But in all these, we need the input from the science, technology and innovation sector.

Therefore, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to state that I support this idea. But let me also indicate that Government definitely, in principle, accepts this idea. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS OBSERVER TEAM TO THE 2013 GENERAL ELECTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

THE SPEAKER: If you can, summarize it in five minutes so that we can use 15 minutes to debate it.

5.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS OBSERVER TEAM TO KENYA (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me take this opportunity to thank you for having thought it wise for Parliament of Uganda to constitute a delegation to go and observe elections that were carried out in Kenya recently. 

I also would like to use this opportunity to congratulate the people of Kenya, the political parties and all the other relevant authorities that carried out a valid, peaceful and transparent election that has given us the peace that we are enjoying now. As you are aware, this situation is different from what happened during the 2007 post-election era for Kenya.
Madam Speaker, pursuant to the provisions of Rule 32 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to present to this august House, the Report of the Parliamentary Election Observer Team that participated in observing the 2013 general elections of the Republic of Kenya.

On 8 February 2013, the Office of the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda constituted a team of which, I was made the leader, to travel to Kenya to do this work. I worked with the following: Hon. Rose Akol, hon. Fred Badda, hon. Sarah Netalisire, hon. Tony Ayoo and Mr Ignatius Kasirye, a parliamentary staff.

We observed both the pre and post-election activities from which I, on behalf of that team, now present this report to this august House.

The terms of reference for this team were guided by the Constitution that gives the Republic of Kenya to observe the aspects of the organising, conducting and supervising the general elections – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The procedural matter I am seeking regards what the member is presenting. The member says this is a report of the Parliamentary Elections Observer Team from Parliament of Uganda. But in this Parliament, we have two sides, the ruling and the opposition sides. Is this an NRM or Parliament report? I am saying this because I don’t see any member from the Opposition on this team.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these members volunteered to go to Kenya. They are the ones who volunteered.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why didn’t they ask us to volunteer too?

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know. Proceed with the report.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the terms of reference required us to interact with stakeholders, the major party players, the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, political party leaders, the media, civil society organisations and all voters on voting day.
This report was produced on the basis of the credibility, transparency, fairness and effectiveness of the organisation of the election.

The activities we conducted were: On 28 February 2013, the team held a meeting with the Uganda High Commissioner to Kenya. The High Commissioner briefed us on the arrangement for the Kenya 2013 general elections. On the same day, the delegation interacted with the officials from the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission. On 29th February, the delegation interacted with a wide range of stakeholders including representatives of political parties, civil society groups – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue again. I am seeking procedure on whether we can have the chairman of the committee read the report as it is written. I am saying this because it says that on 28th February the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament constituted a delegation consisting of five members of Parliament and one senior staff to go and observe the Kenya 2013 general election. But Madam Speaker, you just said that these Members volunteered while the report says the Speaker constituted this delegation –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Opposition, these are the Members of the East African Community Forum – there is a Forum of the East African Community in this Parliament and this is its chairperson. The others are the members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we agree with that, Madam Speaker. But these reports belong to Parliament of Uganda. It is said in the report that you constituted a team. Are you trying to tell us that in this House, there is only one side? If you say that is how it is, we shall accept - (Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, usually, I don’t want to raise points of order. But this time I am forced to raise one. With all due respect to my dear brother, the Leader of Opposition, is it in order for him as a member of this House to challenge the authority and ruling of the Speaker? I am raising this order in good faith. Under which rule – maybe I need to be educated – or which rule stipulates that for any delegation of Members of Parliament to travel, the Speaker must consult the Opposition so the delegation is formed accordingly? I just need that guidance but also raising a point of order. So, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Honourable members, there are many fora in this institution. The Opposition, the Independents and NRM members have got their fora. So, I cannot dictate on what they are doing in those fora. I only do the official delegation and I think no one has ever complained. That is the EAC Forum and I don’t know who the members are. Please finish the report.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe to make some further clarification for my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, when we were in Kenya, we met with a different observer - (Interjections) - I am making clarification -(Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I need to know whether all the fora created by Members of Parliament report to this Parliament. It is only committees of Parliament that report to this Parliament. That is what I know. But I must be guided or a clarification should be made on whether the voluntary fora we have formed outside the Members of Parliament actually are meant to report to this Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: This afternoon, we allowed a report of the Parliamentarians for Global Action. Complete your report.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 30th February, the delegation attended and observed the final campaigns at Uhuru Park and Nyayo Stadium for the two major contenders, that is, ODM and Jubilee. On Election day, the delegation visited 10 polling stations and tallying centres. After the elections on 4th March, we visited the national tallying centre at the Bomas. 

Basing on the interactions we made with the various stakeholders, inter alia, the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, political parties, the media, police and civil society organisations and on the basis of the delegation findings and observation of the electoral process we would like to report as follows:

The Constitution of Kenya and several enabling legislations such as the Election Act 2011; the Political Parties Act 2011; the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Act 2011; and the Leadership and Integrity Act 2012 together with the establishment of a host of corresponding institutions have improved the general framework of electoral governance and introduced changes in the Kenyan electoral landscape. 

The legal reforms undertaken have not only provided and institutionalised an orderly framework within which political and human rights are protected and fair political competition promoted, but also created a better enabling framework for the conducting of peaceful and credible elections.

Election Management

The Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission is the institution mandated to conduct and supervise elections and referenda. The Constitution of the Republic of Kenya guarantees the independence of the commission and precludes it from the control of any person or authority. The commission is composed of a chairperson and eight members who serve a non-renewable period of six years. 

The delegation observed that the leadership and staff of the IEBC are committed to discharge their function professionally. For example, at the national tallying centre, the Bomas, the IEBC organised regular briefings and updated the public on the progress of the electoral process. It was further observed that the IEBC allowed the media and political parties’ representatives to access the tallying centre. They also impartially engaged the public in an open, transparent and accountable manner which boosted public confidence in the ability of the IEBC to effectively deliver on its mandate.

It was further observed that the commission’s competent handling of the 2010 referendum and the by-elections helped establish its credential and trust with respect to its impartiality.

The Biometric Registration/ Verification

The IEBC adopted biometric voter registration for the first time in a bid to enhance the integrity of the voters’ roll. The delegation noted the steps taken by the commission to detect and prevent multiple registrations and other fraudulent activities, specifically, the establishment of the biometric voters’ register, the electronic polling books and the backup verification mechanism, that is, the manual voters’ register.  

However, the delegation noted the challenges with the biometric registration. For example, we learnt that 31,000 registered voters were missing in the biometric voter registration system and took note of the decision by the IEBC to resort to the manual register for the affected persons in order to allow them to vote.

Civic and Voter Education

The delegation noted that IEBC was charged with simultaneously administrating six national elections. At the same time, on the day of voting, that is, the President, the Senator, the Governors, the MPs, the Woman Representatives and the County Representatives were elected. This made the volume and the complexity of this task extraordinary. 

It was further noted that the voter education started late and was only for a limited period. This partially explains the high number of spoilt/rejected votes which were experienced during the last concluded elections.

The Campaign Process

Overall, the campaigns were generally peaceful and the political atmosphere allowed many candidates for all electoral posts to debate and defend their policies to the public. The media provided extensive and balanced coverage to the two dominant political parties, that is, CORD and Jubilee, with rather low coverage of the smaller parties and independent candidates.

The two televised presidential debates enabled the candidates to openly debate and defend their policies on contentious issues in the public domain such as land ownership, tribalism, corruption, governance, the economy and the ICC case.

Election Security

It was worth noting that there have been several activities geared towards coordination of effective election security arrangements between the IEBC and the law enforcement officers so as to ensure free, fair and peaceful elections. It is important to note that during the campaigns, all presidential candidates appealed to their supporters to maintain peace during and after the elections.

Election Day Observation

Official Opening of the Polls

Officials of the IEBC and the security agencies reported on duty in time but at some polling stations the voting was delayed due to various problems. These included electricity power failures, malfunctioning of the biometric equipment, computers and scanners. However, the delegation noted that the delays experienced at the beginning of the process were effectively addressed by the officials of the IEBC and the time lost was recovered.

Voter Turnout

In all polling stations we visited, there was high turnout of voters including the elderly, women, youth and people with disabilities. Some voters were at the polling stations as early as 2 a.m. the morning of the polling day and waited patiently in long queues for several hours to vote. This manifested enthusiasm from the voters ready to exercise their political and democratic right.    

Voting Process

The delegation observed that the voting process was slow at most polling stations observed during the early stages of polling but improved in the course of the day. On average, voters took six to eight minutes. In most cases voters understood the voting process. However, there were instances particularly in rural areas where there were many assisted voters due to different levels of understanding of the voting procedures.

Voters were identified by the electronic polling equipment and manual voters’ register before being issued ballot papers according to election procedures. However, at most polling stations observed, the electronic polling equipment was faulty and experienced battery failures. In this regard, the IECB resorted to manual verification of voters to ensure that voters are not disenfranchised. However, in some isolated instances, some voters’ names were missing in the voters’ roll. 

Despite some isolated cases, most polling stations observed were generally accessible to physically challenged persons and were laid out in a manner that permitted smooth flow of voters. The lay out also guaranteed the secrecy of the ballot. 

Election Personnel

The polling personnel generally performed their duties competently and professionally in areas observed. The level of competence observed is indicative of the fact that the polling personnel were provided adequate training. They exhibited understanding of the election procedures and performed their duties with high levels of transparency. Where necessary, they provided assistance to the elderly, the expectant women, women with children and persons with disabilities.                                   

Closing of the Polls and Counting Process

At most polling stations observed, the polls closed after 1 a.m. due to compensatory time for late opening and high turn up and slow voting process. It was observed that some polling stations closed as late as 10 p.m. The late closure of most polling stations subsequently delayed the counting process. 
The counting was conducted in a transparent manner in the presence of the political party agents, observers and the media. We noted that the results forms were duly signed by the polling officials and party agents.

The Bomas National Tally Centre

The delegation observed that the leadership and staff of the IEBC engaged the public through regular briefings, for example, when the electronic transmission of the results collapsed after 24 hours, the IECB held a press briefing and informed all the stakeholders about the steps being undertaken to sort out the problem.

It is also important to report that IEBC worked very closely with the media houses and party representatives at the national tally centre and this made the tallying process very transparent.

Recommendations

Basing on the foregoing observations, the delegation would like to make the following recommendations:
    1. To commend the people of Kenya for the enthusiasm with which they turned up in big numbers and for their overall peaceful conduct during the electoral process.
    2. Whereas the delegation notes the challenges involved in the conduct of the crucial elections, we commend the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission and other relevant agencies such as the security agencies, political parties and other stakeholders for the successful conduct of elections.
    3. Civic and voter education be enhanced in order to increase understanding of the electoral process and reduce on the high number of rejected votes.
    4. Mechanisms be enhanced to strengthen the engagement of various stakeholders in their diversity, in national integration and cohesion.
    5. Appeal to all political players and candidates to accept the outcome of the elections. In the event that there is reason to challenge the results, we urge everyone to use provided legal channels to resolve their disputes.

Based on our observations and assessment, we would like to conclude that the 2013 general elections in the Republic of Kenya were conducted – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think we should expunge the recommendations – and we stop at your report. I will expunge the recommendations from the Hansard. Just stop at your report. 

MR KASAMBA: I oblige. In the spirit of the East African Federation, we commend the peaceful manner in which the Kenyan general elections were conducted.  I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that I had told you not to go into the recommendations. Now, honourable members, the report is for noting and I invite the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to study it and see what we can learn or borrow from that experience. I thank you very much. The next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT, MOVED UNDER SECTION 19 (2) OF THE NATIONAL AUDIT ACT 2008, TO EXTEND THE SUBMISSION DEADLINE FOR THE ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssimbwa.

5.51
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (DP, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SEPAKER: Just hold on a bit. Honourable members, in the beginning, I should have informed you that we have a new Pope, Pope Francis. So I want to announce that tomorrow at 5.30 p.m., there will be a High Mass at Rubaga Cathedral to celebrate the election of the Pope. So I am informing the members to go there tomorrow at 5.30 p.m. (Applause)

MR SSIMBWA: I thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rules 47 and 48 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

This motion is calling for a resolution of Parliament under Section 19 (2) of the National Audit Act 2008, to extend the submission deadline for the Annual Audit Report for the year ended 30 June 2012. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Auditor-General is mandated to audit and report to Parliament on all public accounts under Article 163 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and the National Audit Act, 2008;

AND WHEREAS under Section 19 (2) of the National Audit Act, 2008  – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure. I know hon. Ssimbwa very well. He is a Member of Parliament for Rubaga– (Interjections) - rather Makindye East and he is not a chairperson of any accountability committee or a finance committee and does not work in the Auditor-Generals Office. I want to know how does he come up with this motion to talk about the Office of the Auditor-General that is independent –(Interjections)- okay, it is an office of Parliament – you as an MP for Makindye to come and talk about the Office of the Auditor-General without talking about those four chairpersons. I want to know how you came to know them.

THE SPEAKER: I got it here. He wrote to me and so I assigned him the duty.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know you can do that but as you are aware, you have four chairpersons; chairperson PAC, Local Government, COSASE and Finance. Those are the people who deal with the Office of the Auditor General – (Interjections) – please, being a member is different. Madam Chair, wouldn’t it have been procedurally good to contact those three chairs to take care of this?

THE SPEAKER: Under what Rule of Procedure? Please proceed.

MR SSIMBWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As I proceed, I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition that under Section 19 (3) of the National Audit Act, the report is supposed to be submitted to Parliament and I am a Member of Parliament for Makindye East, dully elected by the people of Makindye East. So as a Member of Parliament, I am obliged and I am under the duty of a Member of Parliament to present this motion.  

“AND WHEREAS under Section 19 (2) of the National Audit Act, 2008, the Auditor-General is required to certify in respect of each public account examined within the nine months or such longer periods as Parliament may, by resolution, appoint after the end of the financial year to which they have accounts examined and audited late;

CONSIDERING THAT following frauds that were unearthed in the Office of the Prime Minister and in the Department of Pensions in the Ministry of Public Service, the Auditor-General embarked on an extended audit of Government entities for the year ended 30 June 2012 with an aim of ascertaining the extent to which similar frauds could have happened in the other Government entities;

NOTING THAT the deadline stipulated in the National Audit Act, 2008 for the certification of public accounts and the submission of the annual report on the examined and audited accounts is nine months after the end of the financial year to which the accounts relate and in this case, being 31 March 2013;

AND FURTHER NOTING that the extended audit of Government entities by the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2012, will necessitate more time before certification of public accounts as provided for under the National Audit Act, 2008;

AWARE THAT Parliament under the National Audit Act, 2008 is vested with powers to appoint a longer time within which such certification of public accounts may be made and it is expedient that it does so;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament:

    (i) That the time within which the Auditor-General is required to certify public accounts of government entities examined and audited in the year ended 30 June 2012 under sections 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the National Audit Act, 2008 be extended by three months to 30June 2013. 
    (ii) That the Auditor-General prepares a report on the examination and audit of all public accounts referred to in this motion and submit the report to Parliament within the time here appointed by this resolution of Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

5.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am seconding this and I will face the wrath of the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Procedure. I thank you, Madam Speaker. We have two sides of the House and I happen to be a member of the shadow cabinet and we hold caucus meetings, shadow cabinet meetings and we are not aware that hon. Ekanya is supposed to second this motion –(Interjections)- yes. 

The procedural matter that I want to raise is that is it procedurally right for hon. Ekanya to proceed without consulting the Leader of the Opposition who actually is –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, really those are your internal matters. Please proceed. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I wish to apologise to the Leader of the Opposition for having not consulted him before seconding this motion but on a very serious note, I want to inform colleagues that the Office of the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament and in that regard, as the motion states, the Auditor-General wrote a letter requesting for an extension in order to comply with the Constitution. I don’t have much to say but I want to state to the House that we should support this motion to grant the Auditor-General more time so that he can conclude signing the report and give us a quality report which will be handled by the Opposition finally and tabled to the House. Thank you very much, I beg to move. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Dear colleagues, I am an active member of COSASE and my vice chairperson can attest to that. In that regard, we are aware that in the middle of doing his work, new information came to the Office of the Auditor-General and that is about the fraud or scams in the Office of the Prime Minister and the department of pensions. The Auditor-General was requested by Government to ensure that he does an extensive investigation of other government departments because what happened in the Office of the Prime Minister touched on the Office of the Minister of Finance, the Bank of Uganda and other entities. 

There was belief that even other ministries could have been affected by such fraudsbecause of the weak financial management system at that time. So, the Auditor-General had enormous tasks to conduct investigations across the board and as you are aware under section 19(2) of the National Audit Act, the Auditor-General is supposed to submit a certified report to Parliament and he is supposed to do this within a period of nine months after the expiry of the financial year and if we don’t give him enough time, automatically, we will come up with a haphazard report which will not assist Parliament to do its work. 

This report comes to us and it is we who consume and utilise this report. So, it is really better as Parliament to give a period of three months to the Auditor-General to ensure that he comes up with a better report that can assist Parliament do its work in as far as fighting this scourge of corruption is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, that is why I beg my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to pass this resolution and we give the Auditor-General enough time to come up with a good report that will enable us do a better job. I thank you. 


MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, as much as I don’t oppose this motion, how do we know, as Members of Parliament, that he requested? Unless you table the letter from the Auditor-General because you are a private Member of Parliament; you are not from the Auditor-General’s Office. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, are you going against my instructions? I said the Auditor-General wrote to me seeking an extension. I have no power to do it. So, I had to bring it here.  

6.03
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think this is a simple matter. I actually rise to support the motion that the period be extended for the Auditor-General to submit his report to us from the 31st March of this year to 30th June. That is a simple request and I think we will always support the motion and that is my reason for supporting the motion. Let us extend the period. Thank you very much.

6.04
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, I also stand to second the motion but I am somehow pained by the conduct of our colleagues here. I do not know which rule speculates that it should be the chairpersons of committees, more so accountability committees, to present such a motion here. Colleagues, we have a chair who is the Speaker and she has given us information. Why are we still going behind? So, my position is, I don’t have much but the fact is if we are to stop corruption, please, let us allow to get the best evidence to help us deliberate on issues of this country. I thank you so much.

6.05
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion that we extend the term of the Auditor-General and I least expected my colleagues from the other side to oppose, of all offices, the Office of the Auditor-General. This is because always the reports brought by the Auditor-General are applied especially by my colleagues from the other side. Now that we are praying as Parliament, the Office of the Auditor-General which is an institution of Parliament is asking for extension of term. I least expected my colleagues to oppose this one. 

When it comes to hon. Ssimbwa, there is none other than hon. Ssimbwa who is an anti-corruption crusader in this country. I think he is best placed to present such a motion. I do plead with my colleagues that we extend the term of the Auditor-General and move very fast to have this report brought here so that we debate in the struggle to curb corruption in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.06
MR VINCENT BAMULANGAKI SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I see that this motion is really non contentious and I stand to support it but I also want to advise the honourable members that we shouldn’t always emphasise the means because the content of the motion reflects what the Auditor-General asked the Speaker to do. So, I think so far, we have moved on very well with the Auditor-General’s Office and we have no reason to suspect that office. So, I stand to support the motion and I think that we should really move forward. Thank you very much.

6.08
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First of all, I take this opportunity to thank you for having considered the letter that was written to you by the Auditor-General and for having allocated this assignment to hon. Ssimbwa who has presented it to Parliament. Madam Speaker, this is not your first time to do it, you have been doing it and we have been carrying it out properly on this Floor of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for also respecting we, the small people, so that we can come and present – (Laughter)  

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, there two cardinal rules in this House. The first one is that the Speaker is always right. The second one is that in case the Speaker is wrong, you refer to the first one. (Laughter) But in any case, Madam Speaker, since this is a very non-controversial issue – we were only debating because we think there was some contention about procedural matters, which can be excused because of the two rules I have quoted. (Laughter)
For that matter, Madam Speaker – my guidance is - in my culture, we don’t eat porridge; we just swallow porridge. (Laughter) So, in this case, I don’t see any reasons why this House should waste a lot of time – can you now put the question? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me tell you something; I am always confident about my decisions. All of you are my officers and so I can chose on anyone. So, I put the question that this House adopts the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO SET UP A JUDICIAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE ROAD WORKS IN UGANDA

6.11
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Pursuant to Rule 47 and 48 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to set up a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the road works in Uganda. The motion reads as follows:

“WHEREAS for the last five years the Government of Uganda has been increasing funding to the road sector annually with a special focus on constructing transport corridors, which increased the overall budget for roads to over Shs 1.0 trillion, for example the trend of allocation of funds to the works and transport sector has been increasing steadily. In the financial year 2007/08 the budget for this sector was Shs 625.59 billion. In the financial year 2008/09, the budget went up to over Shs 1.0 trillion. In the financial year 2009/10, the budget went to over Shs 1.2 trillion and in the financial year 2010/11, it went to over Shs 1.0 trillion. In 2011/12 it went to over Shs 1.2 trillion and in 2012/13, that budget went up to over Shs 1.6 trillion;

AWARE that the government has not been able to realise its objective as expected, due to late completion of road works and poor quality of road works, among others;

ALSO, AWARE that some contractors like Dot Services, which has several ongoing road contracts including Soroti-Kumi, Kumi-Mbale, Mbale-Tororo, Jinja-Kamuli, Lira-Kamudini, Busega-Mityana roads, among others, and dams in several parts of the country, has exhibited lack of capacity to either do quality work or complete work on time;

CONSIDERING that the state of roads in the country is alarming and requires urgent corrective measures to be taken to address the problem;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament urges Government to:
    1) Set up a Judicial Commission of Inquiry to inquire into the road sector in the country to ascertain: a) The cause of delays in completing road works; b) The cost of road works in Uganda in relation to Sub-Saharan Africa; c) Whether the country obtains value for money from contractors; d) The cause of poor quality roads work; and e) Recommend appropriate action and any other matters incidental.
    2) Suspend the award of further contracts to Dot Services Ltd until the Prime Minister submits a detailed report to Parliament indicating that the company has the necessary capacity to run any contracts in Uganda.
    3) The minister responsible for works reports to Parliament, in two weeks, on what action he has taken to ensure road works under this company aremotorable and will attain the necessary quality and will be completed on time.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Monica Amoding, are you seconding the motion?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable colleague for seconding the motion.

MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of the honourable member. Indeed it is the concern of Government and all of us. But already the Auditor-General carried out an investigation into the road works in this country. I am sure it will soon be debated by the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.

But also, the President has set up a team, the way he did for the health sector on service delivery. Government is already handling this issue. But there are two things here: One is that if you have a report by the Auditor-General and we get one from PAC that will be the opportune time for us to pronounce ourselves as to whether we need a Judicial Commission of Inquiry or anything else, but based on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister in charge of Luweero for her information. But I want to state that in a country, there are key and important sectors. One is security and the other one is the road network –

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, why don’t you allow your colleague to second your motion. Let her second your motion before we get on.

6.17
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, for proposing this motion. I am a national Member of Parliament. That means I move across the country while I do my work. I can reach as far as Kotido, Kisoro and sometimes Kalangala via the ferry.

The status of our roads in this country is sorry. I would like to agree with the mover of the motion on the fact that the status of our roads requires an inquiry and a judicial one at that because what the acting Leader of Government Business right now was noting is the usual business we do as committees. But I would like to state that in Uganda, the road sector is a very important sector in our economy and without a good and clear network, we cannot claim to be supporting development in this nation especially if we want to see agriculture develop and grow in this country and the sector of exportation.

Madam Speaker, what is noted in this motion relates to the road network. I will make reference to the road network in the Eastern region. The road from Busia via Tororo via Kumi until up to - I think it reaches up to Juba. That is a main road network in this country which is an export road to the side of Sudan. It is also a source of entry from the other side and therefore our country needs a lot of support in that direction to ensure that this road network supports the economy. 

In support of this motion, I would like to note that the status of roads in this country is alarming and the evidence is before us; the number of accidents we have in this nation, about 14 people - I think I am understating it - 14 people die every day as a result of these accidents. Of course we cannot overemphasise the fact that this sector is one of the most important in our country, which needs to be improved and worked on and developed and supported in as much as we want to see this country go forward.

I would like to observe that one day, I travelled to West Nile - because of the nature of my work, it is so hectic you have to be here in Parliament, you have to be in the constituencies, you have to do everything that people want you to do as a Member of Parliament, and in this way we endanger our lives as Members of Parliament. I happened to travel at night between Bombo and Karuma Falls and the road is too narrow. The people on that road drive like crazy. It is the same picture when you take the road to the West, to the Kisoro side. The roads are so narrow and there are potholes everywhere. A van comes from the other side, very fast and you have to pass -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you. The road you described to the North, you had not yet reached the worst part; the stretch from Kamudini to Gulu. I wish all of you could experience that road - Kamudini to Gulu - (Interjections) – Kona- Kamudini.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS AMODING: I want to thank the Member who has given that information. What I would like to emphasise using that example is the fact that the status of our roads is really terrible and this is because of the way the contracts are awarded. First of all, the people that deserve these contracts are given contracts without really doing complete and conclusive work. I can give you an example of Dot Services. Demonstrations have been made to this effect in some parts of the country. I think a lot of work needs to be done in this direction. 

I support this motion and request the House to put in place some sort of inquiry. There is a lot at stake we are talking about and the picture is not only for Tororo or the Eastern side; it is a general problem in the country especially the roads that connect our country to the rest of the world, the export zones and given the fact that our country is landlocked.

Therefore, I would like stand to second this motion and ask the House to resolve to establish this judicial commission of inquiry. I thank you very much.   

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, before we go further, I have looked at the prayers. How long will it take for this inquiry to handle these roads? You are talking about all the roads in the country from Nimule to Kisoro–(Interjections) - yes. That is what I am saying. You are talking about all the roads from Nimule to Kisoro and from the Kenya border to the other border.  Is this what you mean? 

Honourable members, I am trying to understand what you want to do. You are talking about the quality of all those roads; you want appropriate action. I am looking at the magnitude of the inquiry. That is what I am asking myself now: the magnitude of this inquiry. When would they report? 

MR MUKITALE: I am very interested and in support of the increasing mood in Parliament to fight corruption and get good roads in our country although I do not have a single tarmac one where I come from. I am particularly interested in the Auditor-General’s report and if this report came out - PAC, is this business already before you or not? Because if it is, the way we are overstretching the whole country would be - I would rather we specifically look at bad cases so that they lead to a further inquiry. But if you overstretch to the whole country, it is a problem.

And finally, if you are looking at the whole country, why do you narrow down to Dot Services? I have a problem with that approach. I have some background in procurement both in practice and training; you cannot blacklist an individual. You would rather cast a wide net and catch whoever instead of going for one contractor.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, then you can justify. You answer my questions when you are justifying.

6.26
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee deals with Auditor-General’s reports and in respect of the issue that has been raised in so far as the performance of certain contracts is concerned, what has happened is that we are looking at the 2009/2010 and – (Interruption) - the Public Accounts Committee; that is what I am talking about - because they said they are dealing with road construction contracts of Dot Services before the committee. And there were efforts to bring experts. Actually the Auditor-General involved experts to look at the quality of work that was being done. But that was in respect to particular contracts which were being implemented.

But what problem are we trying to deal with, Madam Speaker? I will give you an example. When UNRA appeared before PAC and we asked about the state of the Jinja-Kamuli Road, they told us that that road was a political road; that it was contracted without money. Because elections were coming, they just told them to go and assemble machines on the ground and they took the machines on the ground because there was no money. Actually, they said most of the roads which we are accusing them of doing are political roads. They did take the machines on the ground during campaign time when actually there was no money for them to start doing the work. They took the machines on the ground because they were cooperative in anticipation for work. That is why you realise that even the cost of working on those roads also kept on shooting up.

However, what are we dealing with now? Whereas this seems to be correct, in my opinion, when you look at recommendation two and three, they say that we should punish someone. That is one. Whereas the Judicial Commission of Inquiry would even address - when you read the Road Fund Act, it created the Road Fund. I asked a question for oral answer; I have seen it on the notice of business to follow. All the money which gets out of the fuel levy does not go to the road fund. So, when UNRA appeared before this committee, they said they have no money to work on these roads. The way they are contracted is the problem. 

Madam Speaker, the inquiry maybe would stretch but does not extend to the existing contracts that we are dealing with. Because if it goes even to the existing contracts - because Dott Services has got very many contracts but even when they appear before you, they will tell you, “We signed the contract but we have never got any money to do the work.” So how do you blacklist them when they have never got money to do any work? I think we need to have those facts in our minds as we take a decision on this. 

THE SPEAKER: Please answer my questions because I am looking at a very huge thing.

6.29
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The prayer as you have stated - first of all, why are we proposing a judicial commission of inquiry because we know that parliamentary committees already have engagements that are ongoing.

A judicial commission of inquiry like the ones we have heard in the past produce very good reports, for example, that of Justice Ogoola. There was also the Auditor-General’s report on global fund and vaccination but the judicial commission of inquiry worked well and produced a report. The one of Julia Ssebutinde produced a very good report; there was also a report of the Auditor-General on Police. So the judicial commission of inquiry under the inquiry Act goes in detail, looks at policy, at operation issues where the Auditor-General looks at specific issues while doing audit sampling. 

Therefore, maybe what we can do is to reduce the threshold because you are not going to look at a tarmac road in the village. We can only focus on tarmac roads and bridges in billions of shillings and I have the reports here. For example, a unit cost on a kilometre of a road in Uganda such as the Northern bypass cost us 4 billion shillings. If you look at the World Bank study which was done by Price Water House and Coopers and the Auditor-General, it noted that Uganda has the highest cost of roads in Sub-Saharan Africa and that report was presented to the President five years ago. We have been discussing it in Government.

Secondly, one bridge of Aswa cost the Government of Uganda Shs 4 billion. I saw the bridge when I was campaigning. One kilometre of a road like that of Busega cost Shs 1.7 billion while the  cost of a kilometre of a road in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania is much less. The report states that Uganda is on flat terrain, we have plenty of water, we have gravels which are not costly but the costs are abnormal. The issue of a judicial commission of inquiry will go in those details. 

One Member said why do you look at Dott Services? The information I have is that this company is the one that gets so many and sells them to others such as Spencon. The judicial commission of inquiry will look at the procurement details which cannot be done by the Auditor-General.

This Dott Services company can be told to start on a road without even a contract being signed, without a tender document, without a design. The judicial commission of inquiry will look at who erred, who caused this company without machinery and personnel to go and start work on Kamuli road.

The judicial commission of inquiry will look at this Dott Services which can be told to go and do Hoima-Busega road without anything and then they call other companies and then tomorrow they come back to Government and say the road design was not ready, there was no consultant and so forth.

This is work that the Auditor-General cannot look into. Why do I say that it be suspended from taking on new works - because Dott Services does not get advertised works, for them they take calls.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I want to give information; I think Government does something with this company which is not right. Government is repairing Tororo-Soroti Road and Dott Services is willing to work for Shs 400 million per kilometre but a road being done in Mbarara-Katuna, is constructed at Euros 1.2 million per kilometre, so what type of work is Dott Services willing to do on Soroti- Mbale Road or Kamuli- Jinja Road at Shs 400 million per kilometre when other roads are costing one million Euros per kilometre?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. For me, in Kalungu West, the issue of roads - we have to wait for campaigns they promise us and we wait on. That aside, when I talk about Dott Services, we must know the owner of the company because he can again form another company after you have had complaints on this one.

This is a company owned by Col. Mugyenyi, he is a former soldier, I don’t know whether he is still serving in the Army. He seated at the right hand of the father, that is, the President. So whenever you talk about Dott Services, know that this a company owned by Col. Mugyenyi who is running it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I understand what we are trying to do but when you want to know value for money for roads from all contractors and you are only talking about one, where are the others, how do you bring them into the bracket?
I think there is something that is not coming out; we need to focus on what we really want. You are talking about all the roads in Uganda; I don’t know whether they were done by Dott Services. Then you are focusing on one contractor; can we have a team to help us refine this?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with your suggestion because this shoddy work which is being done on our roads does not only include tarmac roads. There are contractors who get contracts to do road maintenance. Year in year and out, the ministry will tell you that they are doing road maintenance but you do not see the work.

They simply take a grader to grade and there is no murrum and billions of shillings are spent on such. So I think we need to agree to include other contractors as well. I think Members could be having some examples of contractors out there who do road maintenance. 

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I applaud the spirit behind this motion. All of us are pained by the state of roads in the whole country and generally the quality of services in every respect, the road sector is equally in a very bad state.

Members know that I come from Kamuli and I am personally very miserable with the state of the Jinja-Kamuli Road. I always have back pains whenever I come back from the constituency. So I feel the pain of Members. That said, I think we should not duplicate institutions or agencies. We are talking about a judicial commission of inquiry and the information given by my colleague hon. Wafula is quite important. Why would a road in a particular part of the country cost Shs 400 million and another Shs 4 billion and it is the same unit? Of course there are so many variables which the technical people can inform you about, such as the width, the depth and everything but we are not competent to possibly explain that.

Under our Constitution, we have been talking about the Auditor-General who assists this Parliament to actually arrive at the proper decisions with respect to matters of this nature. Under Article 163 (3), it is stated that, “The Auditor-General shall —
(b) Conduct financial and value-for-money audits in respect of any project involving public funds.” 

We are talking about a general problem all over the country. Have we asked the Auditor-General to actually do a financial value-for-money audit on any of these road projects? (Interruption) Fine, I will take that information.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I sit on the Budget Committee and the finance committee and we have just concluded a debate on the request from the Auditor-General’s Office requesting Parliament to extend the date for submission of a given report. Each time the Auditor-General comes before our committee, they have always “cried”, requested and informed the committee of the insufficient staffing in that office. So by the fact that they are requesting for an extension of time for them to complete their work, I really do not know whether they will be able to do this. That is the information that I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: The action we took is misunderstood. The Auditor-General – maybe we should have really circulated the letter. He wrote to me to say that after he had embarked on the OPM and the pension investigation, it occurred to him that the net was bigger and that there were problems in all the ministries and so he decided to look at all the ministries. He realised that there was a big network beyond OPM and pensions and not because they are incompetent.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. The point that I was labouring on is that we are talking about constituting a commission of inquiry that requires money, a constitution that will even take more time and yet you want an immediate solution. In fact, you are even saying that we suspend any awards of contracts to Dott Services. I thought a shorter route would be to ask the Auditor-General to do snap audit and give us a report within this time frame so that we take remedial action immediately. This route we are adopting of a judicial commission of inquiry is going to even be longer. So I want to implore my colleague -(Interruption)- I will take the information.

MR EKANYA: I am the one holding the Floor. How can you start taking information? (Laughter)

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: I thank you. I want to implore my colleagues that maybe we could engage the committee which is responsible, the Public Accounts Committee and we specify exactly what we want to investigate and then task the Auditor-General to do a financial and value-for-money audit on all these problematic areas, Jinja-Kamuli to begin with. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: I will grant you –(Interjections)- you are my brother. As I really wind up the justification, Madam Speaker and honourbale colleagues, hon. Kiyingi knows it very well that under the Judicial Commission of Inquiry Act, the power that the Auditor-General – I wish you could lend me your ears. The Auditor-General cannot summon the private contractors or politicians. Under the Constitutions, the Auditor-General accounts to Parliament and looks at the accounting officers and in audit, they do something different. 

The challenge that we are looking at is that from 2008/2009 to date, the road sector out of a total budget of 9 – 10 trillion, the road sector has been having a grope in the budget but there is a huge problem of procurement, policy, design – the Auditor-General looks at money.

The Auditor-General two years ago and I have just said it here – under the request of the World Bank, hired consultant engineers from Tanzania and did a value-for-money audit. The report is there but the mess in the sector is still continuing. 

Madam Speaker, let me reveal to Members; His Excellency, the President in a period of 60 days has written two letters to Works bitterly complaining about this company called Dott Services. The President was in Tororo where he travelled from Mbale for the enthronement of the Bishop. He looked at the situation and he could not believe it.

Also on another day, when he was going to Soroti, he was very bitter about this company called Dott Services – 

THE SPEAKER: Information, hon. Kwizera.

MR KWIZERA: I thank you very much. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and in the Public Accounts Committee, we are handling audit reports from Works and UNRA. The road being talked about by our colleague is one of the roads that did not have designs and so they could not embark on the road without designs. That report is already in the committee and it is being handled. The Kisoro-Kabale Road is being handled under value-for-money audits. So, unless you want to duplicate but much of those things have been identified by the Auditor-General. The reports are there and even the value-for-money audits were brought to this Parliament. So I would think that although the idea is good, we shall be duplicating what we are doing. I thank you.

MS JOY ONGOM: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the honourable who has just said that the report on that road is already before the committee. But I want to inform him that it is less than two years - I would say that it is only last year that Dott Services worked on the road from Lira to Kamudini. 

Madam Speaker, it is embarrassing and appalling as we would not believe that it has been worked on just of recent. If those other roads are before the committee, I want to assure you that the rest of these other roads are not before your committee and they need to be assessed and investigated.

It is of recent that we watched on TV the situation of the bridges; that money had already been paid but work had not been done and people are suffering. We need to investigate why they give a Certificate of Completion when work has not been done. Are we working best in the offices and we are not going on the ground and we are budgeting funds for such work each and every time? I think that the Ugandans are suffering. Let us see value-for-money. If we budget money for roads, bridges, let them be done other than paying for what has not been done. I thank you so much.   

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I again say that I do appreciate the intentions of the mover of the motion but I think it is still too broad in my view. We are going to send the commission on a fishing expedition and so I do not know whether we cannot defer the debate and try to refine the debate. It is the scope – you know the whole country’s investigation may take three or five years. It will look unrealistic. Can we defer the debate and get some Members to assist you to focus because this is too big. 

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with you and just like I said at the beginning, the scope is big but when we have the report of the committee, out of the Auditor-General’s inquiry, we can be able to dispose of some roads and then remain with the residual ones that are inconclusive that can actually reduce the scope. After looking at the report by the committee, we can be able to say this one is handled conclusively by the Auditor-General and we remain with those few ones that can be conclusively handled by the inquiry. Otherwise, I agree with you, it is a very broad inquiry that cannot be even completed in this term. I thank you so much. 

DR LULUME BAYYIGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The terminology which we have used of a fishing expedition is understandable and the movers of this motion had put it categorically clear that the amount of money that has been spent over the years - and you will agree with me that these monies have been expended to do various roads. Some of them are tarmacked and some of them are murram roads. Some of us who do not even have a tarmac road in our constituencies would wish to also give our take on how expenditures are being done and shoddy works on roads, even on murram roads, are being done. I don’t mind the fishing expedition, therefore, especially when I have something to say about the roads that I observe also countrywide and specifically in my constituency. 

I also want to raise my concerns over the expenditures that have always been appropriated for in the budget and nothing actually is done on the ground. Therefore, in respect of sharpening this motion, I believe that it will remove many of us from this equation in which we want to contribute and raise the concerns countrywide. Therefore, we should have a mechanism of raising countrywide concerns and have value-for-money audits put in place without losing the net that has been cast by this motion. 

I also specifically want to bring to your attention the fact that in a bid to include district roads and murram roads repairs, Government embarked on procuring road units and I think it was a campaign issue but these road units are breaking down wherever they do a few kilometres of murram roads. Some information has been given that they were designed to do away with snow in snowy countries and now they have been brought in Uganda where you need to go eight inches into the soil in order to do grading. We want to bring these factors forth so that the country can know that there was a bad deal in these road units. How else are you going to do it without casting a wide net? That is my concern, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the objective should be measurable and attainable but if you are going to investigate how much cement they used here and then the stones and the equipment, when will you get this report? What are the terms of reference you are going to give the commission of inquiry?

6.54
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am coming from a position which is not speculatory. I heard the honourable ministers trying to raise issues of what if, maybe, perhaps in the case of the Lira-Kamudini road, it was not a political road and you can follow it through the ministerial budget segment. In 2008, the Ministry of Works had it on its work plan that the design and the feasibility study would be done. If you look at the budget statement, it was funded by the International Development Association and the component which was supposed to come from the Government of Uganda did not come but the feasibility studies were done. Tracing that same road, you will find the work progress and all these ministerial budget statements. I raised the concern of the Lira-Kamudini Road to the Minister of Works while they were still painting the road; it had started developing potholes. I came to the minister and I raised the concern. I said, “Please, we have problems with this road; surely, aren’t you still within the contract period where the contractor should be obliged to fix and if it is not possible, at least let us blacklist this company.” The minister promised to get back to me and when he did, he was basically saying that there is nothing much we can do. 

If you look at the budget statement for the year 2011, it has a statement which says major works are basically completed. This was the period when they were painting and the potholes were developed. If you pass on that road today in 2013, even the patched places are coming apart. There are fresh potholes and the rains are knocking around the corner. This is a road which I feel we should be able to address which was done by Dott Services. 

Coming from Lira, they moved that equipment and they are now doing the Soroti-Mbale-Tororo Road. The road which they did, Lira-Kamudini, was basically there for 40 years. Right now, even before they have paid off the monies that we borrowed, the road is falling apart. There was supposed to be a major construction for Karuma Dam - that road is not going to last even before the construction begins. Now this sort of work cannot be allowed to continue and if at the same time this company is also doing the Jinja-Kamuli Road and doing all sorts of contracts, it is a big problem which I feel Parliament needs to address immediately. We are losing billions on these various road works and this has to stop. 

So, Madam Speaker, I am pleading with this House to deal with the works of Dott Services and the roads on which we are concerned and for which we have information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in fact your contributions really reinforce my position that we are not coordinated in the way we are making our prayers. I want to propose to hon. Ekanya that we defer this matter so that we can think which pleas we want to actually focus on - I don’t think Dott Services did all the roads in the country - so that we complete on Tuesday but after focusing on what we really want. I don’t think it is fair to appoint an inquiry where it will take 10 years. It is not attainable.  

Honourable members, this matter is deferred to 2nd April. I don’t know which Members can sit with hon. Ekanya and refine what we really want. I appoint hon. Nkayi, hon. Ssempijja, hon. Ssewungu, hon. Kakooza, hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Brenda. Can you work with hon. Ekanya so that we refine what we want to do and complete it when we have resumed? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, as we close, just for the record of the Government, there are 45 questions awaiting oral answers but only five have been reflected on the Order Paper. The other 40 have not come in yet. So, please utilise this recess to process the answers so that they are answered when we resume; 40 are outstanding. Honourable members, I wish you a happy Easter. The House is adjourned to 2 April 2013. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until 2 April 2013.)


