Wednesday, 4 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. On the 2nd of March, the Rt Hon. Speaker received a communication from Dr Jamal Abdul Aziz Raffa, the Ambassador to the Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Kampala. I would like to read the content of the letter which is addressed to Ms Rebecca Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament.

 “I extend my gratitude for having invited me to attend the 7th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 4th Session of the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 24 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m. to pay tribute to the late King Abdulah Bin Abdulaziz   Alsaud (RIP). 

It is without a doubt, a generous gesture from you, Madam Speaker, that you pay tribute to King Abdulah Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud as a unique figure who brilliantly fought terrorism, contributed towards empowering people and upgrading knowledge all over the world, starting with his country and its citizens.

The tribute paid to the late King came from personalities of a high level, figures of the State and honourable Members of Parliament, which encouraged and increased my conviction of the strong and happily existing friendship ties between the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Republic of Uganda and that the people of Uganda appreciate the services rendered to them.

I wish the relationship between the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Republic of Uganda and their people’s more security, peace, stability and prosperity.
Lastly, I wish on behalf of the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, its people and my own behalf, to thank you once again and all those who paid tribute to the late King Abdulah Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Accept, Madam Speaker, the assurances of my highest consideration. 

Signed,
Dr Jamal Abdul Aziz Raffa, Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to Uganda.”

I thought that should go on the record of Parliament; the appreciation of the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia for what we were able to do in recognition of the passing of the king of Saudi Arabia.

2.08
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. About three weeks ago, people accompanied by the police, heavily armed with AK 47 guns and teargas -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it the people who were accompanied by the heavily armed police or was it the police?


MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Well, it is the police that accompanied some people to trespass on the land and plots of the people of Namatala in Mbale. They started laying landmark stones, which left many people surprised whereupon some developed pressure. 

I was in Mbale and I visited these people; some of them are sick. They didn’t know why mark stones were being put in their land. Later, they learnt that NEMA was the one doing it. People wondered why they were not sensitised and told that NEMA was trying to reclaim the land.

What is interesting is that Namatala is not a wetland. When it rains in Mbale, the water from Wanale Mountain just overflows the banks of Nabuyonga River. So, there is no wetland. When I was there, people were watering their plants. If it were a wetland, people would not be watering their plants.

What is surprising is the distance from the banks of the river - you find different sizes - they had gone as far as 500 metres from the banks of the river - in some areas 227 metres and in others 300 metres. What is shocking again is that if NEMA was trying to reclaim land or wetland, it should be on both sides of the river. But this is being done on one side in Maluku and Namatala. The people are concerned. If it is NEMA doing it, why don’t they go with tags showing they are government workers from NEMA? Why did they go with private vehicles? They never used their official vehicles. 

I want to call upon the minister to come and inform the whole country - the people of Mbale because as I speak the people are terrified, worried and sick. People have been born there and they want to know the reason their land is being demarcated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When the proper people come, we will pass this matter for them to address.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.13
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General: 

    i. Kashenshero Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    ii. Bitereko Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    iii. Kabira Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    iv. Kiyanga Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    v. Kanyabwanga Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    vi. Mutara Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    vii. Mitooma Sub-County, Mitooma District 
    viii. Apopong Sub-County, Pallisa District
    ix. Petete Sub-County, Pallisa District
    x. Kituntu Sub-County, Mpigi District 
    xi. Shuuku Sub-County, Sheema District 
    xii. Mugoye Sub-County, Kalangala District 
    xiii. Mazinga Sub-County, Kalangala District 
    xiv. Bubiita Sub-County, Bududa District 
    xv. Kyamulibwa Sub-County, Kalungu District 
    xvi. Mijwala Sub-County, Sembabule District 
    xvii. Kirungu Sub-County, Rubirizi District 
    xviii. Magambo Sub-County, Rubirizi District; 
    xix. Kirungu Sub-County, Rubirizi District 
    xx. Magambo Sub-County, Rubirizi District 
    xxi. Ryeru Sub-County, Rubirizi District 
    xxii. Kyankwanzi Sub-County, Kyankwanzi District 
    xxiii. Butta Sub-County, Manafwa District 
    xxiv. Kakule Sub-County, Budaka District 
    xxv. Ibulanku Sub-County, Iganga District 
    xxvi. Nombe Sub-County, Ntoroko District 
    xxvii. Busaba Sub-County, Butaleja District 
    xxviii. Buyinja Sub-County, Namayingo District 
    xxix. Bukasakya Sub-County, Mbale District 
    xxx. Kagulu Sub-County, Buyende District 
    xxxi. Butenga Sub-County, Bukomansimbi District 
    xxxii. Nsangi Sub-County, Wakiso District 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon, by the Auditor-General. 
They stand committed to the appropriate committee on Local Government Accounts to handle within the law and brief Parliament on how we proceed with those matters.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us start on that at 3 O’clock.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDENT) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to the next item.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is ready with the report for the Bill just read for the second reading but the procedural matter I want to raise is how we can proceed without the minister concerned?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you hear me calling the next item?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO INQUIRE INTO THE RECURRING ILLEGAL LAND EVICTIONS IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember that this matter was debated and there was a response that was required from the minister before that motion can be concluded. I do not see the minister here to make his responses. Please read out the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITED STATES DOLLAR ONE HUNDRED AND TEN MILLION (US $110 MILLION) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE MUYEMBE – NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wasn’t this motion moved at the time the matter was brought or was it just laid on the Table? Well, then you might not be able to proceed in the absence of the minister because he has to move the motion. Go on to the next item, Clerk.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS ON THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND MULAGO REFERAL HOSPITAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. Okay, any member of the committee who can present it?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government must be seen to be coordinated and functional. When I look at the Frontbench and in consideration of the Order Paper, you realise that actually there is no line minister; there is no Leader of Government Business and not even the Government Chief Whip. We have moved up to item seven going marathon without tackling any serious issue, apart from your communication, My Speaker, which I would like to acknowledge.  

In my acting capacity as Leader of Opposition this afternoon –(Laughter)- I am disgusted to the extent that we are actually wasting taxpayers’ money and we are wasting the time of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you because you keep time - we normally come here at 2 O’clock when we know you are coming here.  It would be unreasonable for you to come before the members who are supposed to wait for you.  You wait for them and they even never come.

Therefore, would it be procedurally right for us to proceed in this uncoordinated manner to the extent that we have reached item seven before any serious issue is handled? Is it procedurally right for Parliament to proceed like this when there is nobody on the Frontbench - the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to confirm whether the hon. Charles Bakabulindi is now the Vice President, Leader of Government Business, Chief Whip and everything so that we can proceed with business.

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, today is a Cabinet day. I was assigned a different duty and I am not sitting here in the various capacities you have mentioned. I am here as the Minister of State for Sports and Workers’ MP.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will raise these matters when the House is constituted with the ministers on the Frontbench.

MOTION FOR PRERSENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA COFFEE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FOR FINACIAL YEARS 2009 – 2012 AND THE 2008 SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON UCDA JOINT VENTURE OPERATIONS

2.23
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 was signed into law and when it is signed, it brings into force, a new calendar for the budget. 

The new budget calendar aims at having the budget passed before 1 July. I would like to give this information: In accordance with Section 9(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, the minister, with the approval of Cabinet, should have submitted the Budget Framework Paper to Parliament by 31 December.

Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that Parliament approves the Budget Framework by 1 February. Section 13 requires that the minister and the heads of other votes submit policy statements to Parliament for the preceding financial year by 15 March. 
Section 13(3) requires that the minister, on behalf of the President, presents to Parliament, the proposed annual budget of the proceeding financial year by 1 April.

Under Section 14(1) Parliament is supposed to approve the annual budget, work plan, the Appropriation Bill and other Bills necessary to implement the annual budget for the next financial year by 31 May. And by 1 July, the annual budget should be effective. 

Mr Speaker, this activity is time barred and besides, we also have constitutional amendments coming but which are also time barred and which are supposed to be handled by this Parliament before the election timeframe sets in.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that at this time, Government presents to us a time table on how it intends to proceed with the budget, taking into account the obligations set by the new Public Finance Management Act, so that this budget is approved by 1 July, in accordance to the provisions of this law. Is it not procedurally right that we get this from Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The point you raised is critically important because we all know that the regime that was brought into effect replaced the initial calendar which was provided for by the Budget Act and the minister was very emphatic that this needed to change so that we have discipline in terms of timeframes management in our budgeting process. 

I would like to confirm whether the Budget Framework Paper has been submitted to Parliament and secondly, whether Parliament has approved that Budget Framework Paper. Those two items are already in the past. 

Honourable Minister, the Chief Whip or is there somebody who can help the House know whether and when the Budget Framework Paper was submitted to Parliament. And secondly, whether it enabled Parliament to pass that Budget Framework Paper by 1 February as stipulated in the law. The other activities will be rolled in when these two items are finalised. 

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankibirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since today we have the Prime Minister on the Order Paper, I want to request that this pertinent question be included when he comes since he is the Leader of Government Business. I think he will be able to give us the position. I am not in a position right now to inform you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the Minister of Finance here. Honourable Minister of Finance, do you know whether the framework paper was submitted to Parliament?


2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate so much the concerns of the Members. The Ministry of Finance and Government together with Parliament have been working around the clock on the Budget Framework Paper. I would like to request that we are given up to tomorrow to come to Parliament with an appropriate answer because consultations have been going on. Mr Speaker, I would like to get the latest from the ministry, given time up to tomorrow. Sir, we will be on the Floor with the right answer tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, 31 December passed and you have been working around the clock instead of working around the calendar? (Laughter) You are not only behind the clock, but also behind the calendar.

No, this would slow the entire process. I think you should take it up seriously and when the Prime Minister comes, I will formally put this matter to him so we can see how to move forward with it.

MS AMALI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Bukedea and Commissioner for raising this very important issue.

MOTION FOR PRERSENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA COFFEE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FOR FYs 2009 – 2012 AND THE 2008 SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT 
ON UCDA JOINT VENTURE OPERATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, by the operation of the rules, you have about 25 minutes before Prime Minister’s Question Time.

2.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on Commission, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, I beg to present a report on the opinion and findings of the Auditor-General on the accounts of Uganda Coffee Development Authority, for the financial years 2009-2012 and the 2008 Special Audit report on the UCDA joint venture operations. 

The opening pages of this report are on the mandate of the committee and the methodology. Therefore, I will go to page 3, where we have the background. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda Coffee Development Authority was established by an Act of this Parliament in 1994, and the main functions of this authority are: 

    i. To promote coffee production through research and extension services and to monitor it’s marketing to maximise its foreign earnings and payments to farmers. 
    ii. The authority is also responsible for controlling the quality of the export and ensuring that prices do not go below the minimum. This responsibility, per the regulations, was initially vested in the Ministry of Trade.

The defunct Coffee Marketing Board handled the buying and selling of coffee, which is currently done by the private sector. It should also be noted that the authority did not inherit only responsibilities, but also property such as staff residential houses in Ntinda, Kololo and Bugolobi. 

The commercial property including warehouses in Nairobi and London were transferred to the Uganda Property Holdings Limited when the Coffee Marketing Board eventually collapsed.

Performance of the coffee sector

The annual budget for the authority has risen from about Shs 9 billion in 2011, to Shs 13 billion in 2012 and to Shs 24 billion in 2014.

It should be noted that Uganda’s coffee production has stagnated at about three million bags of 50 kilogrammes per year, since Independence. The biggest problem has been the coffee wilt. 

The UCDA officials predict that if a lot of planting had not been done since the wilt struck around 1993, the country would be exporting just about one million bags. 

In 2008, a total of three million bags of 50 kilogrammes valued at $291 million were exported. In 2010-2011, we exported 3.1 million 60 kilogramme bags of coffee valued at $ 448 million while a total of 2.7 bags valued at $392 million were exported in 2011-2012.

Considering that from 1995 to 1996 we exported 4.1 million bags at $ 388 million and four million bags at $355 in the years 1996-1997, we are now exporting one million bags of coffee less. This shows that our coffee exports have in deed reduced, and on average we are currently exporting 2.8 million bags of coffee valued at $238 million.

As a result, coffee has dropped from number one to number three on the list of our major foreign exchange earners, tourism and remittance from Ugandans abroad, the so called “Nkuba Kyeyo” have taken over, as the number one and two respectively.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, by about 1974, Vietnam was exporting just half a million bags but today her annual export is about 26 million bags. What this means is that Vietnam now earns about $3.8 billion from coffee exports, which is almost equivalent to our annual budget. Brazil, which sells 55 million bags remains the leading coffee exporter.

Special Audit report 2008 on UCDA joint ventures

On the request of the then Minister for Economic Monitoring, in his letter dated 25 June 2007, the Auditor-General carried out a special audit. According to this letter, the hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka requested for a special audit in 2003 joint ventures that the Government of Uganda entered into with private companies to promote sale of Ugandan coffee in Denmark, China, and Egypt.

The committee was informed that the intention of these ventures was to enable the country begin exporting coffee as a finished product ready for consumption. The joint ventures were partly a result of the presidential visit two of these three countries in early 2000.

As a follow up on these visits and trade contacts with China, State House and Uganda Investment Authority; interested Uganda Coffee Development Authority in concluding partnerships with various companies. These partnerships were to be financed by money obtained directly from the consolidated fund.

The committee was informed that a total of Shs 7.6 billion had been injected into these joint ventures before they collapsed. 

The Denmark joint venture

The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) in 2003 entered a joint venture with a company called Uganda Coffee House, APS Denmark. The objectives of the joint venture included: To create awareness of and promote Ugandan coffee in Denmark and other Scandinavian countries; to export Ugandan coffee as a finished product to Denmark and other Scandinavian countries; to import, distribute, process, roast and produce by adding value to and ferry Ugandan coffee and coffee products in Denmark and other Scandinavian countries.

The joint venture agreement was signed on 29 October 2003. The Chairman Board, Mr Mugambwa Sempa and Mr Henry Ngabirano, the Managing Director for UCDA, signed on behalf of UCDA, while Gen. (Rtd) Caleb Akandwanaho, Chairman Board and Mr Kwame Ruyondo Director/Secretary, signed on behalf of Uganda Coffee APS Denmark.

The Uganda Coffee APS Denmark is a subsidiary of House of Uganda Coffee Limited owned by several Ugandan companies and individuals including Gen. (Rtd) Caleb Akwandanaho. The companies that formed House of Uganda Coffee Limited were Akiba, Abdul Karim Dedya, and Kwame Ruyondo.

While the company remained with 10 per cent shares un-allotted, the information received from Uganda Registration Services Bureau showed that M/s Akiba Limited was incorporated in January 1986 under Instrument No. V1027 but there was no form 7 on records showing the particulars of directors and its secretary.

The records also showed that M/s Akiba Limited incorporated on 4 October 2001 under number 50380 changed its name to Akiba International Limited.

According to company form 7, filed by Kasirye, Byaruhanga and Company Advocates, on 31 May 2001, the directors of this company included Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho and Jovia Akandwanaho. It is this Akiba that owns 70 per cent shares in the company that UCDA entered into a joint venture with.

On the other hand, House of Uganda Coffee Limited was incorporated on 30 August 2001, but the records with the registration bureau were not up to date. However, at the time of its formation, the directors of the company were Mr Abdul Karim, Mr Dedya and Enock Rukidi.

The committee established that by August 2003, the list of directors had grown to include Gen. Salim Saleh, Mr Chris Kyerere, Mr Oketcha Collins and Mr Job Chekwot. By 27 April 2010, Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho and Joviah Akandwanaho in company form 8 filed by their lawyers, Kiwanuka and Karugire Advocates, became the only directors of this company. 

Government gives new company Shs 3.2 billion
Official records at UCDA show that at the time of its collapse, around 2005, Government had invested Shs 3.2 billion in this joint venture. The biggest bulk of the money, Shs 2.5, was released in the financial year 2003/2004. 

The request for money was tabled on 19 August 2002 to the then Prime Minister, Prof Apolo Nsibambi. It is one of the directors of this company, Gen. (Rtd) Caleb Akandwanaho who requested for the money. 
On 26 August 2002, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister then, Prof Apolo Nsibambi, convened a high level meeting, which was attended by the then hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, who was the Minister of State, Planning and Economic Development, Trade and Industry, and Wild Life and Antiquities respectively, plus Akiba International, to discuss a request of $15 million to Akiba International to add value to Uganda’s coffee and promotion in Denmark.

In this meeting the Rt Hon. Prime Minister directed that hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, Minister of State for Finance, Planning, and Economic Development, follows up on this matter.

On 26 September 2002, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana convened a follow up meeting in which Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho made the case for the $15 million request. Two weeks later, a meeting which was attended by hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, then state minister for planning, Akiba International, UCDA and Uganda Investment Authority was convened and a decision to support companies involved in value addition was reached. 

On 9 January, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana wrote to UCDA communicating the proposal to hire services of a Danish firm called Storm Foods to brand Uganda’s coffee as directed by His Excellency, the President. 

This Storm Foods is a firm identified with the companies of Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho, and on 27 July 2003, the President convened a meeting at State House to discuss how Government could support companies involved in coffee value addition. This meeting was attended by UCDA, Akiba International and Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development.

On 30 July 2003, another meeting was convened at State House by the President, and attended by Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, the then acting Solicitor-General, Ms Lucian Tibaruha and Mr Ngabirano, the Managing Director UCDA. In this meeting, Tibaruha advised that it was possible for UCDA to co-invest in a private company. 

The Ministry of Finance officials had expressed reservations in a meeting of 29 July 2003 about Government investing in a private company. During this meeting, the President informed those who attended that he would discuss the establishment of a fund to help those involved in value addition with hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana and Governor, Bank of Uganda.

On 6 October 2003, Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho met UCDA Board to present a request for support. The board approved the joint venture and proposed to study it further in order to develop a business plan. 

Subsequently, UCDA briefed the Minister of Agriculture about the decision to support private companies involved in value addition. 

On 29 October 2003, the Solicitor-General cleared the joint venture agreement in which UCDA was allotted 50 per cent shares in the new company now called Uganda Coffee House APS. The name of the company changed to Mountain Elgon Coffee Europe APS in order to align with the brand name of the product.

In addition, House of Uganda Coffee eventually changed its name to Mountain Elgon Uganda Limited and was registered in March 2004. 

In an October 25 2013 letter to the committee, the Registration Service Bureau wrote that “…we have not found this name on our computerised register.”  That is the name of the new company.

His Excellency, the President was informed of all the progress made in this transaction through a letter dated 18 December 2003. This letter is reproduced and I do not have to read it. It is by hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana.

Auditor-General’s findings

A review of the joint venture financial statements for the period 2003/2004 up to 2006/2007 reveals that the joint venture’s performance was poor resulting in losses. A meeting with the joint venture auditors, M/s Radgivnings Gruppen in Denmark in October 2007, established that the company is no longer in operation. 

Although UCDA shares in the business were reduced from 50 per cent to 35 per cent after admission of Storm Foods. All the obligations were being met by UCDA. The promoters of the joint venture demanded that for it to work, UCDA should invest in at least $15,000,000, which UCDA rejected.

The Auditor-General also reported, in his 2008 annual report, that as part of a joint venture capital, UCDA contributed plot 10-12 Spring Road in Bugolobi as well. UCDA claims that the building was to be used as a store for coffee before export. This building was later sold off by the joint venture.

At the time it was sold, UCDA had some equipment for processing coffee, installed in it, with a total investment of Shs 300,000,000, and $99,550. The coffee roaster was carried away and abandoned at the former coffee marketing board in Bugolobi. The Auditor-General reported, in his 2012 report, that the machine was wasting away. The UCDA management claimed that the reason the equipment was sold off was because coffee roasting was to be done in Denmark.

In a meeting with the committee, the accounting officer; the MD for UCDA, Mr Ngabirano, explained that plot 10-12 was never contributed by UCDA, but bought by the joint venture, that is the Shs 300,000,000, which UCDA contributed towards the purchase of the building. It was part of its $1,500,000 capital contribution in the joint venture.

He also explained that the $99,550 was their contribution towards the purchase of the coffee roaster and this was also part of their contribution. The committee looked at the land title and confirmed that it was never a property of UCDA, but the property of the joint venture.

The Auditor-General had recommended that – because this joint venture collapsed, and there has been no activity at all for the last nine financial years and there are no indications to the effect in the foreseeable future that UCDA should write off its shareholding in this company.

Committee Recommendations

Uganda Coffee Development Authority should concentrate on its mandate and never engage in buying and selling of coffee, which is work for traders, it registers annually. UCDA should therefore terminate any dealings with this company.

The accounting officer and the UCDA Board should within six months write off from their books of account shareholding in this venture. 

Parliament finds Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho, now a senior Presidential Advisor on security matters, guilty of influence peddling and recommends appropriate action against him.

His Excellency, the President, should be advised to desist from Micro-managing independent bodies like the Coffee Development Authority, although he can give general policy guidelines, but should not be seen to push decisions under their throats, using state house meetings. Micro-managing autonomous or semi-autonomous bodies by the President has proved disastrous in the past.

The Egypt Joint Venture
Uganda Coffee Development Authority entered into a joint venture – in this report, we give the background. This was as a result of an Egyptian trade delegation, which included the directors of TESCO that visited Uganda in 2003 at the invitation of his Excellency, the President.

After holding discussions with President, the Uganda Investment Authority introduced TESCO to Uganda Coffee Development Authority. Consequently, UCDA agreed to form a joint venture with TESCO, which was registered as Uganda Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company.

Under this arrangement, UCDA held 50 per cent shares in this company. The other shareholders were as listed.

The company share capital was $100,000 and UCDA duly paid Shs 111,000,000 for its 10 per cent shares -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it 100,000?

MR SSEMUJJU: 100,000, yes. After signing the joint venture on 23 August 2002, the MD for UCDA wrote to the Solicitor-General on 25 November 2002, seeking clearance to sign the same. 

On 13 December 2002, J.B.R. Ssuza, on behalf of the Solicitor-General, wrote to Mr Ngabirano revealing “We have studied the agreement and found it proper.” On 9 May 2004, the Uganda Egypt Coffee Manufacturing Company (UGEMCO) board resolved to increase the share capital of the company by 75 per cent.

The Share Capital Laws as was indicated in the report 

Uganda Coffee Development Authority dispatched 20 tons of coffee valued at $37,077 or equivalent Shs 92.6 million to meet its obligation. Some of the shareholders failed to pay, which worsened the company’s financial standing.

This forced UCDA to further contribute an additional $20,000 towards promotional expenses. Despite the capital injection by the UCDA, the Auditor-General in his reports of 2003-2006, noted that the company’s performance was below expectations. The company’s sale income could not cover its operational costs, as the company in some cases, sold below the market price. This means that the company was not able to recover the cost of raw materials for its operation to remain in business. Consequently, the company had accumulated losses totaling to Egyptian pounds 485,480, as at 30 September 2006.These losses inevitably eroded the investment share capital of the company. 

The Auditor-General noted that UCDA and other shareholders were reluctant in injecting fresh capital into the company. Similar to the Denmark venture, the Egyptian venture also collapsed. In fact it is these disagreements in the Egypt venture that were reported to his Excellency, the President that prompted for a special audit.

UCDA, at its 156th meeting on the 22 November 2012, resolved to withdraw from this joint venture and to recall the employees they had deployed in Cairo.

The UCDA in addition to buying shares at about Shs 250 million had spent Shs 586.4 million on maintaining a few employees - Mr James Byansi and Mr Ayoub Maswa in Cairo. This expenditure was not recorded in the joint venture’s books of accounts, according to the Auditor-General. Even the salary that was paid to the two Egyptian; a general manager and deputy were not reported.

At the time of its closure, the company was selling only 185 kilogrammes of coffee per month. The money that financed this venture had been drawn from the Consolidated Fund strategic intervention programme. 
The Auditor-General however reported that, despite all short comings, the company succeeded in introducing Uganda’s coffee to the Egyptian market.

Committee Observations

The committee observes that no due diligence was done prior to entering into this joint venture with Egyptian company. The UCDA simply acted on the directive of the President. Besides, UCDA is not supposed to engage in buying and selling of coffee. This project was outside its statutory mandate.

The committee further notes that by the time the venture collapsed, UCDA had injected in Shs 1 billion. This investment went into the establishment of the business, rent payment for coffee promotion facilities and recurrent expenditures, like utilities and salaries for the project management. Like any other business start-up, it was not expected that profits would be made in the short run. 

The objective of the project was to introduce Uganda’s coffee to Egyptian market, through promotion activities before leaving the Uganda Coffee Exporters Association to take over the business, emanating from the promotions, although this seems to have been achieved at a very high cost.

Committee Recommendations

The committee recommends as follows: That Uganda Coffee Development Authority should concentrate on its mandate and never engage in selling and buying coffee.

The accounting officer, Mr Ngabirano and UCDA board should, within six months, from the adoption of this report, write off from their books of accounts shareholding in this venture.

UCDA joint operations in China -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, can I propose that you introduce the heading and then summarise what it is all about after which you go to the observations and recommendations. If you are to read the whole thing, which we already have, it might take much longer.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. On page 16, we present recommendations on UCDA joint venture operations in China as part of the earlier project that we have seen. 
The Auditor-General noted that coffee exports to China increased from 40 tonnes in 2002, to 600 tonnes by 2006. The summary of it is that UCDA closed this joint venture and maintained a promotional office in china.

I will now go to other findings of the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t you have a recommendation on that subject?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: The recommendation is that the Authority should concentrate on promotions and wind up any other dealings within six months. The committee notes delays in winding up the China joint venture activities. The accounting officer should solely be responsible should this delay result into any loss. 

Weight Processing Equipment 

The Auditor-General noted that Uganda Coffee Development Authority invested Shs 834 million in purchasing steam weight coffee processing machines under the Strategic Exports Programme with the objective of adding value to Uganda’s coffee at farm gate level. The machines will be installed at the firm to aid farmers.

On page 17; the second last paragraph, the committee also observed that even the machines that had been installed and operational were operating below capacity, sometimes remaining redundant for months because of lack of head keys arising from the seasonal nature of coffee production.

The accounting officer informed the committee that the challenges faced in the installation and operation of the weight mills was the high cost of installation.

On page 18, the committee observed that part of the reason as to why there is not enough supply to feed the machines was that small scale farmers were complaining of lack of funding to acquire quality seedlings and other services. As a result, farmers in Wakiso, Mityana, Mubende, Kalungu, Rakai and Masaka informed COSASE that they were engaged in local propagation of seedlings from existing coffee trees thereby compromising the quality.

The committee recommends on page 19 that the equipment, this being a purely a contractual matter, should be enforced but an option of extending the period to the beneficiary farmers be explored to enable them recoup and pay the 2 per cent discounted rate to own them. The unallocated machines should be immediately leased out to ensure that they are put to the intended purpose to save them from losing value as a result of depreciation.

The committee further recommends that the authority should, in future, carry out adequate feasibility studies before making such investment decisions. If not done, such endeavours will continue remaining unsustainable with little or no value for money realised.

On page 20, we report on the rental income arrears of Shs 73.2 million. The committee recommends that the estate manager collects all the monies within six months or his contract be terminated.

On page 21, the committee reports on assets management and recommends that UCDA should urgently prioritise the renovation of these properties that are mentioned in this report in the medium term. The authority should therefore develop a comprehensive plan to ensure that the properties are renovated before the end of this financial year.

On page 22, the committee reports about land and buildings and recommends that this query should be dropped because the issue was innovation and many of them have been renovated now.

Unrecovered utility payments of Shs 28 million

The committee recommends that UCDA recovers the money it paid in water bills from tenants immediately. Mr Speaker, that is the last item we are reporting on. I beg to move that this House adopts this report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and I thank the committee for this very elaborate report covering a number of years and for the recommendations you have made. We will now process the debate. I now propose the question for your debate. 

Honourable Members, the motion before the House is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority for financial years 2009–2012 and the 2008 special audit report on UCDA joint venture operations. I now propose that for your debate, which starts now. If it is okay that we can debate this, we can start.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the report. My point of procedure is that we do not have the report on the ipads and we find it difficult to proceed when we do not have a point of reference. We have listened but could we have copies on the iPads? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I propose therefore that we give some time for us to look at this properly? Is tomorrow okay or can we defer it to next week Tuesday? We had deferred three other reports to tomorrow for debate so can we move this debate to Tuesday afternoon? I think by that time you would have internalised and we can have a proper debate on this subject. Debate on this motion is deferred to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m. 

Can we proceed to lay these reports if the minister is ready, of course with the attendant apologies to the House because at the time the matter was called, there was nobody to read it.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO $199.89 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
OF JAPAN TO FINANCE THE WORKS UNDER THE KAMPALA FLY-OVER CONSTRUCTION AND ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT (KFCRUP)

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to apologise to you and to the House that when the matter came up for mention, we were awary as the Ministry of Finance. So I beg to apologise.

I beg to lay on Table the request to borrow up to $ 199.89 million from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Fly-Over Construction and Road Upgrading Project (KFCRUP). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and report to the House and advise us on how to proceed.

REQUEST TO BORROW IN EUROS 42,900,000 FROM THE FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (AFD) TO FINANCE THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION GRID EXTENSION PROJECT ASSOCIATED WITH THE ONGOING HOIMA-NKENDA TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT AND THE PLANNED INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADE OF 
THE 220KV MASAKA–MBARARA TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the proposal to borrow Euros 42,900,000 from the French Development Agency (AFD) to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extension Project associated with the on-going Hoima-Nkenda Transmission Line Project and the planned infrastructure upgrade of the 220KV Masaka–Mbarara transmission line project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the Committee on National Economy to handle within the framework of the rules and report to the House and advise on how to proceed.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we will start with the issue that was raised by the honourable member for Mbale Municipality. Summarise and then we will move from there.

3.04
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also had a burning question for the Prime Minister. I do not know if I can raise it before I summarise the other one. 

Mr Speaker, about three months ago, the bridge on the Tororo- Iganga road broke down and heavy vehicles weighing about 60 tons and above were diverted through the Tororo-Mbale road via Tirinyi to Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, to mention but a few. I keep wondering how long it takes to repair a bridge. The new roads we have are going to be damaged because there are already potholes on those roads. Does it take a whole year to build a bridge? I would like the Prime Minister to clarify on this issue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, we will deal with that in another way. One question per member.

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of repair of bridges takes a bit of time because of the processes involved, especially the procurement process of making sure that it is both transparent and consistent with procurement regulations. Nevertheless, we know it is an important matter and the Ministry of Works is following it very closely.

3.05
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, appreciating the work that is going on in terms of transport networks and infrastructure improvements from Karuma-Gulu-Atiak and Karuma-Pakwach-Nebbi-Arua-Oraba and noting the gap left in the Nile Valley on both sides of the River Nile, there are people from Nwoya, Amuru, Adjumani up to the South Sudan-Uganda border and it is the same on the other side.

Is your Government interested in bringing development in the Nile Valley? If it is, why don’t you build the Kiakia Bridge, which was put in the budget of the previous three years? It is included and then removed and the time expires without any work being done. This year, are you going to work on Kiakia Bridge? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that the government of the National Resistance Movement led by President Yoweri Museveni, is a government for all the people of Uganda including Ndugu Fungaroo. The government has no plans to leave any part of Uganda unattended to in terms of development and infrastructure. 

However, infrastructural requirements cannot be done in a day; it is a process. It is prioritisation and time for the Nile Valley will soon come.

3.07
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, where would the recent reorganisation of government ministries and departments that led to the integration of science and technology in the Ministry of Education and Sports, in terms of policy supervision, place the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology? This is because Uganda National Council for Science and Technology currently falls under the policy guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Secondly, is the Prime Minister aware that in the event that the National Council for Science and Technology is placed under the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, that would require the amendment of the National Council for Science and Technology Act? When would that be effected? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the President who is the appointing authority in this respect has authority to place departments under ministries. From the reorganisation of ministries, it is clear that scientific issues should be handled by the Ministry of Education. However, we should wait for specific details of how the departments are going to fall in the ministries and that will be clarified. Nevertheless, I expect that the Ministry of Education should be able to look after the Council for Science and Technology.

3.09
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know whether when my beloved Ndugu is passing through Ntungamo Municipality going back home, he is aware that Ntungamo Municipality is still in darkness without electricity. All efforts to get poles to Ntungamo Municipality have been futile.

Whereas the neighbouring villages have lights, the town is in darkness. What plans does our Government have for the people of Ntungamo? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am not aware that Ntungamo is in total darkness and this is a surprise to me. If this is the case, then it calls for immediate action and Government will deal with the matter urgently.

3.10
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister brief Parliament and the country on whether benefits that are due to his predecessor, hon. Amama Mbabazi, have been processed and handed over to him as the law requires? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I think not only I but my colleagues must be fairly astounded by the affinity that is apparent between my good brother Ndugu Amama Mbabazi and Ndugu Nganda. This is because it is only last week that Ndugu Nganda told us of his plans to move a motion and we are waiting for it. Today, he has raised a legitimate point about the benefits of Ndugu Amama Mbabazi.

Yes, Government is aware that Ndugu Amama Mbabazi should get his benefits and the processes are underway. It is true that there has been a bit of delay in provision of benefits to people who have held certain key positions. Government intends to expedite that process in future and Ndugu Mbabazi will be one of the beneficiaries of this expeditious handling of benefits. 

3.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is facing eviction very soon and that, that land is proposed to be given to an investor? If so, how do you intend to handle the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the issue of Government displacing itself for an investor?

DR RUGUNDA: If Government considers that particular piece of land critical, it has the capacity to deal with the matter so my brother should not be very worried that Government will be thrown out just like that. Government will talk to the people concerned and follow the laws in dealing with this matter. Having said that, Government will do everything possible to attract and make land available in legal terms to investors who are coming. We would like many of them to come and we are encouraging them. Where land is available, we assist them.

3.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this Government has come up with different programmes to ensure that different parts of the country develop and come out of poverty. Some of these interventions are general and others are specific. 

Last year, this Parliament passed a motion and resolved that Busoga sub-region be accorded a special development programme and the resolution was carried by this House. Can you brief us on how far you have gone with the implementation of the resolution of this House? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that the motion was recently passed by this august House. Government is considering and preparing the implementation of the same motion and resolution that was passed by this House.

3.15
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans does Government have in regard to coming up with a sanitation policy or a Bill as an avenue to counter the rampant outbreak of diseases like typhoid and cholera in Uganda? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the position of Government on sanitation and policies is very clear. The problem has been in terms of implementation, and implementation of public health programmes hinges on mobilisation and sensitisation. 

Let me therefore take this opportunity, in answering the question raised by the honourable member, to appeal to the entire leadership of Uganda, including the honourable Members of Parliament, to fully mobilise the population and sensitise them about the need for personal hygiene and environmental sanitation. Let us sensitise the population so that we can get rid of diseases like dysentery, cholera and typhoid.

3.16
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in light of the roadmap of the Electoral Commission and indeed the roadmap of the NRM, the party in power, I would like to seek clarification on whether Government has plans to create new districts. 

DR RUGUNDA: What I know is that for quite some time, there was a moratorium put on creation of new districts for reasons that we were given some time ago. Therefore, as far as I know, there is a moratorium and no formal decision that I am aware of has been taken to lift that moratorium.

3.17
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently I went to my constituency and I was happy to note that there is a weighbridge in Nebbi town. However, I realised that the weighbridge is located right in the middle of the road and not on the side of the road like others I have seen. I have also seen that it is located in the middle of the town, thereby posing a risk and causing danger to the people. Why is it that the one in Nebbi is located in the middle of the town and in the middle of the road and not on the side like other weighbridges?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the location that my sister has talked about is rather unusual. It is true that weighbridges are supposed to be by the roadside so that they do not interfere with normal traffic. Secondly, they should not be in the middle of towns. This matter will be looked at by the minister responsible, the Minister of Works, and she will be given an appropriate explanation.

3.18
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans does Government have to formalise and assist external and small scale miners in Uganda, well aware that these people do not have capital and are being exploited by business people?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Mawanda has raised a very important point. Actually, the Prime Minister’s Office has been following up this matter because there is a conflict between the small miners and the big ones. The ministry responsible for energy is working out a regulatory mechanism to ensure that this problem is resolved. The process is underway and we have had several discussions on the matter.

3.19
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a few years ago Government of Uganda adopted the community policing approach, which gave birth to the crime preventers we see in our villages. The crime preventers, whose selection criteria we did not understand, seem to be far poorer than the people they are supposed to offer security to. This has made them very vulnerable and susceptible and most of them have started conniving with the crime creators.

Can this Parliament discuss this policy and concept because if we are not careful, we will have crime creators and not crime preventers?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the main point really is community policing - the community should be able to look after its affairs and be able to pinpoint people who may be introducing the bad habits that my sister is making reference to. Therefore, crime preventers should be seen as a small aspect of community policing. 

If there are problems, like my sister has raised, they will be addressed, but the principle of community policing is a very important one. It is catching on very well in Uganda and I appeal to honourable Members of Parliament to give it total support while correcting the problems that my sister is talking about.

3.21
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister what arrangements they have for the people of Namayingo and Bukooli Islands regarding their means of transport - a ferry from the mainland to the island. Last year, bids were called for by the ministry, people applied and then the process was cancelled. The people are waiting; when will they get access to the mainland by a safe means of transport in terms of a ferry? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member should be able to happily say that Government has acquired money to procure a ferry or a boat for the people concerned; it is only the procurement process that has delayed. Government is taking very strong steps to ensure that our procurement process does not bog down implementation of projects. This new determination from Government to ensure that the procurement process moves fast will benefit the people that you are concerned about. Thank you. 

3.23
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Sunday the President announced a new Cabinet and out of the 30 full Cabinet ministers, 20 are from one region and seven from Kigezi region where you come from. Northern Uganda has only two and one is for disaster preparedness. 

Is your Government committed to building national unity or do we have a government that mirrors the image of this country? Are you aware that sectarianism and nepotism are criminal in this country?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have not carried out a statistical analysis of the reshuffle that my distinguished brother has done. I will look at it. Suffice it to say that the purpose of the reshuffle is always to renew, rejuvenate and strengthen implementation of government programmes. I am fully confident that this new team will deliver to the people of Uganda. 

3.25
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that a big part of Masaka Road has been damaged by big trucks ferrying sand from Lukaya and yet it is a newly built road? This has caused accidents as you may have heard. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, overloaded trucks should be strictly dealt with and the people involved in overloading trucks and driving them should be prosecuted. If this damage is happening on Masaka Road, definitely the law enforcement agencies should quickly deal with this matter so that the roads where we have invested heavily can be protected in order to continue servicing the economy for as long as possible.

3.26
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that law and order in this country is the mandate of the Uganda Police. My question is in regard to welfare in terms of Police accommodation. What is the government’s plan to ensure that our Police officers live in decent accommodation units?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised a very legitimate point. Government is very concerned about the living conditions of the Police and is already in talks with some companies so that a PPP project can be agreed upon and implemented. It is aimed at providing better and decent accommodation for the Police.

3.27
REV. DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently it was published in the New Vision that all public government schools must, beginning next year, open nursery schools. What and where is the legal framework or policy, which is going to guide this early childhood education?

Secondly, I know, as every member in this House knows, that there are huge numbers of children aged between three and six years old who are living in our villages. Given that our primary schools have inadequate classrooms and trained teachers, what is the government putting in place to see that this plan kicks off next year properly and efficiently?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a legitimate point. I have seen something to that effect in the media but the responsible minister has not brought the matter for Cabinet consideration. Please wait until Cabinet has considered the matter and a formal and authoritative statement will be made on the matter.

3.28
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, an advert by Ministry of Foreign Affairs appeared and they have shortlisted 283 health workers, including senior specialists, in a variety of specialities in the health sector. 

Is it true that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did this in close contact with you when you were Minister of Health to export these needed health workers to Trinidad and Tobago when Ugandans do not have enough doctors to cater for them? If yes, is there any programme you have as Government to improve on the working conditions of Ugandan doctors and nurses so that you do not export them? I thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true, and it has been public knowledge in the media, that the Government of Trinidad and Tobago has been trying to get Ugandan doctors and nurses. The matter is under consideration by Government and the permanent secretary responsible has already worked on it. Cabinet is due to consider a paper on the subject matter.

The issues are, however, the following: obviously, we need many doctors and nurses; however, our salary and wage policy and the resources available cannot easily absorb all the doctors and nurses that we are producing both in the government and even in the private sector. There are some Ugandan doctors and nurses who are looking for jobs. Therefore, it is only fair that such people should be able to get jobs. 

Yes, they should be able to get jobs internally and if they cannot, they should look in the region for where they can get jobs. The critical point though is to make sure that we train doctors and nurses to meet the requirements of our people. At the moment, we need to mobilise more resources to pay them reasonable and competitive salaries. As to the actual recruitment, we are due to discuss this matter in Cabinet and after we have discussed it, a formal statement on the matter will come, which will be authoritative on the issue.

3.32
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised this issue as a procedural matter but I think this is the right time for me to raise it as a question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The new Public Finance Management Act, 2015 was recently assented into law by His Excellency the President. With it comes a new budget calendar, which confers obligations to Parliament and also to the Executive. 

In accordance with the new budget process calendar, the Budget Framework Paper should have been submitted to Parliament by 31st December and we should have approved this Budget Framework Paper by 1st February. The ministers and other heads of department are supposed to submit to Parliament their policy statements by 15th March and by 1st April, the President is supposed to present to Parliament the proposed annual budgets for the following year through his Minister of Finance.

My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: when is the Budget Framework Paper going to be submitted to Parliament so that we are able to perform other activities in time such that the Budget will be effective by 1st July? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we do not have the framework paper.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I appreciate hon. Akol’s information. You very well know that the Public Finance Bill was passed only about two or three months ago and it was, as she says, assented to in February. The assented Act reached the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development this week. Therefore, it would not be physically possible to have implemented the law before it was assented to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted the frameworks and dates both in the Budget Act and the anticipated dates in the Public Finance Bill then as it was. So this information was known, that when the law was passed, it would like that and they wrote to us.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that very useful information. I can now tell the House that by 1st April, as may have been announced, the Budget will be presented - [HON. MEMBERS: “On Fools Day.”] Government is always very effective on Fools Day as on other days. (Laughter) Government is not one of those that participate in the gimmicks of Fools Day.

In a nutshell, in spite of the shortcomings, which are rare and I must say I apologise for them, we will have the Budget presented by 1st April and we will catch up with the rest of the programme so that by 1st July, we will be implementing the fully approved new budget. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this, honourable members, I think that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come back tomorrow and tell us exactly what is going to happen because we should have approved the Budget Framework Paper by 1st February. We had nothing to approve because nothing was submitted. It is going to bounce back badly on us and we are going start doing things in a rush because you have delayed. We need you to come and give us a clear timeframe of how we are going to handle this in light of a two months delay. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am most obliged. We will come tomorrow –[Hon Members: “Who are you?”] Can I be protected, Mr Speaker? Somebody is questioning my credentials. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is his maiden speech. (Laughter)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, the other day I spoke.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was protecting you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I thank you. Colleagues, tomorrow we will come with a full explanation and show you how we are going to proceed thereafter. I want to assure you that we must have the budget completed and an appropriation done and completed by the end of May so that come 1st July, we can begin to release funds to the spending agencies so that we do away with the appropriation-in-aid. I thank you.

3.38
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I can see that all your answers are very positive and I think that we should expect the best because these are government assurances. My question is: what plans do you have for the health sector in regard to the overwhelming utility bills? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister has raised a very valid point. Currently, the money given to health centres is inadequate to pay for water and electricity in those facilities. Therefore, as a country, a government and as Parliament, we must do everything possible to ensure that utilities in government agencies are paid for. It is collective responsibility and Government will do whatever it can to get this achieved with your support.

3.40
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently court outlawed and in effect disbanded a board that previously enrolled students to higher institutions of learning for government sponsorship. How is it now going to be done in the following academic year when the Joint Admissions Board (JAB) has been disbanded by the High Court? I thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the law allows the Minister for Education to take the necessary measures and the minister intends to form a committee to handle that matter in the meantime.

3.41
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 1995, this country promulgated a Constitution and under that Constitution, the name of our army, which was the National Resistance Army, was renamed Uganda People’s Defence Forces. 

Is the Prime Minister aware that there is no UPDF officer who bears a UPDF number? I will give an example of President Museveni who is RO001 and I think Brigadier Oula’s number is also RO00 something. Can the Prime Minister tell this country and the House at large why we do not have any UPDF officer with a UPDF number? The numbers still belong to the National Resistance Army, which was a personal army founded by President Museveni.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy of the National Resistance Movement Government is to build on history while transforming for the future. Therefore, it is absolutely appropriate that the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces does not cut itself from its glorious history of the National Resistance Army. I thank you. 

3.43
MRS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question. There is evidence of poor performance especially in the rural schools and one of the causes is poor feeding. What plans does Government have to provide good food to these children? Will Government allow these schools to benefit from “operation wealth creation” since they have school gardens? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do encourage and Government encourages school gardens because they help these youngsters and prepare them to play their rightful role in creation of wealth through agriculture. With regard to feeding, division of labour is very clear; while Government takes care of some of the essential scholastic materials and pays teachers, parents should take the responsibility of feeding their children.

3.44
MR GEOFFERY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We nearly lost the lives of MPs and staff on the ICT committee on the Gulu Road because the contractors are carrying out construction without putting reflective signs on the road. After our vehicle passed, three vehicles fell in the ditch on the road. There was a bus from Sacred Heart carrying 67 girls, a vehicle from Ministry of Education and then another private vehicle. 

My question to the Prime Minister is: what is Government planning to do about these road contractors who are carrying out construction works on our roads without the required temporary road furniture in place?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is raising a very valid point. I did witness what he is talking about a week ago, when I was travelling at night on that very road. Without doubt, all contractors must have very clearly visible road furniture especially in areas where they are working in the middle of the road. 

We will ask the minister responsible for works and also the Police to ensure that the works on these roads are not death traps. The road contractors should clearly and visibly put posters that can be read by everybody so that people do not have accidents the way our colleague has described.

3.46
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I thank the Government for giving us seedlings and seed in our constituencies. However, this is the first week of March and I was in my constituency in Kyenjojo and they were asking me where the seeds and seedlings are. This season is short and if we do not give them the seeds early, they may not perform very well. 

I would like to ask the Prime Minister what plan Government has to make sure that we get seeds by next week so that the crops perform very well. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that Government has enough money and has been urging people to get seedlings and seeds as they are available for purchase. The honourable member can easily get a specific answer from both the Ministry of Agriculture and also from the NAADS offices because money is available and seedlings are available.

3.48
MS JULIANA AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware of some people who are extorting money from the community in Abim under the pretext that the Government is going to compensate people who were displaced by the LRA. 

Is the Prime Minister aware of what is happening in Abim? In December, everyone was being asked to pay Shs 10,000. Right now, they are taking photographs and they are demanding for Shs 5,000 from those poor peasants. Is the Prime Minister aware? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Definitely, the Prime Minister is not aware. Let me take this opportunity to alert our compatriots in the affected areas that Government is focussing on helping them to resettle so that they can live normal lives. However, there is no compensation being given to them as individuals.

3.49
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that many schools in Karamoja have not been coded and as a result they cannot get capitation grants and they cannot be allocated a ceiling for teachers? If he is aware, when is he going to have a remedial measure for this snag that has characterised the schools in Karamoja for so many years?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is fully aware of the problem. However, coding means readiness to pay. As the wage bill increases, the rate of coding will increase.

3.50
DR MICHEAL LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will remember that through a resolution of Parliament which Government implemented, we had expenditure to ensure that doctors at health centres IV and their deputies get their salaries enhanced. Is the Prime Minister aware that these doctors have never been paid that salary as per that resolution?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that doctors in health centres IV have had salary enhancement. As to the specific details, my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Health, and I can discuss. However, I must say that he has been playing a positive role in our joint effort to ensure that health workers are better remunerated and better treated.

3.52
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, road accidents are now claiming more lives than HIV and malaria and this has constrained the Mulago Hospital budget very much. I do not know why road accidents are not given priority. What strategies and measures do you have in your office to urgently curtail this calamity that is hitting Ugandans? Recently, a young girl who was going to report to work for the first time was killed as she was on a boda boda without a helmet.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ruhunda is raising a very serious point, which concerns all of us. It is true that we are losing many people through these accidents and some are also living with permanent injuries. Government is doing what it can. 

Nevertheless, the critical issue is to take preventative measures. We should ensure that people who are drunk, for example, do not drive or boda boda riders, who are helpful in many ways, are tested. You may remember that only two or three days ago, His Excellency the President was meeting boda boda riders, trying to get them organised so that they can be more disciplined. It is true that some towns in Uganda have taken a lead in organising boda bodas. I was recently in Mbarara and I was happy to see them reasonably organised. 

In a nutshell, we need to enforce the use of helmets. We also need to ensure that people who ride boda bodas are properly tested and they qualify to ride. Therefore, enforcement by the Police is essential in order to curb this. Sensitisation of the public is also essential to cut down these accidents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, time is up. However, I have recorded the members for Buhweju District, Kasese District, Busongora, Moroto Municipality and Maruzi County. These are the people who I noted down but I am not able to call them up now. We will continue with this on Wednesday next week. I will now ask the Leader of the Opposition to say something.

3.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for answering the questions. However, there are issues that I think the Prime Minister should clarify.

On the question of procurement, I do not know whether the Prime Minister is aware that the procurement system we have in Uganda is very prohibitive. It interferes with service delivery, it delays things and it is costly. I think we should consider reviewing our procurement system. The President has also raised this matter and we agree with him that it is a bad system.

The Prime Minister has said that the President is a president for all Ugandans. We are glad to hear that. However, we would like the Prime Minister to tell the President to stop some of the things he says. When he was in Busia, he said that the money of the people of Uganda is his money. We all pay taxes, therefore it is all our money. He goes to places and says the roads are his. He says, “It is me who gives roads; it is my water; it is me who gives boreholes; it is my army.” 

It is not good for a president to say all these things. The army is for the people of Uganda. It is not the President’s army. We would like the President to stop saying those things because they are divisive and they are beneath the stature of the fountain of honour.

Mr Speaker, every other day ministries are being displaced. Hon. Alupo is looking at me; since she became a minister, she has been displaced maybe three times. Most ministries have been displaced; has Government got any plan to build these ministries permanent homes instead of having them move up and down? Ministries of Government have become nomadic. (Laughter) When you came to power, you found all these ministries in one place. 

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister talked about licences for miners. These licences are given out without consultation of the local people. There is no advertisement when they are being given out. They gave out a licence in my district for mining gold. Maybe some of the local people would have been interested but the district did not know about it. They just saw some foreigners arriving and saying the land now belongs to them and those are their mines. I think Government should respect the local people and ensure that they hold consultations with them. People become hostile because they are not informed.

On crime preventers, Mr Speaker, I had occasion to address crime preventers who were training in Kabalye. Actually, I said exactly what the MP for Kyegegwa said. These crime preventers are going to become crime creators. They masquerade in white T-shirts with the police logo in the villages. They masquerade as policemen and yet they are not police officers. What law set up these men? Where is their budget? The Prime Minister should tell us. 

We have been told that they are going to recruit 30 crime preventers per village; first consult the people. However, before you even do that, please bring the law here and we approve it so that we know who they are and how they will be paid. Otherwise, they are already crime creators because they have no income, but every morning they wake up with their white T-shirts and sticks and move around the villages.

Mr Speaker, a question was asked about the new Cabinet. The Constitution directs the President to make a Government reflecting national character. We want that to happen. However, if you have a Government where there are 20 Cabinet ministers – This is where the money is shared; the assistant ministers do not share the money. If you have 20 people out of 30 from one region and Bushenyi and Kigezi have more than half of that, it does not augur well for a country. It is something that should be addressed because our people from the north and east also want to belong to the Government - (Interjections)- and central, of course. 

On the export of doctors, the Prime Minister said our doctors are not employed so they should go and get jobs. Your Government has deliberately refused to recruit doctors so that we can have doctors in our institutions. You have refused! You have ceilings. Go to any medical or health institution in Uganda, the staffing is less than 50 per cent. This is because you do not recruit. You have those fake ceilings you have set up yourself and you do not pay them well.

Of course in Trinidad and Tobago, they are going to be paid maybe 10 times more than they are paid here. However, why don’t we pay our doctors well? Why should others pay well and we cannot pay our doctors well? Why do you train a doctor more than you train an arts student and you pay a doctor Shs 900,000 a month? Why should you pay a doctor Shs 900,000 this year? We must find a method of retaining our medical workers. Of course, individually they can decide to go and look for jobs; however, it sounds insensitive of you as Government to begin exporting doctors when you cannot employ doctors in Bugiri Hospital, which is supposed to have 16 doctors but has only one.

Mr Speaker, the budget cycle has changed and we are aware of that. There is supposed to be a development plan which we are supposed to be following. As we consider the budget, we are supposed to follow the development plan derived from the National Development Plan – Vision 2040. The Minister of Finance is looking at me; we have not seen that, but you are going to begin implementing your budget on 1st July. You have not done some of the things and we want you to do them.

There is the issue of utility bills in hospitals, especially water. We moved around many hospitals and found out that they have accumulated utility bills – electricity and water. Water is cut off in some hospitals because those hospitals will never pay that money. They will never get Shs 200 million to pay the bills. 

Government should do an audit and provide a budget to pay all these bills so that these hospitals can have water and electricity. You go to a hospital and there is no water but there is water outside in the town. You cannot run a hospital without water. In Bugiri Hospital, there is no water and there is no latrine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, this speech that you are supposed to give is not supposed to outline several other questions. It is supposed to sum up key policy issues. You are now just listing questions again.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: I am summing up, Mr Speaker. The last point I am raising is the issue of teachers. They have raised the issue of teachers’ ceiling. I do not know whether the Ministry of Education and the Prime Minister are aware that this issue of ceiling in schools is a serious problem. They use the ratios of children. You go to a school, which has seven classes from P1 to P7, and they have three teachers, including the head teacher, and you are pretending that you are giving these children education. 

I know that all of us here do not take our children to those schools. The Prime Minister knows that when we were growing up – him in Kabale and me in Lumino – we were going to school with ministers’ children. Today, it is impossible for a minister’s child to go to a school where a peasant’s child goes. We should address some of these issues. Let us have a minimum of seven or eight teachers if a school has got seven classes; that would be a proper ratio. Otherwise, there is a lot of pretence that we are offering service delivery and yet we are not. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before the Prime Minister responds to the issues and concludes the debate, Members for the following constituencies should be available next week because I will start with them when we start at 3 O’clock on Wednesday next week: Buhweju District, Kasese District, Busongora, Igara East, Akokoro, Mitooma, Kwania, Moroto Municipality, Serere District, Gulu District and Kaberamaido District. 

4.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I nod to the comments from my friend, Wafula-Oguttu, the Leader of the Opposition. I have just a few comments to make.  

Firstly, when President Museveni talks of “my government” or “my army”, let us understand the situation. The person, Museveni, is also the President of Uganda. Therefore, when he says “my government”, it is the President of Uganda talking. (Applause) That is very true because he is the one who formed the government. He has stood and been elected. That is in reference to his capacity as President and this can descend to a number of other things.

Secondly, when he says that, it does not mean that it is not “our government” or “our army” -(Interruption)- There is a time constraint, my brother. Let me give way for my brother Nsubuga.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Prime Minister, I think let us be serious. These are national issues; you cannot say “my army”. The reason why I asked you that question is because we transited from a personal army to a national army, the UPDF; therefore, a President of the country cannot say “my army”. 

You can say “my money”, I do not mind because it could be his money from Rwakitura. However, when you talk about a national institution like the army, how can you say “my army”? Mr Prime Minister, I think let us separate national issues from personal property. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, many comments have been made and one of the classic ones is, “my constituency”. (Applause) I need to make this clarification: we did not transit from a personal army to a national army. The National Resistance Army was not a personal army; it was a liberation army of the people of Uganda.

There was the question of nomadic offices. I think that is a legitimate point. We are by law trying to do everything possible to have our offices as Government. 

On the question of licences, I said that Government, through the minister responsible for minerals, is coming up with a Bill which will regulate the relationship between three important actors: one, the people who own surface land rights – peasants who own the land; two, people who have gone into mining but in a small way; and three, those who come in a big way, the big miners. A Bill will be coming soon to regulate the relationship between those three categories and I think the chaos that you made reference to will come to an end.

We have explained the issue of crime preventers. Let us support community policing and the shortcomings of the crime preventers will be sorted out.

The national character of the reshuffled Cabinet: Let us focus on one thing, and that is service to all the people of Uganda. This will remain the focus of Government - to serve all the people of Uganda irrespective of where the minister or the Member of Parliament comes from.

The question of doctors not being recruited: The recruitment of doctors is restricted by the budget that is available. Increasingly, Government is allotting more money as resources become available so that our compatriots who are doctors and nurses can be recruited to serve in our hospitals and health centres that are currently undermanned. I thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. Next time we will manage the time better and we will always get these issues responded to. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have members of Kyenjojo Town Council. They are represented by hon. David Muhumuza and hon. Timbigamba Lynda, the woman representative. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

4.12
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the second reading of the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can you do it again. Would you like to move a motion for second reading?

MRS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the House -(Laughter)- the Bill’s second -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled “the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. The motion I now propose for your debate, which will be in relation to the principles of the Bill, is that the Bill entitled “The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. That is the motion I propose for your debate, which starts now. Each member will use three minutes. If there are no debates - oh! Let us receive the report from the committee. Mr Chairman, you should have been nearby to proceed quickly.

4.13
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here to represent the chairperson of the committee and I have been given authority by the chairperson to present the report.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I present the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012. However, before I go ahead with the report, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee. I would also like to lay on the Table the Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and the Principle Act - the Trade (Licensing) Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Bill is already property of Parliament and the Act is an Act of Parliament. You do not have to lay them on the Floor again.

MR SSIMBWA: The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was read for the first time on 30 October 2012 by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House pursuant to rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In the process of analysing the Bill, the Committee discussed the Bill and received views from the following stakeholders:

i) Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
ii) Kampala City Traders Association 
iii) Kampala Capital City Authority 
iv) Urban councillors from Makindye Division and the Division Town Clerk of Nakawa.
v) Uganda Local Governments Association 
vi) The Private Sector Foundation Uganda 
vii) Uganda Clearing Industry and Forwarding Association 
viii) Bank of Uganda 
ix) Uganda Law Reform Commission

The committee held a consultative session with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives on the Bill.

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill seeks to -

    i. amend the Trade (Licensing) Act to streamline the procedures for the licensing of trade and make them consistent with the Government policy on trade liberalisation and the obligations of Uganda under the East African Community Common Market Protocol on free trade, free movement of goods and services and lifting of trade barriers. 

    ii. clarify the businesses that are required to obtain licences; to change the validity of a trading licence and for related matters.

    iii. clarify the inconsistency created by the law in section 8, which exempts persons who are licensed by their regulatory bodies from obtaining trade licences, by making a clear distinction between licences issued by regulatory authorities such as the Bank of Uganda, Uganda Law Council, Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, Engineers and Architects Registration Board, since these are licences to ensure that the persons under those bodies are qualified and competent to practice those trades or professions.

    iv. create equity in the licensing of trades and businesses by removing the exemption referred to in (iii) above.

    v. provide for every licence issued to be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of issue. 

    vi. provide for a licence to be issued by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in the case of hawkers or traveling wholesalers operating in more than one local government, to save the hawkers and traveling wholesalers from having to obtain a trading licence from every local government.

Mr Speaker, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

1. The East African Community (EAC) Customs Protocol does have annexes, which state the timing of liberalisation of trade in services. Care should be taken not to open up faster than the commitment Uganda made. 

Furthermore, the Protocol sections may not be implemented if something is considered of health, security and public interest. Development of some sections of business and reserving it for locals is something of public interest. This Bill should not leave room for implementing such interests. There is need therefore to realign the Trade Licensing Instrument with the EAC Common Market Protocol to ensure consistency.

2. Pursuant to Constitution Amendment No. 11 of 2005, Kampala acquired a special status as the Capital City of Uganda and was to be administered by the Central Government. In essence, Kampala as a geographical area ceased to be a local government and can no longer be administered as such. Therefore, the committee recommends that for purposes of Kampala, “Minister” should mean the minister responsible for the Capital City as defined in the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010.  

There should also be a specific provision for Kampala Capital City Authority since Kampala is no longer a local government entity and is now governed and administered as/by a statutory body corporate. Accordingly, all sections making reference to local governments should have a reference to Kampala Capital City Authority.

3. Section 7: Offenses and Penalties

It states that, “Every person who contravenes any provision of section 5 commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand shillings or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve months or both.” 
The committee recommends 48 currency points instead of 10 currency point as this is in other sections. 

4. The committee further looked at sections 13 and 18 on the duration of trading licenses and hawkers’ licenses not transferable. The committee recommends that instead of the licence expiring on the 31st day of December, the licence be valid for 12 months from the date of issue. This should also be applicable in Section 21 of the Act, which is on the duration of travelling wholesalers’ licences. 

5. Section 30: License Fees, Sub-section (2) 

Where it is stated that the Minister by statutory order divides businesses in a city, municipality or town into two grades, the committee recommends that the grades should be four, that is, A to D like it is in the neighbouring country, Kenya. 

Justification: This will enable many categorisations based on the location of businesses; for example, different areas have different market dynamics.

In conclusion, the position of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is that this Bill is necessary for development and regulation of the trade and industry sector and should be considered by the committee of the whole House with a view of having it passed into law. 

For purposes of addressing the various concerns of the sector stakeholders and having a broadly acceptable law, the committee has proposed some amendments for consideration by this House. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair. Honourable members, the motion is now properly before you and we can have a general debate on the principles of the Bill. The contributing members will have three minutes each.

4.22
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, Mr Speaker, I rise to oppose the proposal of the committee to the effect that the licence issued should be for 12 months from the date of issue.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that for entities which collect these licensing fees, it forms part of their budget. It arises out of their projections in some instances, like non-tax revenue. This means that if the non-tax revenue is to support the budget of an entity, it is out of a projection. So, if you are to issue a licence and it is going to run for 12 months from the date of issue, it will cause confusion to the entity in as far as the expectation of non-tax revenue is concerned. 

The most prudent thing to do is maybe to do calculations so that you could say that a licence of 12 months in this area would cost this amount of money. As the year moves on, the responsible officer would then be in position to calculate and know that for you to trade in a particular area for the remaining period, this is the fee you would have to pay. That would seem an administrative issue, which does not need Parliament to legislate. It would be a question of prudence by the entities in those respective areas.

Having said that, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to say that other than that, I have perceived the intention of the Bill to be good; I give support to the motion and I support other aspects of the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will join my brother to thank the committee for the recommendations. 

If you remember in the budget process we make budget proportions. That is, what do we intend to earn and how do we intend to spend it? We have to carry out tax assessment; if we have to do that, it means that we need to calculate according to the business that is going to be carried out. We assess and say that such amount of money is supposed to be earned out of this business; this amount of money is supposed to be put there as a license. We then calculate per month so that it can be easy for those collecting the tax. 

If we just say that it will be according to the time you have started the business – let us say, someone has started the business in December, and then consider December to December. It will not be prudent for the government to know how much it is supposed to collect and how much it is going to spend at that time. I thank you.

4.25
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It will be important for Parliament to look at mechanisms that can bring informal businesses into formality. Then we look at how we can raise reasonable revenue as Government.

In light of that, any mechanism that therefore can deter informal businesses from turning into formal ones will not help the poor  struggling Ugandans who want to improve their status. In the report of the committee, I heard a proposal that they are substituting 48 currency points for 10.

We know that in this country, there are very few individuals who have businesses whose capital is above Shs 500,000. In my village, people operate on capital of Shs 200,000, or even Shs 100,000, including tomato seller, who can operate even on capital of Shs 20,000.

To put a penalty of 48 currency points, this is the equivalent of Shs 960,000, considering the currency point at 20,000. It would therefore be unfair for us to move that far. The proponents of the 10 currency points were in consideration of the various – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Ruwenzori solidarity, thank you very much for giving way. Right now, we are also looking at how to attract the informal sector into the pension scheme.

This is extremely important for a country to expand in our financial resources within the economy, and increase the saving culture. This means that when they make those prohibitive costs, then they are also going to kill this other aspect of the savings. As such, I support your point, honourable member.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you hon. Ruhunda. In tax collection, we must be careful about sending many people away from the tax bracket, and having more people evading the taxes. In my view, looking at the nature of the businesses that we have in this country, most of the prohibition are within the means of the people who actually do small businesses.  As Government, we would even benefit more; we would have more people coming to the tax bracket, and willingly paying the taxes.

I therefore wish to propose that, the 48 currency point proposed by the committee is very prohibitive. What we can only do, if we must really increase these prohibitive kind of tax, we should double the 10 currency points, and have it at 20 currency points. That is the proposal that I would like to move. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That proposal will come very well when we go to the provisions of the Bill. Let us first deal with the principles now.

4.30
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee. The hawkers and the travelling traders should be licensed by the Ministry. I can imagine a hawker from Mitooma travelling to Kampala to get a license. I do not think that this is in the best interest of the Ministry generally. Unless the Minister assures us that the Ministry is going to decentralise this so that these people will be able to get the licenses regionally. Otherwise, I do not think that this Act is in the best interest of collecting taxes and assisting our people in engaging in trade. I thank you.

4.31
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with the committee’s recommendation, regarding the duration of the trade license. The hawkers’ license - I have listened to my colleagues led by hon. Mwiru. Their argument on ensuring that all licenses expire at the end of December was based on re-aligning the budget, so that Government is able to predict the amount it will collect out on licenses.

That argument collapses, because we know that the National Budget here does not end in December. It runs from July to June. If you want to use it as an argument, you cannot sustain it. It is easy for any budget entity to predict its revenue depending on the previous year’s practice and others.

I would also like to believe that when any business person goes for a license, you do not get it for one month or two or three months. It is actually for the period of one year, from the date you have paid. The committee makes a correct recommendation, which we should sustain.

Secondly, regarding the grading of the licenses, the Bill proposes two grades whether it is in a town, municipality or city. I again agree with the committee. It is not possible to categorise businesses into two grades, even if they were in the same location. 

The different volumes of trade and businesses – the different places within the same location will require that you have different categories of businesses. I therefore think the chairperson of the committee is correct. We need to look at three or four grades, and this will be sustainable.

Finally, Mr Speaker, regarding the need to re-align the Bill to our ESC Common Market Protocol, this is an interesting recommendation, but it is in principle. I hope the chairperson will be able to guide us as we go into the details, so that we can know exactly which parts of the Bill are not in line with the ESC Protocol and make the right correction. Thank you Mr Speaker.

MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating this report. I think the committee has done a good job. I will concentrate on section 30, where the committee is talking about licensing, and particularly the proposals to amend section 30 of the principle Act.

I think that is what the hon. Magyezi who has just left the Floor was talking about, in regard to grading or grades for licensing. We have of recent had a number of investors coming to the country and given licenses to do business in this country. Most of the investors come to manufacture or to produce large scale items. For instance, in the steel and iron industry, we have seen the steel and tube, roofing’s and the like and lately Tiang Tang Group of Companies. I do not know whether it is the right time for the Ministry to begin thinking of Ugandans. 

When investors come, they should be able to work closely with the locals. The main interest I am sure the President has been courting investors to come to this country to create jobs and employment opportunity for the people of this country. However, we have seen a situation where the investor sets up a factory somewhere and opens up a wholesale unit in other places and also goes ahead to open a retail unit. A scenario in this could be where the investor puts up a factory in Jinja, opens a distribution unit in Kampala and then a retail unit in Arua. 

In this chain, you only find either the relatives of the investor or the natives of the investor. You will not see any Ugandan in this chain of trading stores. My request goes to the Minister together with the committee – is this is not the point where we should tighten the loose points? Let the investors produce and allow Ugandans to partake of these businesses in the line of trading. It is not right for us to be termed in to consumers when we have been hoping that the investors who come to the country will create job opportunity. 

The only job opportunities available now are in metal fabrication. The youths go and buy the metallic items, cut them into pieces to make doors, gates and the like. However when you look at the real business where money is involved Ugandans have not benefited much.  So would the committee together with the Minister in charge like to help this country in alleviating this problem because most of the proceeds from this kind of business is normally repatriated and not reinvested in Uganda? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.38
MS BETTY AMONGI (FDC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on two issues. Firstly, in the Bill, it talks about dividing businesses into city, municipalities or towns. When you look critically within cities, for instance, if you go to Kampala city you might assume that you can categories all the businesses in Kampala in the same category. However within Kampala city, there are some traders who are sitting on the verandas of others especially women. In most cases they do not have trade licenses because they are selling simple goods like tomatoes, onions and vegetables; but they are within the city. The same is happening in other towns. 

If you say categories of traders in Kampala city are the same, I do not think you would have addressed the specific interest of each of the traders in Kampala. For instance, if you go down town of Kampala like Owino, you will find various categories of traders. You will find pharmacies of wholesale, retail and many selling various things. To me, it would be better if you categorize not only under city or town. 

The committee proposal under categorization from A-D is good, but the committee does not tell us what A – D categories mean since we need to address each of the categories being mentioned.

The second is particularly on the meaning of the terms “Hawkers” and “Wholesale travellers” that move across - a local Government should get a license from the Ministry of Trade. I think that is also a problem. I would like to give an example of Lira; Lira is a big town in Lango sub region. There are many wholesalers who move and sell in nearby districts within the sub region. The same can happen in Karamoja, Bugisu or Ankole and the like each of these sub regions. 

If, for example, you say if you are a wholesale hawker or a wholesaler traveller, you should get specifically licensed from the Ministry. That can cause a problem; it will mean this person has to travel unless there is a framework to decentralize the Ministry of Trade at District level where traders can obtain a trading license; that can work. However, it is to be obtained at a National level. The perception of the framers of the Bill are looking at the hawker’s that leave Kampala and go to rural areas –(Member timed out.)

4.42
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have observation on section 13 where the committee is saying the license will only be valid until the 31 day December and later on it should be valid for twelve Months from the date of issue.  We need to amend it and say that the license should be valid from the date of issue that  run with the calendar year or the financial year, say up to 31st July -(Interjection)- so that when the license is given, the town or municipality will collect revenue within the financial year and it will expire with the financial year. 

If you say from the date on which the license was issued, then you will give a possibility of municipalities or town councils losing some revenue within a period where the business person has not taken the license because he/she can stay for four months then takes it in the fifth month; the local government or the municipality will lose revenue. We should say that it start within the financial year, not December, but for twelve months. But to stay without paying the license for five months from the date it is issued- this is the problem we have with the third party insurance –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Hon. Tonny. The clarification that I am seeking from you is in respect to the dates and time frame that you gave. You talked of the calendar year and tagged it to 31st July. I would like to seek clarification as to how 31st July fits into the calendar year, vis-à-vis the financial year.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I actually made a correction on the financial year and not calendar year because 31st December is the one for calendar year. Maybe you did not pick me well. Mr Speaker, the committee also made an observation that we need to go slow with amending our - (Member timed out.) 

4.45
MR BOAZ KAFUDA	(NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good report about this field. 

I have two issues and the first is about considering the date of issue of the trading licence. I agree with the committee that it is really fair. In this country, we are trying to create a conducive environment for the traders and investors. If we say that we are going to consider - I may start a business almost two months to the close of the calendar year and I will be issued a licence for the whole year.

A trader will be cheated for almost eight months because the calendar year will be closing in two months. Mr Speaker, it is better to consider the date when that trading licence was issued and this will support the traders –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Kafuda. Mr Speaker, it is not a constant factor that all businesses will start in January. Consider a business person who starts his business two months to the end of the calendar year, as hon. Kafuda said. You will not penalise him because he has started a business late. That could be the time he has got the money to start business.

In such a circumstance, it would be prudent for the chairperson of the committee to explain to this House how they are going to handle those individuals who may begin businesses maybe one week towards the end of the calendar year.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu, for giving way. Honourable member, you are asking for information on what will happen. Some of us have been tax officers in these local authorities. If somebody starts a business in March and you are telling him to pay for that financial year, which is July to June. At the end of June, you will start a new year and charge him another licence for the new year; he will end up paying twice.

It is the same for the January businesses. In my opinion, licencing is a continuous exercise and we need to protect our business people. Therefore, let the person pay for 12 months with effect from the start of his business. That is as clear as that. 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, colleagues. The date of issue is very important most especially in business. You will be cheating the traders. 

Secondly, there is an issue about the trading licences of hawkers and travelling wholesalers. Mr Speaker, we have been trying our best to make sure that we look for sources to support the local government. If we take that money to the ministry and it is centralised, we shall be denying these local governments the local revenue –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, hon. Kafuda, for giving way. Actually, this is why time and again I rose to get a slot because if the ministry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, then why don’t you wait since I am calling you next? Why don’t you let the Member finish?

MR KAFUDA: Mr Speaker, there we shall be denying local governments some sources of revenue and right now, most of them are being built up by this local revenue.

I do not see any problem for a person paying local revenue in form of a trading licence in Kasese and also in Kampala where they have another shop. Therefore, if we centralise that payment, we shall be taking the local governments back. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, this debate has three minutes.

4.52
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Coming from a municipality that has challenges with hawkers, I am extremely worried about this provision of a licence to be issued to hawkers by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. It will be very disastrous for us in the Local Government. 

Many of these hawkers, who are manufactured here in Kampala, come and displace the local business people. They sometimes parade their goods outside the shops. For example if you look at the new markets which have been constructed, the people in the markets are complaining that these hawkers come with similar goods. They do not pay rent; they just spread their goods outside. Having a licence from the ministry will make them more powerful and superior compared to those who are receiving their licences locally.

It will cause a lot of problems if the enforcement officers go to evict them or use their local force. There will be legal implications because the law is protecting them. I urge that we expunge this from this Bill.

4.53
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This amendment to the Trade (Licencing) Bill is a very important development. Over the years, we have been complaining that doing business in Uganda is extremely expensive because there are so many licences. A report of last year authored by the Trade ministry showed that we have over 289 licences to be issued if you are going to do serious business in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, this Bill may be sufficient to deal with many issues of harmonisation. First of all, there are licences to do with regulation and there are licences to do with revenue generation. I do not know whether this Bill before us provides that difference and is going to harmonise the different licences - those of monitoring, quality assurance, different from that of revenue. 

In this amendment report of the committee, they mention about the medical practitioners, the engineers and the architects also being distinguished from other bodies that are going to pay licences.

It would be good that today, in this Trade (Licencing) Amendment Bill, we ensure that the number of licences for a business are minimised and the number of licences to do with revenue generation are also harmonised. The number of licences to do with quality assurance - for example, if you issue a revenue licence to a business, does that mean that that business can produce any goods or can sell anything?

Therefore, in this Bill, we should make it clear and harmonise to reduce the number. In Uganda today, they say that it takes a minimum of 32 days to licence a business. It is 32 days to three months; Rwanda does it in three to seven days. Does this Bill help this country in terms of reducing the turnaround time between registration and starting of the business?

Secondly, the issue of licencing also must be understood in the context of safety and security. Does this new Bill take cognisant of the new development in the East African Community and the world at large that licencing goes further? We have just been talking about registration of persons and the national identification. To what extent is this Bill going to help this country link with other issues of concern to do with security, safety and consumer’s interest.

Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, when we go to the specifics of this Bill, we should keep these three issues in mind; the issue of security, regulation and revenue and we must be able to distinguish amongst the three aspects in terms of discussing this Bill.

4.57
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. In section 20, the Bill requires the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to provide a licence for hawkers and travelling wholesalers operating in more than one local government. However, the clarification that I seek is about the wholesalers and hawkers operating between local governments and the Kampala Capital City Authority. Which ministry will be in charge of providing the licences for this category of traders? I would like to get clarification on that.

Secondly, the market dues have really been operating very well and I support the committee on this and say that we should continue with these market dues because it will help us when we come to categorising the traders.

Mr Speaker, when you move around, you will find that some traders are not stable in their businesses because of this problem whereby everybody is placed at the same level. You find that a trader today maybe is trading in second hand clothes and another day he moves to another business because he feels that the amount of money being charged is a lot. I really support the committee on this and on the decentralisation of licences. Thank you.

4.59
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I just would like to agree with most of the reports that they have given.
However, one thing I would like to implore this House to appreciate is that despite several local governments charging the trading licences depending on where the person has established the business, I have experienced a situation whereby you may be charged very close to the financial year but at the same time, that is what the law says.

However, the way local governments make assessments on their taxes, sometimes they have also not followed the financial years. They have followed the beginning of the year that is probably 31st or 1st of January and then they close as per the calendar year. These connections right now are being contracted; they build on contracts and thereafter the contract runs until after December and when it expires, they put new people.

Therefore, I suggest that in circumstances where a person is establishing a business probably in October, let the charges be calculated such that the person is not charged the whole period of 12 months. He could be charged only two months and thereafter, he can run the other remaining part of the year. For, that is the time he has established the money to open up a business.

Secondly, there is also the issue of allowing a person establishing a business from several areas or districts; I think it is okay for the local government to assess this person the trading licence. By the time you establish that you can have a business in Mbale, Busia and Kampala though the mother company is based in Kampala, it means you are going to consume the utilities of those areas that are going to be established and you are going to make profit. 

Therefore, it is okay to allow those other areas where a person has identified a business opportunity to charge a trading licence. The basis is all those people to develop money that can help to develop their areas of origin and to support the local councils of those areas.

The final aspect, Mr Speaker, is based on how we manage hawkers. Hawkers may not basically be charged trading licences but in normal circumstances, most of these local governments have been working along with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. They have laws that have been established where they charge them - probably within a municipality, they set up a small roadblock which charges those people at entry some permits before they enter the market to begin their sales.

Therefore, such circumstances are one way in which they have collected money from hawkers moving around –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have some responses on the debate?

5.04
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I will respond to a few issues. The essence of the trade licence is basically to establish a conducive environment for the development of trade. The process will be based on the criteria to meet all the basic conditions, conducive to promoting trade; for example location, hygiene standards and requirements.

Trade licencing is not and should not be considered as a revenue collection mechanism or an NTR but the ministry will be working with the local authorities and Kampala Capital City Authority to ensure that the regulatory functions take procedure over revenue collection –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable minister. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister; she asserted that actually, this is not being considered as a revenue aspect per se. What is it then if it is not a revenue aspect and what is the intent of this Bill therefore?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say per se also? (Laughter)

MS KYAMBADDE: Per se, Mr Speaker, it is more of a regulatory tool than a revenue collection scheme. 

They talked about the travelling wholesaler. In the Bill, it means that a travelling wholesaler who is traversing one district to another, in reducing the cost of paying in each district, - normally those who operate in the same district are licensed by a CAO or a town clerk but if you traverse from one district to another, then you are supposed to pay for license in another district.

On the issue of the distribution chain –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. Hon. Minister, what would be wrong with an individual holding a valid trading license from a local government and he moves with it for example from his district to another. What would be wrong? Why would the other local government not recognise this, knowing that it is a valid trading license? Thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, there was an incident of the travelling wholesalers within Buikwe District but indeed they were doing retail and therefore, they were competing with the local retailers. They were even selling a little a bit lower than the retailers who pay licenses. While we legislate on this, how are you going to prevent this unfair competition of the travelling wholesaler who may predate on the market of the retailer who is even licensed? 

MS KYAMBADDE: First of all, a wholesaler who is not operating in a particular district would not be allowed to operate in another district –(Interjection)– yes that is a regulation. 

On the issue of distribution, the promotion of the distribution chain is to create opportunities to a wider spectrum of businesses to benefit from the trade distribution channels. We are presenting a policy on this matter to control dealers or manufacturers who manage the whole chain and this will be a national policy on distribution of goods. We are presenting it to Cabinet.

On the issue of hawkers’ licence, when you look at section 16, it has provided for conditions for hawkers’ licence including areas of operation and the kind of goods to be hawked. It prohibits hawking in delicate goods. The hawkers’ licence is very restricted to control competition with other traders in premises and markets. (Interjection) But that becomes a local trader. That is all, unless my chairperson has any other issues to address. Mr Speaker, I pray that this House adopts this report.

5.09
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for the guidance and comments you have made about the report. First and foremost, the issue of a trading licence, the minister has ably informed us that this is a regulatory tool. Thus, for us to look at it as revenue source distorts the whole picture of a trading licence. We should look at a trading licence as a regulatory tool.

Secondly, my colleagues talked about the issue of assessment - the grading. Today when we talk about the grading, we are not talking about grading into cities, municipalities or town councils. The grading is within these cities and municipalities but currently, there are only two grades. You are either in grade A or B and if we leave it at that, it implies that people are obliged to pay what they cannot afford depending on their businesses.

What we are saying is that instead of having for instance only two grades in Kampala, let us have grades A, B, C and D and this is done by the minister in consultation with the local government. It is the local governments who are consulted by the minister and we have put it in the law so that it becomes legal and mandatory for the minister to consult with the local government to form those grades, so that we promote businesses rather than killing them.

On the issue of penalties, section 5 of the Trade Licensing Act talks about a penalty of those people who are not allowed to trade in areas where they are not allowed to trade. It talks about people who are trading in goods that they are not allowed to trade in. Take an example of a Chinese who trades in cabbages, an Indian trading in pancakes; so, we are saying that instead of that person trading in goods that they are not allowed to trade in and paying Shs 10,000 as a penalty, which is little money, we are increasing it to 48 currency points so that it becomes prohibitive for those people not to trade in goods and areas that they are not supposed to trade in.

The issue of penalty comes in line with section 5 of the principal Act.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like the chairman or even the minister to answer; how will you address unfair competition or predatory behaviour of big businesses of travelling wholesalers? You are dodging it. Please help me. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I am not dodging it but its time is coming on my personal Order Paper and I will answer that question of the travelling wholesaler. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the moment to answer. You cannot answer it twice.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, the other issue that I also want to respond to is the issue of the hawkers, travelling hawkers and travelling wholesalers. The principal Act provides for travelling wholesalers and hawkers. The Bill is trying to bring a new dimension; that the local hawkers in the local authorities remain as business people in that locality.

For the travelling hawker, we have modified the definition of the travelling hawker in the Bill and the report. The travelling hawker is that person that moves from one district to another. What are we trying to cure? No district authority or local government can allow a person to trade in that geographical area without paying for a trading license.This is cumbersome to people who are involved in this business. 

What we are doing now is that instead of you being charged from each district as the taxi touts do, let us have one license that allows a person to travel while doing business but not stationed; and that is what is provided for in the report. They should not be stationed in one area or in one district but we have them today. They move from one district to another district; they are not paying for a trading license and are being –(Interjections)- let me finish on the trading licence. 

MS KAABULE: I thank you so much. If you have a hawker and he gets a single licence, how do the respective local governments benefit if a licence is paid once? 

MR AYOO: Mr Chairperson, a hawker is a hawker -(Laughter)- whether wholesale or retail. 

Hawkers are sometimes commission agents of the big businesses and when you issue them with one licence and tell them to go all over Uganda and do business and yet you are also saying that the trading licence is a regulatory tool and not just a revenue tool, there are interests of those who are trading and doing business in a particular area and they should be protected. While they pay revenue there, they should also get opportunity to do business and that is why they had to remove them from the barazas in Kampala city to allow people get into the markets and have orderly business.

When you allow them to move, first of all, do you have the capacity to regulate and licence all these hawkers that would come up?

Secondly, what is your interest with the businesses that are spreading? Do you want them to kill other businesses? I thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to interest the member on section 20 of the principal Act. This is not a new invention. Section 20 talks about a Travelling Wholesalers Licence, which has been existing. What is the modification now? 

The modification is two-fold; one is that we are providing for this wholesaler. We are changing the definition because the earlier definition in the principal law, when you talk about a travelling wholesaler, he or she had the liberty to sell and act as a retailer in any way and that is what the principal Act was providing for. We are now changing the definition of a travelling wholesaler.

Two, they have been doing this business without paying any trading licence. They pack their merchandise in vehicles and stop at trading centres, sell and go away. Now we are changing the definition to ensure that travelling wholesalers only sell to retailers and not to the final consumer.

We are also changing the definition of a travelling wholesaler to include that he should not be stationed in an area. They should just come, sell to the retailer as a distributer and then go away. 

We are also making the penalty prohibitive in the Bill. It is prohibitive in such a way that if somebody contravenes the provisions of the law, then the penalty they are supposed to pay is also higher. We are not introducing something new in the Bill but only reinforcing what has been in the principal Act and the same applies to the hawker.

When we go into the real provisions of the clauses, we can get the exact figures of the penalty and that is what we are providing for in this Bill. Mr Speaker, please allow me get the last clarification.

MS KAMATEEKA: If the licence is issued by the ministry, who is going to hold this person accountable? Who is going to check that the goods are according to what is licensed? Who is going to charge the penalty? 

The licence has been issued by the ministry but this person brings goods to the local government and yet the local government did not issue the licence. So who is going to check on what is being sold as was licensed and who will collect the penalty?

MR NZOGHU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ssimbwa, when we are legislating, we need to be real and need to look at the local circumstances. 

Having listened to you, I see that what you are actually proposing is not practical in Uganda because most of the hawkers are agents of established businesses. They normally collect those items in the morning to go and sell and then return what they have not sold in the evening. Such a proposal can only work in countries like the UK because the tax regime in the UK is not like ours in Uganda. 

I am therefore proposing that for our circumstances here, if we say that we are also going licence the hawkers, then we are actually going to face a scenario of double taxation because here, the hawker pays for the licence and the main person from whom the hawker picks the items in the morning will also have paid for another licence. So what is it that we are curing in this?

Secondly, when you say that we are looking at this Bill, it is more of regulation than a revenue aspect. I do not understand you, hon. Ssimbwa, because the various taxes that we could talk about there are products of regulation. So, when we say that these licences in effect are turning into revenue, we are simply being correct and precise. Why are you trying to differentiate between regulation and taxation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are beginning to discuss the provisions of the Bill. Can we agree on the principles of the Bill and then we can go to those details that need adjustment? Would that be a proper way to proceed because we are now discussing the actual provisions and yet it is done at committee stage? 

MR SSIMBWA: Let me conclude by making three points.

One, on the issue of differentiating between taxation and regulation, we need to consult the Uganda Revenue Act and see who collects tax and who could collect other fees like the trading licence fees. I think that would explain why I am emphasising that the trading licence is a regulatory fee and not a tax.

The other is about what hon. Magyezi raised. It is very vital. He asked about what part of the Bill talks about the East African Customs Union Protocol. When you look at section 5 of the principal Act and at the amendments that are meant to be done in section 5 of the principal Act, this is exactly where we are saying that when you look at the Common Market Protocol in parts D and E, it talks about issue of trade liberalisation and trade related aspects. This is where now we want to ensure that we bring in tandem the Trade (Licensing) Act with Part D and Part E of the Protocol on the establishment of the East African Customs Union. So, that is what we want to ensure that we do.

As a committee, we have so much interest in protecting the ordinary business people in the markets and those that are just beginning. That is why in the Bill, we have included provisions that are to do with who should pay the trading licence because with this current law, you find that some people are paying trading licences when they are operating in markets in Jinja and Kampala. 

We are putting provisions to ensure that we protect those people and we are requesting honourable colleagues to guide the local governments to ensure that these markets are gazetted under the Market Act so that we can protect our small traders.

Lastly, we are saying that this license should be valid for the entire 12 months; this is to protect those people that are starting businesses. People fear to begin businesses in the middle of the year or as the year ends because of the trading licence which is exorbitant. So, we are making it easy for them to begin at any time and expect their licences to go the full length of the 12 months. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to request that we support and pass this Bill so that we can regulate and promote trade in our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, the general rule on licences and those fees is that they follow the calendar year. That is the general drafting principle in those things. I wish the Attorney-General was here to help us with this. I have not seen a licence that is issued today and runs for 12 months. Most of the licenses that are issued by Government lapse at the end of the year - 31st December. I do not know whether you are creating a new regime in this one. I wish the Attorney-General was here to help us with this because my understanding of this is that all of them, whether for lawyers or who, it expires at the end of the calendar year. Even if you get your licence or practicing certificate on 30th December, it will expire on the 31st December. That is the standard rule; I do not know whether this is a new regime, I am just asking.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I think the practice has been different because we have different specifications and Acts of Parliament on this. For example when you insure your car, if they issue it in February, you will have to wait until next February. It has been varying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that makes sense, then it is okay.

5.27
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, there are two issues, which I want to highlight here. One, in regard to what the committee proposes, it has not given us a hint on how they would integrate the running contracts. So the business people who have their licences and contracts on are they not going to be inconvenienced? 

Secondly, I would also love to have in this proposal that we insulate this Bill in a way that today, we may have some pronouncements being made by even a Mayor or the President, saying we are actually stopping such and such kind of licence.

So, we need to go deeper to see how to avert such kind of scenarios. One may wake up and say the boda boda people should no longer pay licence. How are we insulating ourselves against that because it has an impact in operations as an economy and therefore, if we can handle it at this stage, the better for us. For God and my Country.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a key principle which we need to agree on. The issue of centralising licences for hawkers and wholesale travellers. To me, a wholesale trader who is travelling ends up actually being a hawker; a bigger hawker. 

When we talk about taking over the responsibility of the local authority, yes it may be for regulation but we have other laws; the Local Government Act section 80 clearly specifies licencing as a source of revenue for local authorities.

We also know that in these towns or cities they are going to- it is not just about regulation, it is about service delivery; they do access the services of these local authorities. Now if the honourable minister wants to take over their responsibility, there are two questions; One, do you have the capacity to licence hawkers? How many hawkers are we talking about, how can you handle them?

Two, honourable Minister, are you sure that you have harmonised this with the Minister for Local Government because we are entering a key policy area which can actually boomerang at the end of the day. Eventually if you do that, it means even in terms of tribunals and appeals, the hawker is aggrieved. That hawker must run to the minister. 
 
This is a key question in terms of policy which we need to resolve. I propose, hon. Minister that you leave the issue of hawkers with the local authority -(Interjection)- No, in the Bill you are actually saying, a hawker who moves between Mukono and Kampala must be licenced by the minister, and that one shall appeal to the minister in case he is aggrieved and they are very many especially for this region where we are; Wakiso, Mukono and Kampala. This is a big area we are tampering with. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.31
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Raphael Magyezi is raising a very pertinent issue. I would probably love to get to know the new definition of a hawker and what this travelling licence looks like and travelling from where to where? 

If I am a hawker in Tororo like we have many, you have given me a licence as a hawker travelling to Mayuge and when I reach Mayuge you then say, I am not a hawker here. I would love to know from the chairperson of the committee whether we are inventing or reinventing the wheel here because implementing that kind of legislation might be difficult. If you are saying I am a hawker and you are arresting me for noncompliance, even if I were standing, I would continue walking so that you see that I am actually a hawker. It just occurred to my mind -(Interjections)- There can never be - a hawker is a hawker by whatever name and there is no difference between travelling and walking. (Laughter)

5.32
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, some hawkers are seen and some of them are not visible. Maybe we should just leave this as a clarification. There are people who sell their things here in Kampala and then either through IT they circulate their products all over the country. Do we also call them hawkers? How do we call them because they just deliver? To me, they are really not visible. I am just going to deliver the goods in a specific location; how do you follow me up? Thank you.

5.34 
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I want to reiterate the definition of a hawker, the difference between a hawker and a travelling wholesaler. A “hawker” means a person who, whether on his or her own account or as a servant of another person, sells goods by retail other than in trading premises or in a market established under the Markets Act. 

A “travelling wholesaler” means a person who, whether on his or her own account or as a servant of another person, sells goods by wholesale other than in trading premises.

Mr Speaker, the hawker is licensed by the local government; we have amended it. It is not the minister. If we pass this law, we will be able to regulate these hawkers because they are very many. We would be able to control them and to formalise trade in our environment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the key distinction between the two terms is that one is “retail” and the other one is “wholesale”. It is as simple as that. With the hawker, the key definition is that they do by retail. The travelling wholesaler does the same kind of thing but on wholesale. That is what the law says. That is the distinction in the law.

MR SSIMBWA: Maybe, that is the definition in the principal Act. Now, in the report of the committee, we have added into the definitions, if this Parliament passes the Bill and the amendments, we have included – Mr Speaker, allow me to go into these details because it is controversial – in defining a hawker, we have inserted the phrase, “…while moving about” between the words “person” and “sells”. This is to differentiate between that vendor and the hawker. On the wholesaler, we have also included and inserted, “…while travelling and selling to retailers” between the words “persons” and “sale”. This is to make it clear that a travelling wholesaler only sells to retailers but does not sell to final consumers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with it when we come to those amendments, honourable members? We cannot solve that at this level. I know that it is important but we will not be able to resolve it at this level of the principles. Can we go to the actual provisions and deal with them there?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I am aware that whereas the minister and the chair are talking about the regulation, when we pass this Bill, the local governments are going to advertise these as revenue centres. People will bid and at the end of the day, there is going to be a contractor to collect revenue in those areas. As a ministry, how are you going to ensure that the enforcement of those contracts by local governments does not conflict with the position of the ministry?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, the Bill does not take away the mandate of the local government in collecting trading licence. The issue of determining trading areas, as per law, is just by the minister. However, the issue of collection remains the mandate of local government. The minister only comes in on two areas: a travelling wholesaler and the travelling hawker. Those are the only two provided for the minister but the rest of the trading licences remain the mandate of the local government to collect and utilise these taxes.

The other issue that we have looked at is that before, the minister would sit in Kampala and determine how much is to be paid by a trader in Jinja. However, in this Bill and in our report, we are providing that the minister, in consultation with the local governments of those particular areas, should decide even the rates. Therefore, we are not removing the mandate from the local government. We are only strengthening it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we satisfied with the debate on the principles of the Bill? Can I put the question to the motion for a second reading? I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR JOHN SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, the committee has proposed to amend Clause 2:

    a) In paragraph (a) by inserting the phrase, “…and city authorities” just after the phrase, “local governments.
    b) In paragraph (c) by inserting the phrase,”…and city authorities” after the word “governments” at the end of paragraph (c).

The justification is to cater for Kampala Capital City Authority and any other city authority that may be established in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal by the committee.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The cities in our law are actually local governments. It is only Kampala, which is a capital city. Therefore, if you would like to make the difference for Kampala, then you better add the word “Capital”. However, when you talk about cities, any other city that may be created is a local government. I agree with you but add the word “Capital” simply to make sure that we are talking about Kampala Capital City.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, do you agree with that improvement?

MR SSIMBWA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you now read it as you have conceded to, for the record?

MR SSIMBWA: We insert the phrase “…and Kampala Capital City Authority”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Kampala” or just “Capital”.

MR SSIMBWA: By inserting the phrase, “Capital City Authority”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, members? In now put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairman - 

MR MULINDWA: Mr Chairperson, I think we should not put “Capital City Authority” because in the near future, we are likely to get other cities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We should just say “Capital City” and stop there? 

MR MULINDWA: We put “Cities” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the reason this proposal is being made is that there will be cities. However, this particular exception is to distinguish the capital city from the rest of the other cities. That is the proposal to cater for, specifically, Kampala. Is that clear, honourable members? Member for Kasambya, are you now okay?

I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment in paragraph (b) by rephrasing the clause to read as follows:

In subsection (2) by rephrasing paragraph (c) as follows: “The trade carried on in any market established under the Market Act except trade in businesses that may be prescribed by the minister in consultation with the local authorities.”

The justification is in order to exempt small market vendors from the requirement of paying for trading licenses as they pay market dues while empowering the minister, in consultation with the local authority, to prescribe businesses that require trade licenses to carryout trade in markets established under the Market Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are you satisfied with that? Does it take care of all the interests? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, on page 2, we still had an amendment by repealing paragraph (f). The justification is that in order to require businesses licensed under any other Act, for regulation purposes, to pay for trading licenses for purposes of trade order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRERSON: This is still in Clause 5?

MR SSIMBWA: When you look at (c) in the Bill – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which paragraph (f) are you talking about, chairman?

MR SSIMBWA: When you look at the Bill, there is paragraph (f), which stops businesses that were getting -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are we talking about?

MR SSIMBWA: Clause 5(c) we are repealing paragraph (f) of the Act. This paragraph (f) is providing for those people who pay trading licenses from their regulatory bodies, exempting them from paying trade licenses and this is denying local governments money because they are prohibited from doing so.
So, under the report we are repealing paragraph (f) for them to start paying trading licenses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But are you amending Clause 5 by doing that or you want to amend the principal Act?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, we are amending the principal Act under Clause 5 by doing this. The principal Act under section 8, there is paragraph (f) and that is the (f) that we are repealing. But since we were considering Clause 5, which is amending section 8, we took it all together to also amend –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a new amendment, which was not part of this Bill and we need to handle it as a separate amendment to section 8 of the Bill. So, propose it properly and we deal with it; an amendment of section 8 by deletion of paragraph (f).

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, I propose that section 8 paragraph (f) of the principal Act be repealed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are still at committee stage, we had taken a decision on Clause 5 under which this particular amendment seeks to be housed. We reopen it by allowing further amendments to clause 8 of the principal Act. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, is this an afterthought? What you are trying to undertake appears like it is being smuggled in. What does the original Bill say? I just want some education.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, section 8 of the original Act talks about trading being prohibited without a trading license. Paragraph (f) says; “Any trade or business in respect of which a separate license is required by or under any written law.” We have businesses that pay a regulatory license like the medical and dental practitioners, the banks, who get licenses from Bank of Uganda and under this principal Act they were not required to pay a trading license.

Therefore, what we are trying to address is that local governments have been losing money in that line. We want to ensure that apart from paying their regulatory fees, they pay even trading licenses in areas where they operate.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairperson, the chairman of the committee is forgetting very fast. He had just convinced this House that this is not about revenue. This is a regulation and the exception created under the Act as is now is that they are regulated under those respective Acts. That means that the framers of the Act as of then were alive to that, that this is not about revenue regulation. They were saying that these professional bodies are regulated under those Acts.

For now, I would like to object to that proposal because it is like that we now want to get revenue from these bodies and it is the only justification.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, when you see the justification, “...in order to require businesses licensed under any other Act, for regulation purposes, to pay for trading license for trade order...” these words “for regulation purposes”, I believe it is the chairman’s or the committee’s invention and even also for “trade order”. And the examples, you have given, I am regulated as a practising lawyer, what I get is a practising license, which regulates me. I have to pay money in order for me to practise, to trade; even for a doctor, to practise is a trade.

Now, you are saying here that a trading license is different from a regulatory license. Is it a crime in this country to be a professional, that you have to be taxed twice? Is it a crime to be an engineer? (Interjections) I do not need information on this one. I understand why we need money to expand our revenue base but is it fair for someone selling bread and me, sitting in this office waiting for a client from morning up to evening - I could have not seen one - you do not see me as a trader, however, you see me as a person who has bad conduct and has to be regulated to be there. You pay first and then you pay for trading.

Mr Chairman, is this really what you intend to do? If you are targeting banks, you could say so but these professional bodies are not many and you can count them even in this House. You are targeting the medical doctors like the hon. Bitekyerezo’s clinic in Mbarara -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much my brother, hon. Oboth. Mr Chairperson, I run a clinic in Mbarara called Mbarara Medical Specialist Clinic. I am the boss but we are about -(Laughter)- I have another colleague but we employ about six specialists. 

We are paying money yearly; we pay rent and now, Uganda Revenue Authority is on my neck. They have made me a businessman. I have to make sure that I put returns in URA, so I pay. They are following me everywhere. I do not know the reason.

I also pay a trading license on top of paying money to the medical council. Therefore, we are being squeezed. I do not know why, as hon. Oboth has said, becoming a doctor, Mr Chairperson, is not a crime! However, to be taxed every day and everywhere - do I go to church and say, “I repent being a doctor?” Why don’t you tax me once? 

I thank you very much. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you for the very useful information, which was quite emotive at the same time. Mr Chairperson, we could be accused for conflict of interests but there are other professionals who are not able to be here. We need a clear-cut perimeter. If we are going to have this, law - I worked with government before I came here. This proposal was there before, why has it taken long? It is because of the other implications. 

The banks are making money; it is different because a bank is not a professional body. They are making money. They are trading. They only have a license to regulate them - minimum balance and other things by the Bank of Uganda. It is different from a professional body under -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Chairperson, I think hon. Oboth should bring a different angle because if he keeps on saying that these professional bodies are not trading, I want to say that you trade especially when you look at the lawyers in the chambers. This is purely business and they are making huge sums of money.

Therefore, to say that they are not trading, you beat my understanding of what it means. It is trading in a different direction. Maybe we need to define what traders making money is.

MR OBOTH: I have got the information and I am still alive in this House. I have not said that the professional bodies are not trading but what I am saying is that what they pay that you say it is for regulatory purposes and that they need to pay additional trading license - what you see in their practising certificates, whether a medical doctor or any other profession, is a practising license. (Interjections) Practising certificate, I own one, it is not what you are given. You are given that as a license for you to practise and that is a trading. If you want to get that money from these professional bodies, you can be able to align and make sure that money gets to government in one way or the other.

However, the way I see it, there are not many people who are going to support this position - (Laughter)- and anyway, that is the dilemma of speaking for the voiceless. I want to be on record that that is double taxation in this matter. (Interjection) I do not want more information. I am resting my case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this law has been in place. This provision was not proposed to be amended by the Bill. Is it proposed to be amended by the Bill? 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, Clause 5(2)(b) in the Bill -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is proposed to be deleted by the Bill. That means there is a shift in policy to deal with those issues; to amend in section 8 of the principal Act in sub-section (2) by repealing paragraph (c) and (f).

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairperson, I think what should be made very clear is that it is not that the professionals do not want to pay the license. What they are saying is that the license is paid to the professional bodies. Therefore, if government wants to partake on what is paid, then they should find themselves to the professional bodies. 

However, for you to leave to follow where the money is paid and you say, “Pay us the second time” that is when we think is unconstitutional. It is the same person paying this money twice. You would rather say that once the license is paid to the professional bodies maybe government shall be entitled to a percentage from what is paid. We are not saying per se the professional should not pay. A doctor, once he pays for that license, you cannot come to him for the second time and say that he should pay one more time.

That is why the argument has shifted from regulation to these professionals making a lot of money. We are saying that once they make money, they should pay for the trading license. However, they are paying to the professional bodies where you should find the money.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Chairperson, if we are talking about professional bodies, lawyers have been telling us that they pay to their umbrella organisation a practising fee. That is strictly practising fee for that umbrella organisation. Now unless we are going to also do the same to those in the educational industry, because we own schools, pay taxes and licenses.

If I go to a clinic in Kawempe North and I pay, why can’t I pay even for the license for me to trade in Kawempe? Please, let us pay taxes. (Applause)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, a school pays tax but I want the honourable member, the Imam of this Parliament, to tell us whether every teacher who is a professional has to pay every year to teach.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for that. They pay “Pay As You Earn” as teachers and I would like to also -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. Let us not confuse these issues. Everybody who earns money pays taxes, unless they fall within a certain bracket. Therefore, the payment that teachers pay on their salaries is different. 

What you are talking about is a professional who pays to the institution that regulates him, to pay certain money for him to be able to operate. Again, you are saying they should also pay another license. It does not mean that the firms do not pay taxes. They pay taxes. They pay taxes as per the business they do. However, now you are talking about license to practise. So, there is a distinction there.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairperson, it is not license to practise; it is license to operate in that locality. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I also understand that the issue we are discussing is that the professionals have got professional bodies to which they pay professional licenses. However, the local authorities and other authorities also have licenses, which need to be paid in order for them to provide services in the area where they are operating. You are operating in Kawempe, for example, and there are certain services that you enjoy in that area such as roads, street lighting, security and other services. 

Therefore, it is good practise to contribute to the area from where you are operating. It is just a contribution - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, if it already in the Bill and we have already voted on the clause, why should we propose another amendment to it? The chairman wants to propose another amendment and yet, we have already passed what we are discussing in paragraph (b) of the Bill. 

In sub-section (2) by repealing paragraph (c) and (f), we have passed it. What he is proposing is that it should be repealed but we have already done that.  Why are you proposing it a second time? 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, I withdraw and we proceed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Really, imagine all this time we have spent on something we have decided on.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairperson, on Clause 5 - I do not know why the chairman is quiet. There is an amendment he is proposing under Clause 5. That one is - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think he has dropped it. Let us move.

MR MAGYEZI: There is one of instituting an appeal authority. Mr Chairman of the committee, why are you quiet?

MR SSIMBWA: This is in amendment to section 11 of the principal Act. It is not the other one that we have already passed. This one is a proposal to amend the Bill by inserting two new sub-clauses, (6) and (7) just after sub-clause (5) to provide as follows: “The minister shall constitute an appeal authority in each local government or urban authority.”

The justification is to provide for the establishment of an appeal authority -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not called clause 6 yet. It is the way the report is written that is confusing because we have finished with the amendments to Clause 8. 

The one that is now being proposed and marked as Clause 5 is not Clause 5. They are proposing a new clause, which should follow Clause 5. That deals with an amendment in section 11. 

I do not know how that works. You are proposing an insertion by amending an existing section of the law. Why don’t you just house it as an amendment of the section, which is proposed in Clause 6? 

You see, the proposal to amend Clause 6 of the Bill, which deals with the amendment of section 11. Instead of trying to propose that it is a new amendment, why don’t you just propose those amendments under Clause 6 and we proceed?

MR SSIMBWA: I abide by your ruling. 

Clause 6

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, I propose that clause 6 of the Bill be amended by inserting two sub-clauses, (6) and (7) just after sub-clause (5) to provide as follows: 

    a) Proposed sub-clause (6): “The minister shall constitute an appeal authority in each local government or urban authority.”

The justification is to provide for the establishment of an appeal authority in each local government or urban authority. 

    b) Proposed sub-clause (7): “A person aggrieved by the decision made by the appeal authority under sub-section (4) may appeal to the minister.”

The justification is to provide for the appeal from the authority to the minister.

The committee, in addition to the above amendment to the Bill, proposed an amendment to the principal Act to include the following: “Proposal to amend the interpretation clause –“ 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No –

MR SSIMBWA: We leave it as sub-clause (7).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 6, which deals with amendments to section 11. Now, you want to use it to also amend section 1.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, just an insertion of sub-clause (6) and (7) as I have presented. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us deal with the proposed amendment in Clause 6. Clause 6 you have no problem. I am talking about the amendments proposed in Clause 6 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have an amendment to the proposed amendment?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee is proposing that, “The minister shall constitute an appeal authority in each local government.” How can a minister constitute an appeal authority in each local government? Does this appeal authority report to the minister or to the local government? 

I think where we have had tribunals and appeal committees - they are constituted by the respective councils. I do not see how the minister goes to Packwach or Bushenyi and sets up an appeal committee. 

Moreover, they are saying, if you are aggrieved with that appeals committee constituted by the minister, then you go to the minister. It does not work. I think under the minister constituting an appeals authority, the amendment should be that we leave this to the authority of the local government. Where there is a person who is aggrieved then they can appeal to the minister. I hope the committee chairman will agree with me on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you proposing? Who should constitute the appeals authority? 

MR MAGYEZI: The council; the local government.

MR SSIMBWA: We concede to that amendment and where the word “minister” appears, we put “the local government” to constitute an appeals authority.

Why we brought that proposal is that in the original Act, it was the minister who was only appealable to. Somebody in Kapchorwa and everywhere else was appealing to the minister. We felt it was not worthy for every trader to be appealing to the minister and the minister is final. We wanted a bridge in between the trader and the minister. 

We accept that where we have “minister”, we replace it with “local government” so that we have the principle of appealing and of arbitration.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The chairman of the committee is talking of appealing to local councils and yet, we also have the capital city authority. We shall also have other city authorities. I think we should also include those ones there.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I do agree with the amendment moved by hon. Magyezi. I also wish to propose further that for us to simply leave it open to either the local authority, or the local government would be an ambiguous aspect in this law. Premised on the fact that whether in the local authority, the accounting officer will be the town clerk and the accounting officer in the district will be the CAO. 

It would be prudent that you become specific and say that, “The accounting officer of the local government shall constitute an appeal authority” but of course, with the approval of council so that they do not muzzle their powers.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Chairperson, I am yet to be convinced as to whether there is no conflict of interest. If we say that the local councils or someone who is aggrieved will appeal and we all know that these taxes are meant for the development of those local councils and they are the ones we are telling that someone who aggrieved should appeal to them - I see some conflict of interest.

The councils are the body, they are organisations that are in need of that money and someone who is aggrieved is supposed to go to them – unless I am –(Interruption) 

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable colleague, I think you did not get us properly. We are saying that the appeal is to the appeals tribunal committee established, I agree with hon. Nzoghu, by the accounting officer, with the approval of the council. If you are aggrieved, then there is recourse and that is the minister.

You do not have to appeal to the same council. There is a recourse, who is the minister. I think we need to separate the arbitration process. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We need to follow, where is the first decision taken from which an appeal is required? Where is that tribunal in the law? In the parent Act, where is that process, from which you now would like to create an appeal process so that we know how to harmonise it properly?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, when we look at section 11 of the principal Act, sub-section (4), “Any applicant who is aggrieved by the refusal of the licensing authority to grant him/her a trading license, may appeal to the minister, whose decision shall be final.”

Therefore, we are saying that somebody in Kapchorwa who is refused to be granted a license, or he has issues, he must run to the minster in Kampala for an appeal. This is very difficult. Our traders cannot move from wherever they are to appeal in Kampala, where the minister sits. That is why we would like to bring in another tyre at a local government level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How do you leave sub-section (4) intact and then create a new sub-clause (7) to deal with what is substantially handled in sub-section (4)?

MR SSIMBWA: Under sub-section (7), we are substituting (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The existing sub-section (4) is proposed to be deleted by the Bill. Is that correct? “Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a license or revokes a license, the licensing authority shall, within 14 days, give reasons in writing for the refusal or the revocation.”

That is what is replacing – which one now? “A person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing authority to refuse to grant the trading license or revoke may appeal to the appeal authority constituted by the minister by statutory instruments”. Is that what you are proposing to amend?

MR SSIMBWA: Yes, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In your amendment, you are proposing by inserting two new sub-clauses (6) and (7) and not dealing with sub-clause (5) in the Bill. You have not done anything to clause 5 in the Bill. You are now proposing (6) and (7). So, we leave clause (5) as it is; won’t it contradict?

You look at the Bill and then what you are proposing, then see how to harmonise it. If you leave sub-clause (5) as it is now – the committee is only proposing additions(6) and (7); they are not dealing with sub-clause (5), which in essence is saying that, “The appeal authority constituted by the minister by statutory instrument.”

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairperson, by introducing the two clauses (6) and (7), if I am to move by a clear motion, I beg to move that sub-clause (5) of the Bill, be deleted to be replaced by (6) and (7).

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. From what has transpired, I see that it would be prudent for the chairperson to go and re-align his proposed amendment vis-à-vis this Bill so that then we are able to proceed in a manner that is consistent. I, therefore, wish to move that the chairperson is given more time, to go and re-align this work and then we can proceed next time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is coming to 6.30 p.m. and we need to have this harmonised properly. We will stand over this and start with it tomorrow. Please, look at it and harmonise it properly. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
6.21

THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Trading (Licensing)(Amendment) Bill, 2012” by considering clauses 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.23
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 March at 2.00 p.m.)



 
