Wednesday, 11 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I welcome you to this sitting. It was an oversight as we were doing the Order Paper; there is a motion by hon. Asamo, PWD Representative, Eastern, on some award and recognition that has been given to Uganda. She should be moving that motion as soon as we come to the time for motions. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate her to make that motion.

Honourable members, many of you will remember hon. Zachary Olum. He lost his wife this morning - Madam Aron Olum; she died in the hospital early this morning. All of you recall hon. Zachary Olum was the Member of Parliament for Nwoya County, now represented by hon. Todwong and he was also deputy minister for Housing in this Government and he has served in different places. I just want the House to know that he lost his wife this morning. Those of you who know his home or would like to come and mourn with him will be given direction. He lives in Ntinda-Naguru. That is where his home is and the body will be brought there tomorrow.

There is an urgent situation that is developing in this country and particularly in this Parliament that requires members to be sensitised and educated about the terrorist threat that is apparent in this country. A request has been made by the Minister of Internal Affairs for a briefing for Members of Parliament so that they remain alert about what could happen so that we all know what to do when situations like those arise.
A briefing is proposed to take place tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the conference hall and I urge honourable members to attend because it is important that you do. The briefing will take about 30 minutes only. Please attend so that you are armed with information that could facilitate your wellbeing should any situation demand such actions.

Honourable members, you will recall that there was a matter that came before the House when I started chairing Parliament. It was a matter relating to a petition from the people of Lwemiyaga. It relates to Kabeho LC I, Kinoni LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba LC I and Bigaga LC I in Birongo Parish Ntusi Sub-county, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule District.

We all recall that when I came to chair that day, what happened did happen and the House took a decision. So, for the last few days, we have been trying to see what could be done and this is now what I would like to communicate to the House. There have been situations that we have experienced when there are minority reports alongside the main reports of Parliament. It is within members’ rights to prepare and present minority reports if they disagree with the view of the majority. A member can prepare a minority report and attach it to the main report under rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure (2012).
The majority report is presented to the House followed by the minority report. Debate is called upon by the Speaker on either both reports concurrently or specifically on the minority report if it is a big divergence from what the main report says. When the minority report is considered first, the report is debated generally and the recommendations are adopted or rejected. Where recommendations are adopted, the majority report is amended to reflect the adoption of the minority report’s recommendations. 

Upon conclusion of the minority report, the majority report is then debated and the resolutions therein adopted. The Speaker normally puts a question for the adoption of the report as amended at the end of the debate. The debate normally takes place concurrently or if it is very diverse, you can debate the minority report separately. We have had cases in the oil debate when hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi made some presentation of minority views. We debated them exhaustively and we discovered that most of the recommendations that had been given in the minority report were actually captured in the Bill. So we finalised that.

What comes out clearly from this practice is that it is usually the Speaker that guides the process. When we come to the actual situation of what happened in this particular case, when the matter was called, I specifically called for debate on the report based on the motion that was on the Order Paper as was laid and read by the clerk at Table. I specifically asked for the debate on the matter and none of the Members stood up to debate or make any contribution. At this time, the authors of the minority report ought to have defended the report, which they did not. 

Furthermore, rule 209 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure (2012) specifically prohibits any attempts to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current session except upon a substantive motion for rescission by a vote of half of all members of Parliament participating in that decision. In that regard, therefore, once the Speaker puts the question on the majority report, the House may not consider that decision unless they comply with rule 209.

To rule otherwise would amount to introducing an unsustainable precedent contrary to the Rules of Procedure. There is no gap in this particular procedure and the Speaker’s discretion is not required or called upon. It would amount to rewarding absenteeism and late coming to the House if I should rule contrary to the rule. I so rule that this matter will have to come back following the procedure of rule 209 of our Rules of Procedure (2012). Thank you.

2.18
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am aware the rules give you wide discretion and it is not my intention to go against your ruling and guidance in this matter. However, the procedures that have been standing in this House are that Parliament pronounces itself on the minority report and it is disposed of and then we go to the majority report. In this particular instance, Mr Speaker, your attention in the chair was never drawn to the fact that there was a minority report that had been uploaded on our iPads.

Secondly, when the two were presented, we were given opportunity to go and reflect on the matters and we would resume debate at an appropriate time. 

Whereas I agree with you that it is not in the best interests of Parliament to reward absenteeism, a closer look at the Order Paper on that day shows there were various items on the Order Paper that were skipped and the members who had interest in this matter knew that you post the Order Paper for us to follow the business in the House. In this particular matter, the item was read first and we moved to the next item No. 6 because even the chairperson was not in the House and even at the time, Members were trickling in. If you rely on the cameras or attendance, you would realise that indeed at that point, Members were just trickling in and were few in number – including the committee chairperson himself. 

I am raising two issues; it was not our mistake but there was the amended Order Paper. Had we to proceed with the agreed Order Paper, the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Bill was there and we had really prepared. We were still searching on the matters of that Bill, well aware that we would reach the item.

There is no indication, Mr Speaker, and I am surprised that you are rewarding laziness. You ask the Frontbench and Members. Let us look at the Order Paper. I think for fairness, if indeed an opportunity had arisen and this House pronounced itself on the minority report, there are substantive issues within the minority report.

Lastly, my name was put into question and if you see the Hansard, it stands that I alleged that members were given $300,000. I wouldn’t demand too much from you, Mr Speaker but when the name of your member is dragged down the drain and you cannot invoke your wide ranging powers, you leave some of us in chagrin. 

I am also raising the question of the Order Paper. It is not for formality and that is why we usually put the Frontbench on spot for skipping the sittings when they are indicated on the Order Paper. Therefore, with all those considerations, it is my humble prayer to you and to the Members of Parliament that for purposes of justice, it isn’t in the best interests of this House to lock out people crying for justice, on a technicality.

I indeed pray that we reconsider this in view of the Order Paper which was amended - and why was it amended for certain items to be skipped? We did not go –(Interjections) - Mr Speaker, to that extent, I humbly seek your indulgence and that of the House that it was not laziness. I expressed my zeal; the writers of the minority report also did the same. Mr Speaker, you will never see this again, to see that members are running when a decision has already been taken on a matter. 

With your wide ranging powers, Mr Speaker, reconsider your position and I pray to Members because rule 209 has its own technicalities and we met you in your chambers – (A Member rose.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are giving information on a point of procedure? Honourable members, let us recapture these events. The Speaker on that day did not amend the Order Paper, if you read the Hansard. Today, I have amended the Order Paper to allow a motion that was not on the Order Paper to be brought to the Order Paper. On that day, we sequentially followed the Order Paper but because of the circumstances obtaining in the House, the absence of the chairperson to present the report, we were unable to proceed with those items. That is how we went to the next items but the Order Paper was never amended.

MR SSEKIKUBO: We skipped the items.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well that is not amendment; you are not able to proceed, so you go to the next item. 

Secondly, the Speaker’s discretion is exercisable where there is a gap in the rules and where the rules are unclear; where the subject matter is not captured by the rules; that is where the Speaker’s ruling can supply the deficiency in the rule and it becomes the rule.

In this case, I have stated that a decision was taken by Parliament and so there is no gap. What should have been the gap is cured by rule 209. The rules say a matter should not be revised at all in the same session of Parliament but the same rule says it can only be done so if you bring a substantive motion. Honourable member, your name was indeed mentioned but you were not there. Should I have stopped business to wait for you to come and answer before I move on with the business of the House? Please be fair to the Chair and also to the House. Those are the events. Please, honourable member, the Speaker is speaking. 

I have considered this matter; we have held consultations on this matter and we have come to the conclusion that the only way to solve this particular problem is to proceed under rule 209 and that is my ruling.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was the mover of the minority report and when the main report was presented, I also presented the minority report and it is actually clear in the Hansard that there is no debate that ensued thereafter.

On that day, when the report was disposed of, we were in a committee meeting of the same Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Actually that is why the chairperson, hon. Biraaro, was not in the House when you mentioned that matter at first. We were in a meeting of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, considering other reports. 

Also, considering the fact that I did go to the field, I put in time and effort to do this report, it would have been in the interest of all of us that a middle position is reached. If the chairperson had mentioned that the minority report was there and then you concluded the matter, I think it would have been fair. In the event that the chairperson was quiet about the minority report and yet both reports were not debated, it would be fair and in the interest of all of us to have a middle position. I thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Without seeming to appeal your ruling, a close look at rule 209, in my opinion, applies to a situation where a matter has been properly concluded in this House. I was in this House. The two reports were tabled, debate ensued on the majority report and then the Speaker deferred the debate on this matter.

On the following day, when Parliament convened, it would have properly concluded this matter if it took a vote on both reports. However, Parliament took a vote on the majority report and did not deal with the minority report. In my opinion, rule 209 does not suffice in this instance and I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that in the interest of seeking justice on this matter, we defer it, come to your office and find a way of proceeding in another way. 

I am of the opinion that rule 209 does not apply in the circumstances since Parliament did not properly deal with the minority report, which was before this House. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear; at the time the matter was called, the chairman spoke for a while and that is when the name of hon. Ssekikubo was mentioned - It was not that it was called and voted upon immediately. No, there was a process. 

I called here in this House, “Is there any debate on this matter?” There was no debate. The Speaker cannot manufacture a debate. The chairperson, who was chairing a meeting in which the honourable member alleges to have been, is the one who presented the report here. I wonder where the Member was when the chairman reported. I suppose he adjourned the meeting before he came here. I wonder which other meeting he was attending. Honourable members, my indulgence is within the rules. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. What is the fate of the two reports? Whereas the Hansard is very clear, the chairperson never mentioned the existence of the minority repor,t but this minority report was uploaded on Members’ iPads and was tabled before this House.

Whereas we are going over a matter that we say was concluded, what is the fate of the minority report? Let us look at how we have been proceeding on these matters. A vote must have been taken on the minority report, disposed of and you put a vote on the main report. What is the fate of the minority report? It is not in the Hansard and the chairperson never bothered to draw your attention to the fact that there is a minority report that has to be first dealt with before we proceed to take a vote on the main report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not over burden this matter, which is actually concluded.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you are chairing; you are not supposed to be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said let us not over burden this debate. Let me give you guidance, hon. Ssekikubo. I have listened to you and decided. Let me state it again clearly, for your information. Honourable members, the matter that was on the Order Paper was a motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LCI and Bigaaga LCI in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-county, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District. I called for debate and there was no debate. I put the question and it was passed. Period!

Honourable members, if you know the rule on how you challenge the Speaker’s decision, proceed under the rules but my ruling is, this matter was decided upon and we cannot bring it without a substantive motion. I am not saying that you cannot bring it; I am saying bring it back but use a substantive motion procedure. Next item. 

2.33
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker, this morning, the members of the fourth estate family, the press, were gripped with fear and uncertainty. In the face and age of information explosion, where we need experienced journalism in order for our people to have proper package of information, there were unconfirmed reports that the Parliamentary Commission had informed the members of the press that those who have stayed for more than five years in this Parliament as members of the parliamentary press corps are not supposed to be here. In other words, they have been chased away.
I felt that it was a matter of national urgency and critical in nature. The nation needs to know from your seat, whether it is now confirmed by the Parliamentary Commission that the members of the press who have stayed for more than five years are not supposed to be here. I know that the Parliamentary Commission acts on our behalf as Members of Parliament. When I was asked, I said I would reach the House and find out through the Speaker. Mr Speaker, is it true that the Parliamentary Commission has chased away members of the press, who have stayed in this Parliament for more than five years or not? People want to know.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is part of the proceedings of the Parliamentary Commission that a decision has been reached, I would have to consult with the Commission to see how to further proceed with that matter. Now that you have brought it to the attention of the Speaker, we will do further consultation on this and see how we move forward.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am in possession of a letter written by the Clerk to Parliament. It was written on 9 March 2015. It was addressed to news editors of various media houses. The tittle was, “Replacement of Parliamentary Reporters.” It is clear that the Parliamentary Commission is entering into the management of other media houses. It is clear that they are not considering experience and the training of various journalists who have had to address and report on parliamentary proceedings.

I was a minister of Parliamentary Affairs in 2001 to 2003. I brought trainers from America and England to train the fourth estate on parliamentary reporting because there was a big gap. Most of these people who have been in Parliament long have had the training; they know the Rules of Procedure, how the committees work and the proceedings in Parliament generally and they can properly and correctly report.

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the Clerk to Parliament, who deals with parliamentary business and cooperates with other institutions in handling matters of our citizens, to bar and interfere with the running of other media houses and make a decision in a matter that should have been handled administratively?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Clerk to Parliament is an institution. I am sure by the time they authored that letter, they had done their own consultations. What I have said here as Speaker is that I will go back, look at it again and then see what can be done. That is all I can say because I was not part of the meeting that came to that decision. Now that the matter has been brought to my attention, we will deal with it. 

You cannot ask if the Clerk proceeded correctly because procedural issues only relate to the Members in this House here. I cannot rule the Clerk out of order when she is not in the Chamber here. It was handled administratively. Let us do the same. Let us not make it a big matter here. 

2.40
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a mess in our transport system. The boda bodas in this country, in my view, are considered to be unsafe and the biggest cause of road causalities admitted in Mulago and many other hospitals around the country. 

In the same vein, the most admissions in hospitals all over Uganda are due to motorcyclist-related accidents. Highway robberies are also facilitated by boda bodas. Reckless riding is also harmful to other road users not only in Kampala Capital City as our central business district but also outside Kampala.

Walking into the surgical unit of Ward 3B of Mulago Hospital, there is no way one can escape the feelings of pathetic depression that surround Mulago Hospital. Patients that occupy most of the beds, covered with bandages stained with blood are as a result of accidents.

I visited Mulago hospital last week and I saw this and I was in total disbelief. Of recent, there has been news in the media of the sudden death of a young girl called Rebecca Nandujja aged 24 years. She was killed in a boda boda accident and there are many unreported cases of boda boda fatal accidents all over the country. The question that I would like to bring to the attention of this House goes to the Ministry of Works and Transport; to explain to us the measures being put in place to address the road carnage accidents caused by motorcyclists in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works, would like to respond to this issue - (Laughter)- you are just in time.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I heard the question because I was in the corridor and that is why I came in. The problem with boda bodas needs a multi-dimensional solution to reduce them in Kampala including the introduction of high capacity vehicles and light train systems in the towns in order to carry the mass movement of the people.

The laws which are in place are enough; it is a question of how they are being managed. Truth be told, the boda bodas are a complex situation. Therefore, the Ministry of Works and Transport together with Kampala Capital City Authority, we are planning to expand the roads and secondly reintroduce the passenger trains, which I am sure will start within two weeks so that people who are forced -(Interjections)- yes, in two weeks. I am the minister in charge – (Laughter)- there will be passenger trains. The aim is that most of the people moving on boda bodas do it because of the traffic jam and they want to move faster.

There are those also who come from areas which are not easily accessible by the commuter vehicles. Therefore, the solution to this problem does not only lie with the Ministry of Works and Transport. We can coordinate but it is requires multi-disciplinary action to ensure that all these motorcycles are brought to order -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the “New broom in the new role” for the response he has made to this very important question, which is in the House. We do appreciate that many of our youths are unemployed hence their engagement in this trade. However, I also hasten to say that I think it is more than what you are stating. I ply this road of Jinja especially before you reach the yard; the boda boda operators are a real nuisance. They even inconvenience you under the watchful eyes of the police. A situation where vehicles are cleared to fly to Jinja, a boda boda man comes from nowhere and he tears through. Yet in a situation where the police could have arrested, they do not even swing into action. When you ask them, they say “These are untouchable people of somebody; these are voters.” I do not know whether my colleagues have experienced such a scenario. At the end of the day, don’t you think, Mr Minister, that it is more of commitment on your part as Government? I talk to you as a member of the Executive; I think you need to do more than what you have just told us.

In serious countries like Kenya next door; go to Nairobi, in the centre; Rwanda - very clean roads, you will only find a boda boda with a helmet on and the passenger wearing a helmet and they abide by the traffic regulations. However, here the impunity is too much and it is being anchored by the powers that be. You need to go to Cabinet and discuss these matters objectively and save the people. When you go to Mulago, there is a ward called Senke and that is where the causalities - everyday people are dying and rotting there. Please – (Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am forced to give this information to my brother, hon. Wadri, that every time I sit here, I always hear Members blaming boda boda riders and they never blame motor vehicle drivers. These are the most indisciplined people in Uganda. They never respect the pedestrians, anybody and boda bodas simply because - I want to give you this information. I have just been to Malaysia and motorcycles are more than the number of human beings -(Interruption)

MR ODOO TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The subject matter we are talking about is the boda bodas. It surprises and shocks me when I see my colleague talking of drivers of vehicles. Is he in order when we are talking about boda bodas and he brings the subject of vehicles?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, as Members of Parliament, my dear brother, the issue that we are dealing with here as the minister states, is a multi-sectoral matter. It is a matter that requires multi-disciplinary action. We should not only look at the boda boda riders. These are young people who are looking for a living –(Interjections)- yes, these are young people and we must defend them simply because they are not in Parliament here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now?

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to give this information -(Laughter)- to my brother, hon. Wadri, that as you talk about our young people and the means of transport that we have in Uganda, you should not only look at the boda boda riders but the whole thing in totality. This is the information I wanted to give you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can we finish this?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Felix Okot Ogong for the mouthful information. I think you went a little bit beyond, but I appreciate it. Except to say that the example that I gave is about indiscipline in the usage of the roads and not adherence to traffic regulations; that is the root cause of all these things.

If these boda boda riders were people who were trained and they have got riding licences and know the traffic regulations, I think we would go a long way. But as long as it is a matter of somebody getting money, going to a shop and buying a motorcycle and mounts it from there and begins business without even going for road test, that is where the problem is - (Laughter)

The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is whether his ministry, in conjunction with that of Internal Affairs and that is the police, ever bother to check whether these boda boda riders have got valid riding permits which they have obtained after undergoing thorough training and adherence to the traffic regulations. That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I agree, honourable members. First, I appreciate the situation that we are in and I agree that there are a lot of casualties not only in Mulago but in various hospitals due to accidents caused by boda bodas. At the same time, I also accept that these problems cannot be solved by only the Ministry of Works and Transport because the regulations and laws are in place.

On one side, how do we enforce the law because as we have said, it is impunity; even boda bodas riding on the pedestrian walkways, turning from anywhere they like. In most cases and from the statistics that we have, the riders or the so-called drivers do not die a lot. The people who mostly die are the passengers.

Now, I appeal to all of us leaders, the Executive  and everybody including the Members of Parliament in Kampala, is for us to come together, combine our efforts so that when the police impounds the boda bodas, there is no Member of Parliament saying, “Why are you touching my people?” We have to work together because if I touch the boda bodas and somebody in the central division says, “I want them to be in central division,” then it ends up being messy. 

Therefore, as we have started, we have to create alternatives first by reintroducing multi-transport systems so that people have alternatives to the boda bodas and we are starting with the railway.  I remember, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to come with an outline of what you intend to do to deal with this problem so that you deal with it in a more comprehensive way?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What timeframe would you need?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am not giving myself tomorrow because I will not achieve it. I want to be objective and realistic. I want to give myself three weeks in which I will bring that comprehensive paper. As I said, it is not an issue of only the Ministry of Works and Transport, or the police or local administration and KCCA - I have to bring all these people together so that we look for a solution.  I hope our Members of Parliament will enrich and support it so that we can bring sanity in the city.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have the minister come back with that comprehensive coverage in three weeks. 

Before we go to the next item which is going to be the Prime Minister’s Question Time - it is 3 O’clock; I communicated earlier about a request by the Minister of Internal Affairs to carry out some sensitisation session with the Members of Parliament, which cannot happen in the plenary and I have directed that we do it tomorrow starting from 10.00 a.m. in the conference hall.

It is about an urgent matter of the security of this Parliament and all of us that we need to be briefed about and how we are going to be advised on what to do when circumstances demand that we do certain things. Please, let us be there by 10.00 a.m. tomorrow in the conference room and the Minister of Internal Affairs with his team will brief us. It will take about 30 minutes and we will be done. So I request.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that when we closed last week, I had an arrangement with the people who should have spoken but were not able to. So, I am going in that order - member for Buhweju District. 

2.57
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minster, I hope you know that recruitment of health workers is around the corner. We have health workers bonded by the District Public Service Commission and those who have been supported by other partners like NGOs but they have not been paid well. 

The information I have got from my district is that these people are denied the chance of being recruited by the government. These are workers who have been working hard; they have been helping us in health centres II but they have denied them a chance to be recruited by the government. Hon. Prime Minster, I am seeking clarification on why these people who are qualified cannot be recruited by the government. I thank you.   


2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, recruitment in the Public Service is a public issue and I cannot see any Ugandan who qualifies to take up an appointment being stopped from applying or being considered for a job he or she is qualified to have. However, I will have a little more time with our sister and the Ministry for Health to be able to internalise better the point she is making reference to so that if necessary, corrective measures can be taken. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kasese District? Not around. Busongora South? Not around. (Laughter) Okay, Igara West.

3.00
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the Ishaka- Katunguru Road, which is a very important road for the tourism and development of that region. This road has been planned for, for the last three years. I remember that last year, this Parliament approved and passed a budget for this road. This year again, we passed the budget for this road. I was there last week but nothing is happening at all and it has developed potholes almost everywhere. 

Mr Prime Minister, the people from that region and I would like to hear from you what the plan of Government is for the Ishaka-Katunguru Road.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that that road is definitely important in many respects; tourism and connecting us to the rest of the region. Government has taken the necessary steps and advertisement for bids has been put up and at the moment, the ministry responsible is in the process of selecting the best bidder to do the road.

3.02
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is 11 March 2015 but the retired civil servants and teachers are complaining that they have not received their pension money for the month of February 2015. 

Can the Prime Minister tell this House and the nation why the retired civil servants have not received their pension and what the problem is? The majority of these pensioners rely on this pension for their survival.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that payment for pensions and money released was short of Shs 31.8 billion and as a result, some of the pensioners did not receive the money that they were supposed to receive especially for January and February. However, that mistake has been corrected and the Ministry of Finance has released the money and the Ministry of Public Service is already making payments, which are expected to be completed by Friday this week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mitooma - not around? Moroto municipality -

3.03
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to know from the Prime Minister what measures Government is putting into place to control the new form of child trafficking in Karamoja. As we talk now, a new form of child trafficking is taking place where parents take their children to the market during auction days pretending to be buying animals and the buyers of these children also go to the market pretending to be buying animals but in the process, you find them exchanging items and money for the children.
On 3 February, I was called by the Regional Police Commander over the interception of 16 children aged one to 15 years around Lulim and brought to the police together with the dealers who were produced in Court. So, what measures is Government putting into place to control this? I thank you.   

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother, hon. Aleper should be telling us what the community and leaders in Karamoja are doing to condemn and stop this trade in children. Nevertheless, Government is working closely with the other agencies of Government and the community in Karamoja to ensure that this modern slave trade stops. 

As hon. Aleper rightly said, the police are already engaged in investigating the matter. However, my appeal first and foremost, is to the political and civic leaders especially in Karamoja to publically condemn this and sensitise the population against this human trafficking.

3.06
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to demonstrate to the people in the catchment area served by the Soroti Regional Referral Hospital that Government is concerned about the prolonged deplorable state of the Children’s Ward in that hospital where sick children lie on the floor with cannulas in their hands, suffering from pneumonia without drugs. 

The Prime Minister is a medical person who would know better. Can he demonstrate that they are concerned - because this has gone on for a long time?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister, hon. Alaso, does not require a demonstration of concern but requires –(Interjections)- not an explanation but what she requires is to ensure that the children get their drugs.

Actually, one of the areas where Government has done well is making drugs available in health units. It is true that in some cases, there are some gaps and in those situations, if the National Medical Stores is informed well in advance, supplies would normally be made.  Nevertheless, since she has now raised this concern, I will ask the Minister for Health to follow up the matter and take the necessary corrective measures.

With regard to other facilities, the government programme of rehabilitating health facilities is very well known. It has covered many hospitals and Soroti Hospital will not be left out of this equation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Gulu District? Not around? Kaberamaido -

3.08
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to tell this House what Government policy on ambulances is. At the moment as we speak, the role of getting ambulances to health centres has been more or less left to the honourable members of Parliament in this House. What is Government doing to ensure that hospitals and Health Centres IV get ambulances? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, first and foremost, I would like to take this opportunity to salute honourable members of Parliament who have made generous contribution to the people by buying ambulances. This is a very significant contribution, which Government deeply appreciates. This is because it reinforces the government programme of ensuring that all health units have ambulances. Nevertheless, Government continues to procure ambulances to cover areas that are currently not covered and the aim is to eventually cover all Health Centres IV in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bubulo - not around? Isingiro District - not around?  Luuka - not around? Igara?

3.10
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, yesterday we were talking about mobile money. Today, the cost of running bank accounts in this country and in the region is the highest in respect to bank charges. They charge you for depositing, withdrawing, monthly fee, management fee; there are various charges and this really discourages people who would like run accounts in banks and the level of accounts in banks in this region is very low.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, what can Government do? We are aware these banks are regulated by Bank of Uganda and the sector was liberalised but if you are to run an account of Shs 100,000, all this money will go to bank charges. How will people run accounts in these banks and what can Government do to help bank account holders?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the concern of hon. Mawanda because it is true that when you look at your statement sometimes, it is difficult to know what has happened to whatever you may have been having in the bank. So, I think the market forces should really be able to generate an atmosphere where customers get the best services. 

However, in extreme cases, where there are distortions, Bank of Uganda, as a regulator, would be able to do their work. So, I think it is only fair to say that we will ask the Bank of Uganda through the Minister of Finance to look at this complaint in more details to ensure that the people of Uganda are getting proper and non-exploitative banking services.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have finished with the list that was an overflow from last week. We now start afresh from Tororo Municipality.

3.12
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, today morning, while I was at my work place, I did meet a group of gentlemen who seemed to be pretty strange to me but they knew me very well. And they asked me to raise this issue today. North Bukedi Co-operative Union has been advertised for sale by a financial institution. This union is one of the very few functional and existing cooperatives in this country and it has been advertised for sale. North Bukedi encompasses ginneries, a commercial building, which is in Mbale on one of the main streets. 

Unfortunately, the minister for co-operatives comes from the region, the minister of industry comes from the region and the gentlemen seemed to be desperate and asked me to raise this issue on the Floor of Parliament to our ministers and Members of Parliament, Tororo being part of Bukedi I would like to ask the Prime Minister; Is he aware that North Bukedi Co-operative union is up for sale? If he is, then what is Government doing? Would it take hon. Nandala-Mafabi to go and stand for a bail out from Government? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am fully aware that the property of North Bugisu Co-operative Union is –[Honourable Members: “North Bukedi.”] North Bukedi, sorry. Bugisu has its own other issues which we are acquainted with. (Laughter) Hon. Kataike raised this matter with me and I have also discussed the matter with the Attorney-General, who is already taking up this matter to see if a rescue operation can be carried out.

3.16
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few weeks ago, I saw an article in one of the dailies of Uganda saying that the Ministry of Education is bringing forth a policy that is going to instruct all UPE schools to run pre-primary sections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say primary section?

MS OSEGGE: Pre-primary; that is nursery and probably day care. Mr Speaker, it worries me knowing the current situation that we see in this country as far as UPE schools are concerned; I do not see enough facilitation or adequate supplies for these pupils to be able to study. I wonder if the ministry has put in place facilities, polices and human resource or the environment that is required to manage pre-primary, knowing that even the UPE section is inadequately supplied. May I know what arrangements are in place? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, what appeared in the media was not an accurate statement of Government position. It is not correct that Government is going to start pre-primary section in all our UPE schools. It is not correct and I have had discussion with the Minister of Education and we have agreed that a corrective statement be issued so that the people of Uganda can know what the facts are.

3.18
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Four years ago, Government promised to give all LCs I bicycles. To some districts, deliveries were made, but I want to inform the Prime Minister that my LC I leaders in Dokolo have not yet received the bicycles. May I know from the Prime Minister whether the promise to my LC I leaders was real or just hot air?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ogong’s question - the promise was absolutely real. That is why 52 districts have already received the bicycles. Government is looking for money to be able to buy bicycles for the remaining districts. As soon as money is got, the bicycles will be bought. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kwania, Adjumani and Agago.

3.19
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the underlying principle of the Common Market is for countries to specialise in goods and services that they produce with the most efficiency, and enjoy economies of scale where they have absolute advantage. May I know from you which goods and services Uganda has prioritised, is promoting, supporting and we are producing so that we can enjoy the benefits out of specialization?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda continues to champion the deepening of the East African integration. In terms of benefit, Uganda is taking advantage of its agricultural potential to add value to our agricultural products so that we can increase value of what we are exporting in the region. 

Apart from that, we are also taking advantage of our young industrial sector. We are already selling quite a number of things like cement, mabati and others to our neighbours. Therefore, Uganda is poised to take maximum advantage and benefit from the East African integration.

3.21
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wish to know when the Government will table constitutional amendments, aware that time is not our best ally. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this matter has been raised in the House quite a number of times. The concern is very well known. As I have had occasion to say, in as far as constitutional and electoral reforms are concerned, the National Resistance Movement – the government side – has spearheaded all the reforms in this sector and will continue to do so. To that end, Cabinet is having a special session this Friday to conclude discussions on this matter so that the reforms can subsequently be presented to Parliament.

3.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very sure that the Prime Minister knows that Acholi sub-region also have people who keep cattle. In other words, the Acholi people are cattle keepers. You are very much aware that during the long dry season, usually the water that the animals drink dries out. I would like to ask the Prime Minister what the Government’s plan is to get valley dams dug in the Acholi districts so that during the dry seasons, the animals are able to drink water. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, water for production is an ongoing national programme. The Acholi sub-region is not excluded from this national programme. (Laughter)

3.24
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last year, the Government of Uganda embarked on an ID registration exercise. A number of Ugandans were recruited to help out in the registration of persons. Quite a number of them did their part and were promised pay of not less than Shs 300,000. To my knowledge, the people of Lyantonde were paid Shs 30,000 for the entire exercise for all those months they worked, and this is not just in Lyantonde District. My question to the Prime Minister is: when are you going to pay these people the balance? Are you going to pay their balance; if so, when and how soon? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the balance for all those who have worked will be paid. In fact, the payment has already started. Those who have not been paid are going to be paid full amounts of their money. The process is already ongoing.

3.26
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the current weather condition. When I went to my constituency, I discovered that some homesteads have been suspected by the locals as being responsible for the delay of the rains. (Laughter) Some of the homes have even been burnt down.  

May I ask the Prime Minister to enlighten us on the weather forecast? When are we expecting the rains, so that more houses in my village are not burnt down? (Laughter) Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have already had some rains. Authoritative sources from the Ministry of Agriculture and the ministry responsible for water say that by the end of this month, there will be plenty of rains. (Laughter) I hope that Isingiro will not miss out. (Laughter)

3.28
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is on the issue of security. You have not accounted for where hon. Kipoi is. Since the Speaker is saying he is going to alert us and the Minister of Internal Affairs is going to brief us on security measures, I would like to thank the Police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs for putting down the uprising or rebellion in Busoga. However, it would be appropriate if the Government came up with a statement on one Member of Parliament, hon. Stephen Dede, who was arrested a week ago and has not been accounted for. 

He is a Member of Parliament; supposing he was not a Member of Parliament? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, isn’t it your responsibility to inform the country of what rebellion was coming up, how the Police put it down and how that Member of Parliament was involved and to what extent he was recruiting rebels? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true our brother is in the hands of the Police. He is assisting them with the investigations that are going on in the Busoga area, where we have lost a number of compatriots. Let us wait for the law to take its course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if a member of this House is arrested, this House deserves to be informed formally. (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I completely concur. This matter was discussed yesterday and we agreed that a formal statement should be made in this House to ensure that the august House is informed. Secondly, it was also agreed that in future, if an unfortunate incident of this nature is to happen to any Member of Parliament, the Speaker of the House should also be informed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.30
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you might be aware, Isimba Dam is under construction and one of the consequences or effects of this project is the influx of mosquitoes in this area. This arises from the damming of the waters of River Nile. Mosquitoes have proved to be a menace to the people of that area, particularly the villages of Nampangi, Nakakandwa and Isimba in Kamuli. 

This problem was envisaged in the EIA report and the necessary remedies are included in that report. We would have expected the relevant ministries to have taken action but so far nothing is being done. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister what measures are being taken to address this problem?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this morning at the Cabinet meeting, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere informed Cabinet of these two issues, especially mosquitoes and the road congestion that have emerged as a result of construction of Isimba Dam. Cabinet directed the Minister of Health to deal with this issue of mosquitoes and also directed the Minister of Works and Transport to deal with the issue of road congestion that has developed. So, directives are already on the way and we expect quick action to take place.

3.33
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Prime Minister about the poor academic performance in rural primary schools. 

As you are aware, Mr Prime Minister, Ministry of Education and Sports runs a thematic syllabus, where from P.1 up to P.4, children are instructed in their local language and yet when they reach P.7, they are put at par with children who studied from nursery level up to P.7 in English. This, therefore, puts them at a disadvantage when it comes to answering questions at PLE which they are expected to answer in English. Realising that these rural schools do not perform well because the children fail to comprehend and answer the questions correctly in English, is there any plan by Government to reconsider this thematic syllabus policy so that these children are instructed right from P.1 up to P.7 in English to improve their academic performance? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not know how English can be a language of instruction in P.1 in the countryside where people are meeting the language for the first time. I think we need some bit of time before they can be able to understand the instructions in English. 

Nevertheless, the observation made by hon. Wadri that the performance in our rural schools is significantly lower than in urban centres is a legitimate point. The Ministry of Education and Sports is looking at all the variables that are responsible for this with a view to take corrective measures.

3.35
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. In this country, we have been having a lot of expired drugs and foods in supermarkets and shops. However, we have an institution, the Uganda National Bureau Standards (UNBS), and I think they have two very important questions to answer.

Firstly, I am not going to ask what you are going to do, but when are you going to equip UNBS to carry out their activities properly? It is very understaffed and yet you know in Uganda we have porous borders. They do not have the capacity to oversee all those borders and even go to supermarkets and see what food items they have. 

Recently, Members might recall that Tuskys was closed because it had rotten food and Shoprite in Naalya was also closed because it had rotten meat - the meat had a lot of maggots and black flies. Can the Prime Minister tell us when he is going to employ more staff at UNBS? They only have one pickup for the whole country; when are you going to address their transport system for the whole country? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the concern of the honourable member is shared by many of us. Government, through the responsible ministry, is building the capacity, both human and material, of UNBS and other agencies that are responsible for regulation and checking on standards, including agencies responsible for checking on the counterfeiting of drugs. Therefore, we are carrying out capacity building and we expect that this problem will be contained with the improved capacity that we are already working on.

3.37
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have always made commitments here on the Floor of Parliament in response to Members’ concerns in the form of questions; how far have you gone with implementing the already made commitments? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the questions that have been answered, Government has made commitment on the basis of the programmes that Government has in the implementation of the manifesto of the Movement. We do not come here to invent and create new things and give commitments. The things we have promised are generally within the framework of our pledges to the people of Uganda. At an appropriate time, we will be coming to account for the commitments we have made and how far we have gone in implementing those commitments. 

3.39
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have the Banyankole Kwetarana Co-operative Society and this society was affected by the liberation war. The Government promised to pay them but they have been slow in doing this. We went there and they were lamenting and yet they are doing tremendous work in terms of value addition and supporting the coffee growing areas of Greater Ankole. When is Government compensating them because they have heard that other people who were affected by the war are being compensated? When are you compensating them?

DR RUGUNDA: Some part payment has been made to a number of co-operative organisations. We are fully aware that some of the monies have not yet been paid. The Attorney-General’s Chambers, which represents Government in handling these debts, is dealing with the matter.

3.40
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I speak to the Prime Minister, I am speaking to three persons in one: You are a doctor, Minister for Health and above them all, you are the Prime Minister. In 1962, the population was only eight million and we had Mulago Hospital. Today, the population is 37 million, where is your hospital to cater for this big population? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: If my sister is referring to the number of health institutions, the critical point is not necessarily the number of health institutions but also the capacity, the staffing and the equipment. Government embarked on a big programme of rehabilitating institutions, expanding, re-equipping them and improving the staffing levels.

3.42
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the community tree planting programme was started in 2009. It is supported by Government of Uganda and implemented by National Forestry Authority. The objective of establishing this was to restore the bare land, forest reserves and bare fields and increase the wood fuel and also timber in the country, given that the current deforestation rate in Uganda stands at 92,000 hectares per year. 

During the process of my monitoring tree hunting in my county, I discovered that the demand for seedlings is quite overwhelming, over and above what National Forestry Authority can supply. The current statistics indicate that in 2010/2011 4000 seedlings were requested; in 2011/2012, 7.2 seedlings were requested -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask the question.

MR OKELLO: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know how Government is thinking globally but also acting locally to fix this problem of inadequate seedlings that are required by the community.

DR RUGUNDA: The act of planting more trees for our country is to be done by, first and foremost, the population and then also Government. Therefore, with the question of seedlings, we expect the private sector to play a critical role in making seedlings available for commercial purposes. You may also know that for some of the leading crops such as tea, coffee and so many others, Government has put aside a lot of money to purchase seedlings from private producers. 

On the issue of planting trees, while we have the National Forestry Authority, there are also many private seedling producers available for planting trees. I would encourage colleagues in their respective constituencies to encourage private producers of seedlings so that they can be readily available at affordable prices to the population. This is so that our country can be covered by trees and forests. 

3.45
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question. 

Early this year in Koboko District, young men and women were recruited and trained as crime preventers. They are now doing their work but they are asking who is supposed to pay them; is it local government or the Ministry of Internal Affairs? When are they going to be paid? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the crime preventers for being very patriotic and being available to help the country in confronting security challenges. They have done great work but I am afraid there is no budgetary provision for their assignment because they are doing patriotic voluntary work. 

3.47
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two years ago, the President of this country commissioned Kagulu Rock, which is found in my constituency, as a tourist destination. This was part of Government’s effort to boost tourism but also by extension, address the issue of socio-economic transformation. 

The President also, at the same function, pledged to extend a power line to Budiope in particular, but generally to Budiope East Constituency. This was part of tourism support infrastructure. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two years down the road, the electricity is not forthcoming; what do I tell the people?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if there are delays in implementation or in power being provided, the logical thing to do is to contact the department responsible and get specific attention. In that respect, the Prime Minister will also play a role in ensuring that the problem is addressed. 

3.48
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (Jeema, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year, Parliament passed a resolution to terminate the services of UMEME. I would like to know how far Government has gone in this direction. (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, UMEME has been discussed quite a number of times in this House. I am aware that a decision was taken but I do not have up-to-date information as to the implementation of the same or the position of Government on the matter. This is one of the issues that this august House will be informed about in due course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Can I now have the Leader of the Opposition. 

3.49
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to thank the Prime Minister for answering these questions because the Opposition is not satisfied with the way some of the questions raised are being answered. 

Last week, for example, a Member raised a question on electoral reforms and we have been raising this question but the Government has been keeping quiet. I remember one time the Rt Hon. Prime Minister told us that the two ministers concerned were out of the country. However, I can now see them around. In those circumstances, I do not know why the Prime Minister is again pushing this question and yet we want answers. There is no time left; you know the schedule of the coming 2016 elections. As members of the Opposition, we want answers from the Government concerning these issues.

Secondly, there is the issue of security for Members of Parliament. If you move around outside this country and you compare the security of the Members of Parliament of Uganda and that of Members of Parliament in other countries, you will realise that Members here are not secure at all. One cannot arrest a Member of Parliament for a week and no report about it is produced, as if we do not have a Government. It does not matter whether you are a Member of Parliament from the NRM or the Opposition side, this is an issue about Members’ security. We should discuss it as Members of Parliament. How can we have a Member of Parliament arrested and detained for a week and the Prime Minister just keeps quiet? Do we have security? What are they doing? Please, be serious as Members of Parliament about these issues of security.

Lastly, Parliament has been a stakeholder in partnering with Government in promoting agriculture in Uganda. For balanced development, all Members had agreed to partner with the Uganda Coffee Development Authority in the distribution of coffee seedlings in all constituencies. Unfortunately, Government changed that policy and instead the coffee seedlings are being distributed by UPDF. Can the Government explain why there was a shift in policy implementation? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Concerning electoral reforms, as I said, the ministers responsible were out representing Uganda in a case which, fortunately, Uganda won. I commend them for the good work. As they came back, there were some re-adjustments in Government and these ministers needed time to settle down. 

I already informed this august House that Cabinet has dedicated a full day, Friday, 13 May 2015, to conclude this issue of electoral and constitutional reforms. Therefore, I would like my colleagues to realise that Cabinet is very serious about this -(Interjections)- Since I am concluding, my brother, the hon. Kassiano Wadri, will come next time.

On the issue of security of Members of Parliament, I already said we shall consult. This was a subject of discussion in the NRM caucus yesterday and a statement is coming to this august House. 

The final point was on the shift of policy regarding agricultural inputs. I would like to say that there is actually no change of policy. All that has been done is to get senior officers of the UPDF to reinforce the machinery that is already in place. This was done in order to take advantage of the highly disciplined and thorough codes of conduct of the UPDF, so that this exercise of empowering the peasants and people of Uganda to produce as much as possible is effected. Therefore, we should welcome the participation of the UPDF officers in reinforcing the operation for wealth creation for all the people of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I also thank the Members who have been able to raise these questions and I thank you for the answers given. Members had risen but one hour is one hour; it can only accommodate as much.
I have Members of Kyenjojo District, Bushenyi Municipality, Buvuma District, Moyo District, Zombo District, Rubaga North Constituency, Mbale Municipality and Ayivu Constituency who had stood but were not able to speak. We shall continue with those when we come back on Wednesday.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA COFFEE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FOR FYs 2009–2012 AND THE 2008 SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON UCDA JOINT VENTURE OPERATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we received this report. I propose the question for your debate on the motion for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of Uganda Coffee Development Authority for financial years 2009–2012 and the 2008 special audit report on UCDA joint venture operations. Debate starts now. Contributions will be three minutes each.

3.57
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of this committee, the hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, for the report presented on this Floor. 

I come from an area that grows coffee. Coffee was one of the main crops that brought in a lot of money into this country. When I was growing up, the Ministry of Agriculture had extension services and people from that ministry used to go around all coffee growing areas to spray the coffee trees against weevils. They used to have a team that would go around pruning the trees. That practice ended many years ago. Today, coffee farmers are having it rough. 

We used to have the Coffee Marketing Board that would market Uganda coffee. I am proud of it because I went to work at Bugolobi while waiting for my results and the Coffee Marketing Board was doing a tremendous job in regard to exporting Ugandan coffee. Revenue from coffee was used to build property in Mombasa and build our missions both in London and New York and many others. 

This Government has ignored coffee. The report shows that a country like Vietnam, which emerged out of war with all the bombs that destroyed its infrastructure, now exports more coffee than Uganda. I had a chance to serve in Denmark and its population is about 3 million. The US$ 15 million, which was given to an individual to promote our coffee in Denmark, was wasteful expenditure, which as a coffee grower I think is unacceptable.

I served in China and UCDA tried to establish a joint venture with the Chinese Government. The Chinese are tea drinkers but UCDA only offered US$ 300,000. This is money that could only buy a coffee roaster. They were not even able to pay rent or pay the workers. The guys who went to China were asked, “How much money are you putting in?” Because the manager who was sent to China, Beijing, had quarrelled with the Chinese, they pulled out of the joint venture. However, because of the contacts that the minister and UCDA know, the manager was instead transferred and made an ambassador. Can you imagine! This fellow went to Beijing to promote coffee in a joint venture but because he quarrelled with the Chinese, they pulled out of the joint venture and left only one -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Honourable members, I recognise in the public gallery this afternoon students and teachers of Uganda Christian University, Mukono, Kabwohe Study Centre in Sheema District. They are represented by the honourable Dr Elioda Tumwesigye and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have leaders of Kasokoso residents in Waksio District, represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju-Nganda and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. They have come to listen to the discussions on the motion for consideration and adoption of the petition by the residents of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda I over land evictions and destruction of property. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.02
MR NATHAN	NANDALA-MAFABI	(FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The UCDA’s role is not to market coffee; their role is to promote the quality of coffee in the country. However, they went further to do what they were not meant to do.
As hon. Wamanga-Wamai said, when they opened a joint venture in China, two people were taken, one was from western Uganda and another was from Bugisu. However, while the one from western Uganda was made an ambassador, the one from Bugisu or eastern Uganda was sacked. 

Mr Speaker, I have a few issues which I would want the committee to help me understand. They bought property on Plots 10-12, Spring Road and sold it, and UCDA claims they sold it because it was a joint venture property. Since we owned 50 per cent, it meant that they should have followed the normal ways of disposing of public assets. How can you sell off a public asset without following the procedures and then you come and tell the committee that you had no say in it? At an appropriate time, I will need to move an amendment to say that the accounting officer of UCDA be held liable for the loss of that money that was invested in the property at Spring Road, Plots 10 to 12.

Mr Speaker, if you again look through this document, they say that they brought some equipment like the wet processing machine. Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you add us more time because this affects the coffee growers and it is only the coffee growers who can debate this motion very well -(Interjections)- Yes! I know more about coffee than you do. 

The wet processing machines were imported from Brazil. At the time it was a lot of money, to the tune of Shs 850 million. However, the machines have not been operationalised up to date and yet we still grow coffee. The wet processing machines came in to improve the quality of coffee, which would be exported so that we fetch more money. Since they have never been utilised, the people who were involved caused a loss to Government and so they should be held accountable for the non-use of these wet processing machines. Nobody should tell us they could not work -(Member timed out.)

4.06
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to the discussion on the joint venture. My prayer will not be different from what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said on this matter. Mr Speaker, I would ask for your indulgence so that you give us at least five minutes. That is how we shall be able to get to the root of the issues in this report.

On the issue of the wet processing machines, – by the way that is Shs 850 million - it means we are losing out on what the machines could have done for us in terms of output and we are losing because of wear and tear without any valid reasons. Therefore, these people must be held accountable. For them to tell us that this was beyond their decision is not sufficient. 

This report fell short of addressing the joint venture issue in the context of operations between UCDA, the farmers and nursery seedling operators. There is a very serious issue of corruption. The nursery operators in this country have never been paid their money since 2011. The UCDA will contact them and say, “Please, give out 130,000 coffee seedlings; MP, we are allocating you this amount of seedlings to give to the farmers; UCDA regional offices, please give out this amount of seedlings” and they pick them on credit. 

Here is the pain: when one is going to sell their seedlings, they are not only selling the seedlings but they are also selling their very good loam soil that one puts in the pot. This is actually a quadruple loss! Your soil is gone, UCDA does not pay you and yet when you operate a nursery, they recommend that that is the only nursery bed from which farmers should pick the coffee seedlings. If you try your own, they even have powers to come and stop you on the basis that the seedling is not approved. 

Therefore, I would think that we should not even give the Uganda Coffee Development Authority money this year, if possible. There is a lot there. There must be a serious audit of Uganda Coffee Development Authority. I am one of the nursery bed seedling operators and they pick a lot of coffee seedlings from my nursery bed –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I congratulate the chairperson for presenting the report. However, I have a few questions to raise in regard to the operations of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority.

Not long ago, we were asked to request for seedlings from Uganda Coffee Development Authority, which we did. To a certain extent, we were also asked to identify people who can raise nurseries for coffee seedlings, which some of us did. However, just as hon. Joshua Anywarach has said, most of these seedling suppliers have not been paid.

Secondly, we have also had issues in regard to the kind of seedlings that have been supplied. Some of them do not match with the climate - of course, coffee has different varieties. The question is whether Uganda Coffee Development Authority is putting taxpayers’ money in the right place. I am very sure the monies that are involved are taxpayers’ money allocated by this Parliament.

Thirdly, is Uganda Coffee Development Authority doing the right thing? We are in a dilemma because some of us who are deeply involved in mobilising people to benefit from this programme are almost being asked to pay for the seedlings and the nurseries. Therefore, can the ministry responsible get to the root of this? 

From what I have seen, it is like some people are benefiting from this process. You ask people to raise nurseries and you procure them and there is no proper agreement signed and eventually, somebody disappears in thin air. I think it is important for us to restructure. The truth is that we need to revise the aspect of coffee growing and its marketing in this country because that is one of the most important cash crops we  - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Bernard Atiku, for giving way. Honourable members, I would like to say Uganda Coffee Development Authority was created to help the coffee growers to produce more coffee, export it and get commission. However, Uganda Coffee Development Authority has not done much to help the farmers. The farmers are grumbling, struggling with weevils and yet UCDA gets money and they do not account for it. 

There is a property I talked about in Beijing; they bought a coffee roaster and it remained there. It is rotting in Beijing. Every year, Government gives Uganda Coffee Development Authority more money but what is Uganda Coffee Development Authority doing for the farmers of Uganda, apart from sitting down and doing their own business? Uganda Coffee Development Authority should have done an analysis of the joint venture before injecting in taxpayers’ money.

Honourable members, I would like to ask you to help the coffee farmers of Uganda. Now and then we hear Government talking about improving agriculture. Surely, coffee is a plant that Government should have taken interest in given the fact that Uganda Coffee Development Authority is not doing a good job. I would like to agree with the recommendation that the accounting officer, who is also the Managing Director of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, be held responsible for the losses incurred.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I think my point here – (Interjection)- I have been given a minute. The truth is that Uganda Coffee Development Authority was established by this Parliament to do a good job. Therefore, the recommendations in this report need to be followed closely and we see to it that they are implemented. We need to restructure and we need coffee to be revived.

For those of us who have been writing requests, when you ask for 100,000 coffee seedlings and you only receive 20,000 yet we will have prepared farmers to grow more coffee with people surrendering land to engage in the production of this cash crop, you kind of kill the motivation that these person had generated. Therefore, I think we need to restructure Uganda Coffee Development Authority in order for us to get the benefits of our input as Parliament and at the same time the taxpayer’s money that is involved –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give arises from the point as to why Uganda Coffee Development Authority was formed. The staff of Uganda Coffee Development Authority are now the ones processing coffee and opening up cafes instead of promoting the quality of coffee. They have now abandoned working on the coffee quality. They work only with a few farmers and leave the rest at God’s mercy. 

That is why people are slowly abandoning coffee growing and yet it is the most productive sector. In Bugisu, for example, one tree produces five kilograms. At a cost of Shs 8000 per kilogramme, that is Shs 40,000. If you have 200 kilograms, you can earn Shs 8 million. How many chicken or cows can you rear to raise Shs 8 million? 

The Government has deliberately used UCDA and UCDA staff and management to literally destroy the coffee sector. The Auditor-General did the audit but I think we need to do a forensic audit of UCDA. How can you import machines for coffee roasting but keep them idle for nine years? There is one man who has even made – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are still giving information?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Speaker, but I am about to conclude. The reason we are raising all this is help the House get more information regarding coffee growing in Uganda because we know what happens.

The current Minister of Agriculture was one time the Managing Director of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority and instead of promoting it I do not know what he has gone to do in agriculture. I would like to tell you that coffee is the only crop from which people can make money; it is only followed by cotton and tea. There is a report, which was written by the former UN Secretary-General, Mr Kofi Anan.  That report mentioned two items; after oil, the other item is coffee. Coffee is called black gold. You can mine it but it will never get finished. It can help people to get out of poverty. That is why we are saying UCDA is one of those entities, which have contributed to the poverty levels of the people who grow coffee.  

That is why when they went to Denmark, they opened a company called Mount Elgon, named after a place where Arabica coffee is grown. If you taste coffee from Mount Elgon, which has not been adulterated and which has not been mixed with the one from Bushenyi, you can never forget it. This is also the reason why when the white men came here, they lied and they told the Bagisu not to drink coffee because their hearts would beat fast and they told them to grow coffee only for export.

Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time I will propose that we do a forensic audit at UCDA. This is a place where money has been wasted without people knowing and one of the culprits is the current Minister of Agriculture. I thank you, my colleague, for giving way.

4.20
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at Uganda Coffee Development Authority -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, aren’t you a member of the committee?

MR MBAHIMBA: Yes, I am, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know the rules! (Laughter)

4.20
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will use these three minutes to inform the House and the one member who thought we do not know anything about coffee yet some of us have traded in coffee for long and so we know what takes place in the coffee sector.

When I am not here, I do business. The hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that a good coffee plant yields up to five kilograms of coffee. I want to inform the House that the new crop is supposed to yield 30 kilograms –(Interjections)- I am refereeing to the one they are giving out to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I come from Bugisu and I have grown coffee, even before I was born. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where was your garden? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why I am talking about the revenue in Bugisu Cooperative Union, in our primary society, where I am member No.54; I use my grandfather’s number. 

We have two types of coffee; there is the organic coffee, which grows without any fertilizers, where people just use local manure. On average, it gives five kilograms, and that is the one that fetches the highest value on the market. There is the one where you put fertilizers and it is the one which my sister is talking about. With that one, one can get even 100 kilograms because that is adulterated coffee. That one in the world market is treated as rubbish. 

Is my colleague in order to tell the House that what I said, that a plant of this coffee can fetch a farmer five kilograms, was not true and that it fetches 30 kilograms? Is she in order to say this yet I started growing coffee before I was born? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was just complementing what you said.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. If I were a farmer, I do not think I would plant a crop which yields only five kilograms and leave the one which yields 30 kilograms.

Mr Speaker, regarding UCDA, I would like to suggest that we revive the former marketing system so that when farmers are growing their coffee and there happens to be no market,  Government steps in and does not just let the farmers be exploited by traders. Much as some of us have an interest, we do not exploit the farmers but we do not have the capacity.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, as Government intends to encourage the process of growing coffee - I am a member of the East African Community and we have been told to grow cotton but I still feel that coffee is a better crop. We should market that coffee and help farmers. Instead of giving them 400 plants, each farmer should be encouraged to get two acres of coffee from which they can get about Shs 15 million. That would be a good thing for the coffee authority, rather than turning government programmes into personal ones. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for presenting their report. 

My comment is on the joint venture partnership, which was established between UCDA and a number of companies in Denmark, Egypt and China. We certainly believe what the committee has written. In the case of Denmark, UCDA entered into a joint venture partnership with a company called Uganda Coffee House, which eventually changed their name to Mount Elgon Coffee Europe APS. However, that that partnership ended up in losses; it collapsed and we made big losses yet UCDA through Government funding had invested a lot of money into that partnership. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the partnership with Egypt, again UCDA entered into a joint partnership with a company called TESCO, which also changed its name to Uganda Egypt Coffee Manufacturing. We invested a lot of money to support that partnership but eventually it collapsed and we made a lot of losses.

In the case of China, the committee observed that the export of our coffee increased from 40 tonnes to 600, but the committee also observed that this may not have been related to the joint venture partnership. Again, we see a case of UCDA going into a partnership with a Chinese company, which collapsed and wound up. 

The question I would like to put to the chair of the committee is: first, this is a report of 2008/12, what is the current status in terms of this kind of affair under UCDA? Are they still engaged in direct buying and selling of coffee or they have now concentrated on their regulatory roles? I think it is important, much as we are looking at their performance in the past, to know whether at the moment they are still behaving this way.

Secondly, what is the total loss we incurred as a country in these fake joint venture partnerships? Third, you have been very quiet on assigning responsibility for these losses; is it a person, company or Government? I see a situation in which we gave more than Shs 7 billion to promote joint venture partnerships and instead of making profits, we came out with losses. Surely, Mr Speaker, I do not think we can simply talk about UCDA and its roles and we become quiet on who occasioned this loss to the Government. I would like to hear an answer from the chair of the committee on those issues.

4.28
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we are to discuss this report very well, we should not just base on general issues as some Members are now alleging. To the best of my expectation, UCDA has performed. Each and every Member of Parliament here has been given 50,000 seedlings to take to their constituencies whenever they go there - (Interjections)) - yes, in those coffee growing areas. I am a coffee grower; an organic coffee exporter –(Interjections)- I am telling you because –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I can rightly say that I have never been given such an amount of seedlings. Is the honourable member in order to allege that every Member of Parliament was given 50,000 Coffee seedlings to quantify the inefficiencies of Uganda Coffee Development Authority? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you have heard that not all members got. So do not go into general statements which you said the House should not get into.

MR TAYEBWA: But if you go there, you will get them and if you do not go there, then it is your fault. The point that I was driving at is that we should not blame – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Tayebwa is my brother and I would not have raised a Point of Order on him but I think that he is going too far.

Is it in order for Members of Parliament whose role is clearly oversight function to go to companies, like UCDA, to look for Coffee and Cotton seedlings? Is he in order to say that we should start walking to UCDA to look for seedlings? Is he in order to tell Members of Parliament to go to UCDA and leave the oversight function for which they were voted to perform?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The other function of a Member of Parliament is to lobby for things that can support -(Laughter)

MR TAYEBWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the point here, according to this report, is about joint ventures which has actually messed the activities of UCDA. Looking at the last recommendation of the committee, there is micro management by the President in UCDA, influence peddling by Gen. Salim Saleh - the problem is not UCDA. We should find a cure by ensuring that if there is a board – the UCDA should perform its duties according to how it is established by law.

Two, UCDA having done what it is supposed to do - and you can see that some of this money was lost because some of those joint ventures would change names and so forth according to the auditor’s report –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. People in the countryside are dying in dire poverty, not because there is nothing for them to do but because Government is not directing the country where it should be going.

By the time we have Uganda Coffee Development Authority engaged in buying and selling of Coffee, what do we expect the local businessmen and women to be doing? Ugandans are choked and virtually have nowhere to get money because the big barons have taken over the responsibilities of the local men and women. That is why at the end of the day, you get an institution like the Uganda Coffee Development Authority engaging in the buying and selling of coffee. 

We urge this Parliament to this time realign and remind the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to what it is supposed to be doing. Otherwise, we should give opportunity to other business men and women out there to be able to get the resources; to be able to send children to school; to be able to proposer so that resources are shared amongst many, instead of confining them into the hands of the very few who are already able.

On the question of the joint venture, I would like the Attorney-General to guide this country well. One time I mentioned a complaint about the inefficiencies of the Office of the Attorney-General and its role in advising Government but hon. Peter Nyombi almost jumped across to stifle me; I almost ran out of the House.

The Office of the Attorney-General is supposed to align the issues and questions where Government is supposed to come in. We do not even know what happened between this Coffee Development Authority, Tesco and the  Egyptian  company. There is also the question of Munyonyo and Bujagali. 

There are issues whenever Uganda enters joint ventures with various companies with the terms not being clear. In fact this House should ask the Office of the Attorney-General to bring and lay on Table, all the joint venture agreements that Government is involved in so that we are able to follow up on them. Otherwise, Government will continue engaging all of us into businesses we are not aware of and cannot follow and yet Uganda is losing out. At the end of the day, we have the shilling trading at this inbalancing rate –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): I would like to thank the committee for coming up with tis good report and also thank the Auditor-General for coming up with these appropriate findings. 

I have two issues on which I need clarification. The first is: When you say that an entity has a function of monitoring the marketing, what does this involve? Does this mean that at some stage the entity can do market tests and if you go in that line, can it be interpreted as if the entity has gone into direct marketing of the product?

My second issue has to do with property management. Most of these Government entities, UCDA inclusive, have the habit of abandoning properties, and I am not surprised to see it here.  What I would like Government to do is to explain to this House the comprehensive plan for most of its properties that appear to be in bad shape and in some instances, abandoned completely.

As I conclude, in most of these Government entities, you note that where these properties are used to generate income, the revenue due is in arrears or is never paid at all. I would like Government to explain to this House the comprehensive plan it has for its property management. I thank you, Mr Speaker.


4.38
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the chairperson and the committee members for presenting a good report. I almost share similar sentiment with hon. Musasizi. When you read the report, it appears that UCDA is over stretched in terms of mandate. It should get focussed to its real mandate. We you read the report, it has a lot of properties and buildings and yet it is not in estate management. 

From the report, it is clear some of these buildings are not renovated and even the rent being paid has been lowered. And in some instances, that rent is not being collected. I want to believe that this is not the mandate of UCDA and because of that, I support the committee. 

This mandate should be given to other competent entities in that area like the Uganda National Housing or whatever, but it should not be the mandate of UCDA.

Look at the joint ventures - I am sure the chairperson is more knowledgeable in this report than us. What I would want to hear from him is, are there some joint ventures which are working and bringing us returns? That is important to know because almost all these we have seen here in the report are really in a lamenting state of affairs with no returns, yet their intention was to bring returns to ensure the economy grows. Kindly tell us if there are any success stories. If they are not, then really it is high time UCDA pulled out of these joint ventures so that they concentrate on supporting the farmers. 

In terms of encouraging coffee growing in my constituency, I can report that at least the results are tangible. However, because of engaging in these other issues which are not for UCDA, some of the issues are not answered.
You get a coffee wilt; it will not be attended to because UCDA is engaged in other unrelated issues. 

The issue of saying they are getting rent should stop because it is only Parliament that has the mandate to appropriate. Let that thing of estate management be done away with - we shall always appropriate for them to ensure serious and strong coffee growing is done to boost our economy. I thank you.

4.41
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting the report. However, as hon. Magyezi has put it, the core issues they looked into were joint ventures. But then you realise that these joint ventures were not an initiative of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority. It was the political wing that was directing the technocrats on which ventures to go into and so forth, without doing due diligence. So, when we condemn the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, it would not be very fair because given the limited staff and less funding, they are trying to do their work in a better way.

Mr Speaker, it will be catastrophic when Uganda Coffee Development Authority is pulled out of buying coffee. Why do I say so? When they buy coffee, they buy from -(Interjection)- I do not know how many minutes have been given -(Interjection)- They do. Okay, they buy seedlings and to me, they do not buy from anybody. They buy from people that have got certificates to show their Coffee seedlings are of the right quality. Should we say that we leave this coffee buying to the hands of businessmen, we shall end up getting fake Coffee seedlings and only businessmen with right connections will get those contracts and supply air.

Mr Speaker, I think let the Uganda Coffee Development Authority continue doing this but with less influence from the politicians. As I speak, the Uganda Coffee Development Authority is stuck. They have got the money for the people to supply coffee seedlings, but the Minister up to now has failed to direct them. Do they supply the Coffee seedlings the way they have been doing it or not? And in so doing, the Coffee seedlings that are supposed to be planted this season are growing old and may not be cultivated. 

Therefore, I would ask Parliament to direct the Minister of Agriculture, before any season comes, not to be waiting for the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to ask them which political direction to take. As a minister, you should be at hand and should learn to operate horizontally because Uganda Coffee Development Authority will do its work but you will find agricultural officers at the districts just seated waiting - like in greater Bushenyi; there is only one person that supervises five districts. People keep waiting for this one person simply because he is down strain; the rest are just seated in offices. 

Therefore, whereas they are giving us the coffee seedlings, the line ministry should be able to make the Uganda Coffee Development Authority and other agricultural agencies interface. 

On the joint ventures, are avenues used by some people to steal money. Politicians in Government should stop directing these technocrats on what to do because they are already qualified; they know what is right and what is not. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just make this communication at this time. I had earlier informed you that there will be a meeting for a security briefing at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. I have consulted with the Minister for Internal Affairs, a new date will be communicated probably tomorrow because the technical team has been asked to go and do some operations, I do not where, but they will not be able to make the presentation tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. So, tomorrow probably by the end of business, we will get a new date. But this matter is urgent; we need to handle it.

4.46
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my brothers and sisters in this House to thank the committee for the report. I come from a Coffee growing area and I got to this Parliament partly as a result of coffee growing; my father would fetch school fees from it. Up to day, I do not bother sending sugar to my father because coffee is still growing in my area. 

What UCDA is doing would not be bad, but they are under staffed. Someone who is supposed to oversee the nursery operators to see whether they have prepared breeds of high quality - take an example of my region, we have one co-ordinator for the whole of Rwenzori Region who is supposed to oversee all those nursery operators.  That is why at the end of the day, we get challenges; the Coffee nursery operators have given out varieties which are not good. You find someone planting many acres of Coffee but using the Catimor Variety and when it comes to marketing, they are told that it is a poor coffee quality. This has made it difficult for anyone to convince the farmers to cut down those trees because they will have already invested a lot of money in the plantation. Secondly, the coffee would be ready for harvesting though it will be of poor quality. 

My suggestion is that it would be very paramount to increase on the number of staff at UCDA in order for them to do commendable work.

Secondly, according to their report, the members of the committee have reported to us that in 2011, there was a rent arrear amounting to shs 73.2 million and yet there was a tenant’s agreement where the tenants were supposed to pay three months in advance. There was this arrear of shs 73 million yet the tenants were still residing in those premises and they had not paid. I do not know whether the agreement was still in use or not. This means that somehow, the money was being collected and enjoyed by the people who were overseeing instead of collecting it. Therefore, it is paramount that the people concerned at the time suffer for the loss. I thank you.


4.49
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a good report. It is okay for us standing here in 2015 to say that UCDA should never sell coffee. We forget that UCDA started buying coffee as a stop-gap measure following the collapse of the cooperative movements when individual farmers and traders could not afford to sell their coffee out of the country.

UCDA came in to standardise the quality of the products that we were taking outside and also to ensure that we kept the level of the market that we had outside so that we continue supplying on a constant basis. I do support the recommendation that now UCDA can concentrate on its mandate and get out of the selling but without thinking that they just came and grabbed other people’s mandate.

Mr Speaker, following the effective lobbying and advocacy of the Members of Parliament, very many farmers in Uganda have now taken to growing coffee. Previously, they had cut down on coffee growing because of the fall in prices on the world market. However, now very many have grown coffee. The major problem is extension work; advising our farmers as to how to use manure to get good harvests, how to prune and nurture the crops and when that crop comes; how to dry it so that we get quality coffee. If UCDA can do this for us, then we would be in a better place –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. You are raising a very critical point –(Interjection)- Yes, Igara and Mitooma are neighbours and what affects her, affects me. The point she is making is the revival of production of coffee. When you look at the mandate of UCDA as given in the report, it includes promoting coffee production through research and extension service. 

The point I would like to make is, when you look at extension service at the moment, whether it is distribution of seedlings or advice to farmers, UCDA, NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation and I think the ministry as well is doing all this. A new challenge of coordination is coming in within the ministry and we need to look at who is responsible for extension service provision. You heard hon. Dorothy saying that in her place even a private company was distributing seedlings -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now debating, honourable.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give is a further challenge to the minister as to who is responsible for coordinating extension services.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you for that information –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me. I would like to say that I am a member of coffee platform in Parliament here. A few months ago, we made an M&E trip to the eastern region and we visited Kapchorwa, Mbale, Iganga and Jinja districts. We visited three categories of people dealing with coffee: the nursery operators, the farmers and the processors. 

One of the main complaints of the nursery operators is the delay of payment by UCDA. UCDA has, for the last six months, not paid the nursery operators and this has retarded their work. They want to start another nursery but they cannot do it because they have supplied the old one and they cannot start another one because UCDA has not paid them. This is a very big problem and this complaint was voiced in all the districts we visited. 

We went with the staff of UCDA and when they were asked about this, they said that their main problem was also the delay of payment by the NAADS Secretariat. They said the releases are delayed and they never match with the seasons of coffee growing. Therefore, this was one of their big problems. However, they said they have solved it this year because they have requested Government to pay them the full amount for the whole year and that they have received it. This year, they are very sure they are going to run their activities properly especially with regard to the nursery operators and the farmers.

The farmers were asking for tarpaulins for drying their coffee, which has been a problem. The quality of the coffee, especially the parchment coffee, is very poor because of the drying method. They dry them on the bare ground and along the roads and what comes out are of poor quality. They also harvest berries, which are not ready; green berries. They force them to ripen and they are dried. What comes out however is of very poor quality. This issue was very common among processors of Jinja District. What they appreciated –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the committee for this informative report. It is sad to note that in spite of the increase in funding to the Coffee Authority; in 2011 they had Shs 9 billion while in 2014, they are now at Shs 24 billion and this is well over half increment in funding to them. We saw a serious reduction in coffee exports. This has been attributed to the coffee wilt disease, which is impacting negatively on our foreign exchange earnings. 

Mr Speaker, this is a problem identified. However, I have tried to look through and it is not clear what action was taken to address this problem. This knowledge is crucial, especially for me who recently tried to intensify coffee growing in Kioga. 

I also find it outrageous that Uganda Coffee Development Authority should digress from its core mandate and engage in activities that are not meant for them thereby leading to loss of Government resources. 

Speaking from what my colleague, hon. Raphael Magyezi from Igara said, and probably for emphasis, when you look at recommendation 1.2.2 by the committee, I find that the recommendation that Uganda Coffee Development Authority should only concentrate on its mandate is inadequate. I think officials who cause financial loss to Government should be brought to book.

In 2012, I happened to apply to Coffee Development Authority for some seedlings. Like I told you earlier, I have been championing the process of intensifying coffee growing in Kioga and I was allocated 20,000 seedlings. However, the farmers were asked to raise nursery beds and later on get funding for the seedlings that they would have supplied. This was done but three years down the road, from 2012 up to now, the money has not been paid to these farmers by Coffee Development Authority. Since I participated in mobilising people to grow coffee, now the people are mobilising me to get their money from Uganda Coffee Development Authority -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a good time for those demands to be made. (Laughter)

5.00
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to tell you that I grew up in Obote’s regime and therefore, we used to see these things. Everywhere they would write, grow more coffee, grow more cotton; they are cash crops and that means they bring in cash. The government would bring in - (Interjection) No, it is not a test; it was real. There were pumps everywhere to spray on the coffee; they would give them fertilisers, hoes and even seedlings. Today, UCDA is only after the seedlings. I do not know whether they follow up to find out whether those seedlings really become trees to give coffee.

Today, farmers are facing a problem of fake pesticides. I do not know whether UCDA is involved in knowing whether the pesticides on the market are good enough to help the farmers. Since they are using their own money, let UCDA come in and help them get the good quality pesticides that can help them. 

Mr Speaker, coffee, being a cash crop, should be grown everywhere in the country and the farmers should be given the right type. This is because for us in Mt Elgon areas, it is only the Bugisu Arabica that does well. However, you will find the one that grows in Busoga is brought to Bugisu because they want us to harvest 30 kilograms per tree. That is why I am asking UCDA to give us the right type so that we do not make mistakes. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. [Hon. Nyakikongoro rose] Honourable member, you have already contributed on this matter, have you not? Okay.

5.02
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am passionate about coffee and the minister knows it because my fees were paid using coffee earnings. 

Mr Speaker, I think there is a problem in differentiating the various activities that are being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries where UCDA also falls as an enterprise. This is because if you look at issues of quality, managing pesticides and herbicides, all those are vested in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I understand there is a department that is supposed to be handling that. When you blame UCDA in terms of the volume that we export outside the country, this is not specifically the role of UCDA; there are many stakeholders that are involved. 

Therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries needs to go back to the drawing board and guide the population on who is responsible for what is happening in the countryside. Recently, we were on a tour with UCDA and we were talking about extension workers; who is paying them and who is responsible for looking at the quality of coffee? 

Mr Speaker, why are we losing market as Uganda? It is because people keep on mixing all sorts of things in coffee. The coffee that is grown in Kasese, Mbale and greater Ankole is different because others have Robusta and there is Arabica. When all these are mixed up, we do not get market for our country and that is why we have low quality market for our coffee. 

Therefore, there is need for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to streamline things. That is why I was raising the issue of the Banyankole Kweterana. If Banyankole Kweterana Cooperative Society is handling Robusta coffee from greater Ankole, someone should not migrate and move to buy coffee from Rubirizi that grows Arabica and then Arabica is mixed up with Robusta. It makes the whole thing difficult.

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of pesticides for the coffee twig borer, I have been here on the Floor of Parliament raising this issue. If we are going to invest in coffee through Operation Create Wealth and we give seedlings to our people without handling the pests, we are not going to achieve anything. At the end of the day, they will blame UCDA and NAADs yet the problem is hanging there.

Honourable minister, you need to get interested in this issue of the pests, which are attacking the coffee. I want to add my voice to my sister that farmers are crying. They are getting poor quality herbicides -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We will stop here for now. What is going to happen is that we will have an opportunity to process the recommendations from the committee one by one and take decisions on them and that will be tomorrow. However at this time, the minister could respond so that when we come back tomorrow, we deal with the specific recommendations and if there are some discussions, we can deal with those. 

5.06
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, first of all, allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee and his team for a good report. It is extremely informative. I read it thoroughly well and picked the six key issues, according to the report. 

They included: 

    1. The performance of the joint ventures in China, Denmark and Egypt; 
    2. Low rental income and arrears that are being obtained from the assets they rent out; 
    3. Assessment of assets management by UCDA; 
    4. Land and building valuation; 
    5. Updating accounting financial manual and;
    6. Payment of utilities bills.

Obviously if one looks at the trend of the debate this afternoon, most of the problems are not on these issues but on production and please give me some time to go through these quickly and perhaps I will be able to persuade the Members to appreciate where I am coming from.

In 1970s, there was a perception -(Interjections) Please, allow me to persuade you to see the situation analysis. In 1970s, there was a perception that there was over production of world coffee and therefore, countries should limit their production. Government adopted a policy of not planting; they placed an embargo on further planting. There was failure to appreciate that these are biological things that must be in place; they have a time to start and a time to end. 

In 1980, it was realised that coffee production in this country had dropped so low and that incomes were becoming extremely small and yet this was the major export crop. Therefore, a project known as Coffee Rehabilitation Program was initiated and implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to try and reverse the trend of decreased production. The ministry was now faced with two important questions; one was replacement of aging trees and the other was planting so that we could increase production.

The planning program required the necessitation of nurseries, which in the past was done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but this time, it was thought better, in order to quicken the process, that the nurseries be handled by the farmers themselves. This is exactly what has happened. 

Another attendant problem as to why coffee production was going down was the marketing structure. At that time, a farmer was receiving 35 per cent of the world price while a processor, who was the middle man, was receiving about 15 per cent of the world price. Coffee Marketing Board, for its operations, was receiving about 15 per cent of the price. Government, which was marketing the coffee, was getting about 35 per cent of the revenue and so the farmer was getting an increasingly a low price. 

When restructuring and reformation transformation came in, this trend had to be reversed so that a farmer gets a greater proportion of his coffee earnings than he was getting. That is when the forms came into being. I can quickly tell you that now a farmer is getting 85 per cent of the world price and that is why there is renewed interest among farmers to plant more coffee. 

Having said that, I would like to report to you that Uganda Coffee Development Authority is doing well. In the recent past, it had dropped to an export level of 2 million 60 kilogram bags. As we speak, they are now at 4 million 60 kilogram bags; they have doubled in the recent past. In addition, as I speak, the demand for seedlings is so high in that in this season alone, we have got 60 million coffee seedlings to be distributed. 

The point is, when people like you come and ask us to participate in the distribution of this, we cannot refuse. We now have to liaise with these officers in the countryside at constituency level -(Interjection) Why don’t you allow me to give you this background?  

We now have a responsibility to try and distribute these 60 million coffee seedlings as fast as possible. When you requisition, definitely these things are going to constituencies because that is where the farmers are anyway. 

Having said that, Uganda Coffee Development Authority has done reasonably well in my view because production has gone up, planting materials are up to 60 million seedlings ready for distribution and they have now got more money to pay due to an increased budget. Therefore those of you who had issues of non-payment, I would like to encourage you to move fast and give your submission to the Managing Director, UCDA for payment of those arrears. 

Let me go to the specific issues that were raised in the report. The first one is the performance of joint ventures in China, Denmark and Egypt. It should be appreciated that this was a promotional exercise. In that context of promotion, sometimes things may not happen well but I would like to report that the promotions in Denmark and Egypt raised some misgivings. This issue was put to the Board and they have suspended operations in those two countries. However, the one in China is doing reasonably well and it is still going on – (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not like to put the minister to order but I do not know whether he is speaking facts. The joint venture in China died when I was still serving in China. The Chinese moved out of the joint venture and they left one Renminbi. 

Honourable members, for your information, six Renminbi make one dollar. The Chinese pulled out and the thing died. Solomon Rutega who was the manager is now the Ambassador in Guangzhou. The mission was formed for him. Why should you tell Ugandans, the House and I, as a coffee grower, that the joint venture in China is doing well? Who is buying coffee in China? They even failed to import coffee from here because they had no money. They also failed to pay rent. 

Are you in order therefore, honourable minister, to tell Ugandans lies when I have got a good memory of what happened in China? I used to sit in those meetings. So are you in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the word ‘lie’ is not very parliamentary. ‘Misleading’ is better because it is easier to rule on while ‘lies’ is a most difficult situation. Can I rule on this matter, honourable minister? There seem to be some issues with the factual situation you have presented. You may need to clarify specifically on what the honourable member has raised before you say whether you are in order or not.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, I have a paper here that was written specifically on this venture covering Denmark. I was doing another paper specifically on China following that observation. I have reason to believe because last year I was in China and I had coffee in the Uganda Coffee Centre. Since I have been challenged, allow me to look for more information, which I will give tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what I am asking is, where you guiding the House properly when you made those statements, which the honourable member has objected to? 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: As far as I was informed, I was but there is room to find out more information –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that this House should not be used as a joking matter. The China venture, which the minister is talking about- He said he was there last year. We have been to China and we have interests in the coffee in China. The joint venture had a factory north of Beijing. The office was in the middle of Beijing. Both the factory and office were closed. The man who was the manager called Rutega was made an ambassador and he is now in Guangzhou. 

Is it procedurally right for a minister who knows that we have invested a lot of money not only- We first started with 100 then 300, they wanted equipment and we put 1.5 million - We have put a lot of money in that joint venture. Is he procedurally right to come and say that according to the paper they gave him, they are saying it is doing well but he is going to cross check and yet he was saying China is doing very well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you are relying on information, it is normally structured this way. To the best of the information, I received, which information I verily believe to be true- Do you really believe that the information you have brought is true? If not then you can ask for time and come back and clarify on those issues.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you for the guidance, Mr Speaker. When I came, I believed that what I was saying was true. As I said, last year I had coffee in the Uganda coffee shop and I was there. Allow me to proceed with other things, please.

Point number two that was raised in the report was low rental income and arrears being realised on the properties we have in Kampala. Some are in Nakasero and others in Bugolobi. Indeed UCDA acquired these properties a long time ago but they have been over taken with time and they have better buildings, which have come up. However, some UCDA properties have remained of low rental value. We are going to put this to the Board for review and see whether we can raise money to improve on them.

Asset management was also an issue. A seedling engineer has been recruited to handle this aspect of the issues raised in the audit report.

The fourth element was land and building valuation. This is an accounting procedure that has been brought to management and the Board so that proper evaluation can be made on those assets.

Updating the accounting financial manual has been done and payment of utility bills is also being handled. I am told UCDA was handling this centrally in a block where they had about 32 houses. Now they want to make sure that they install individual meters in order to enable the occupants to pay for their bills directly. 

These were the key issues that were raised. However, there were others that came in like the fact that we are trying to ensure that UCDA does a better job especially in the research area. I think I mentioned this before that Kituuza Research Station has been raised and given personnel to handle issues of breeding, containment and handling of pests and diseases as raised by the honourable member from Sheema. 

Otherwise, those were the issues that I have been able to respond to. As far as production is concerned, we are doing our best to ensure that we raise productivity of this crop. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, what will happen tomorrow is, we will begin processing the recommendations from the committee and take decisions on them. 

Chairperson, would you like to respond to some of these issues because what I wanted to do was to allow a brief debate on item No.6. This is because item No.7 is wrongly placed on the order paper because we already took a decision on it last week. Isn’t it true, chairperson?

5.22
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Mr Speaker, it is item No.6, which is wrongly placed on the Order Paper. Seven is correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We took a decision on No.6 already. Okay, it is item No.7, which we should debate and that is on the Ministry of Health and Mulago Referral Hospital. That remains the only upstanding business. Let us hear from the chairperson and see if we can debate briefly on item No.7.

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think there are a few issues I was asked to clarify on. First of all, on the issue of joint ventures, this being a report of 2008 and the same matter being reported on by the Auditor-General almost up to 2012, the minister does not have up to date information on the China Joint venture. 

The Auditor-General has been recommending that UCDA gets out of these joint ventures. In China, they are actually did that because the joint venture collapsed and it is not in existence. What is in China is now a promotional office, which is the job of the UCDA. The joint venture was not their job. So it collapsed like all the others did but they maintained a promotional office, which is working. If there is any credit to give, it should be to the promotional centre and not to the joint venture.

Another issue was raised by hon. Magyezi of apportioning responsibility in the failures of these joint ventures. If you read the report very carefully, these joint ventures were literally pushed down the throat of UCDA with meetings that took place in State House, in Ministry of Finance and in Prime Minister’s Office. It is not a decision they took by themselves to go and start joint ventures with any company. 

You will also need to note that if they had implemented all the political directives, probably we were going to lose much more because in the one of Denmark, the chief promoter of the company that wanted to add value to Ugandan coffee, Gen. Salim Saleh, wanted $ 15 million. He had been given up to Shs 3 billion, which is about $ 1.1 million. 

You can also understand environment under which people are working. There are three meetings in State House chaired by the Head of State and you are asked to provide money for someone to go and add value to Ugandan coffee. Those meetings are followed by others presided by the then Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. Then you go Finance - That is why I wanted colleagues to understand the context under which these things happened.

Finally on the issue of the performance of the Ugandan coffee sector, we indicated in this report for example that you can report about the growth but we have been selling. By 1962, Uganda was exporting 3 million bags of coffee. We are now exporting 2.2 million bags and that is how coffee has fallen from number one to number three on our main foreign exchange earners. 

If you look at countries we indicated in the report like Vietnam, by 1962 they were exporting just about half a million bags of coffee. They are now exporting 26 million bags of coffee. The amount of money Vietnam fetches from coffee is about $ 3.8 billion; nearly the Ugandan Budget. 

Therefore, the government needs to fix this instead of saying we are improving when we are not. Actually we have stagnated and the amount of money we get from coffee keeps going down. I think generally those are the responses that I wanted to make to colleagues who raised concerns. This is a report of Parliament, we were only reporting because we were assigned this responsibility. We shall take all the improvements. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and the committee. Thank you, honourable minister for your response. We will process the recommendations of the committee tomorrow and take decisions on how this House can advise on what should be done in this sector. Next item.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS 
ON THE HEALTH INSTITUTIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the one that was already adopted, with the guidance from the chairperson. It is the next one that is pending.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS 
ON THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND MULAGO REFERAL HOSPITAL 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and I proposed the question last time. I had asked for debate and it was deferred. The question remains proposed for your debate and debate starts now. Can we use three minutes for each Member contributing?

5.28
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I want to ask Members in this House to go to Mulago Hospital. Mulago Hospital is the biggest referral hospital in this country but if you go there, you can shed tears. Look at the wards. The British did a wonderful job and built Mulago for us and when they left, there has not been a single coat of paint. If you go there, it is so miserable. 

The conditions, which are our patients go through are terrible. Regarding the people working in Mulago Hospital, I do not know whether Dr Kiyonga worked in Mulago Hospital at one time. The conditions in which the doctors and the medical personnel work are so terrible. Of late, Government has been saying that Mulago Hospital has got to be renovated and everybody has now shifted to Naguru hospital and the lines are so long. 

Instead of shifting the staff from Mulago Hospital to go and sit in Naguru Hospital, which was built by the Chinese so that they can reduce on the great numbers of people, those doctors are not there. They are doing their own things and the pressure on Naguru hospital is great. I keep wondering what Government is doing. Why are you ignoring the people who gave you and us votes that you cannot provide for them?

I want to inform people in this House that I signed the first agreement for DANIDA to deliver essential drugs to Uganda and to come and build Entebbe Medical Stores. When this medicine comes to this country, it does not reach Mulago Hospital at all. The conditions are so bad. 

The whole country has hospitals that Obote built: Kawolo, Bugiri, Nakaseke, Bududa. Look at them, the situation is so bad. (Interruption) 

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague. I would like to give you this information that we have patients who are being referred to Mulago Hospital from upcountry districts like Amuru and Gulu. When they come to Mulago Hospital, they may spend a whole week without seeing a doctor yet Uganda, as a country, is exporting doctors to other countries.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much for that information. I keep wondering what the problem is in this country. We have got so trained doctors from Mbarara Hospital, Gulu University Hospital and then Makerere University. There are so many doctors but these doctors are working as volunteers -(Member timed out.)

5.32
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the committee for the detailed report that they have made about Mulago Hospital. Because we are speaking about Mulago Hospital, I am constrained to report to the House about something that one of my constituents reported to me about one week ago. 

He had a cancer patient at Mulago and his patient and other patients at the Cancer Institute were being forced to sleep outside because the place was overcrowded. I understand that Mulago Hospital is under renovation and there is a new building being put up but as of now, from what I understood, there are cancer patients who were admitted but there was no place for them inside the ward and they are sleeping outside. This person called me and wanted me to provide a solution but as of that time, I did not have one.

I thought that since the Minister of Health is here, she could be able to tell the country what the situation is. How come admitted patients are staying out in the sunshine and sleeping in the cold? How can patients be on treatment and at the same time they are sleeping outside and not in the ward? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.34
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, People with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the committee for this report. We should appreciate that Mulago Hospital is the sole national referral hospital. Being a national referral hospital it implies that all the hospitals in the country refer patients to Mulago. It is not therefore surprising that Mulago is overwhelmed by the number of patients.

However, there is a very great improvement now in Mulago Hospital. Despite the inadequacies, there is serious renovation going on. As my honourable colleague said, I paid a visit to the Uganda Cancer Institute and they could only accommodate about six or seven patients because they did not have enough accommodation. Today, the Uganda Cancer Institute has built a new magnificent building, which I also visited. It was only lacking equipment such that it can be used efficiently.

In the same place where the Cancer Institute is, the government has now built a new paediatric ward for children only. Therefore, there is a good future for Mulago Hospital. I implore colleagues in Parliament that if Mulago Hospital brings its budget here, it is incumbent on us as Members of Parliament that where we are lacking adequate services, we should include that money in their budget. 

A case in point here is, have we interested ourselves to know how much money has been appropriated to Mulago Hospital? Normally, we do not appropriate even half of what Mulago Hospital asks for but the medical staffs in Mulago endure this. They work and perform on that very miserable budget. I therefore appeal to colleagues that Mulago, as a national referral hospital, is trying its best. If you see the number of OPD -(Member timed out.)

5.38
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for that report but I would also like to thank the government for the rehabilitation that is going on in Mulago Hospital. Everybody is anxiously waiting to see that something is done at the end of the day and how Ugandans are going to benefit from the health services of this referral hospital. 

However Mr Speaker, allow me to make this observation. Our biggest concern, as representatives of the people, is the way health workers are handling patients. Recently, I had a resident in my district that came to me explaining how her daughter, who had twins, had gone to deliver in Mulago Hospital and was mistreated. I was overwhelmed and could not believe it. I may not have the time to explain the whole story but I think something has to be done. I know this is an ethical issue and these people must have a human heart and face.

I would like the Ministry of Health to help us. As the buildings are being rehabilitated, we also need the human resource in Mulago Hospital to have a human face. If they are not motivated, please find a way.

The other issue is that of equipment. We know very well that most of the equipment in Mulago Hospital is broken down and maintenance is still a big challenge. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Health that as they bring their budget, specifically for Mulago Referral Hospital, we would like to see the component of maintenance and rehabilitation of our equipment.

We have many cancer patients who go to Mulago Hospital but they cannot be helped because the equipment is broken down. Where do we expect them to go?

Regarding medicine, it is so surprising and shocking that as we speak, patients in Mulago Hospital and Naguru Hospital- By the way, Naguru Hospital is doing very well in as far as the human resource is concerned. However, the challenge is that patients are given prescriptions to go and buy their own drugs and we ask ourselves, where is the National Medical Stores? 

The Ministry of Health should tell us why Mulago Hospital does not have the required drugs that our patients need. The poor people cannot afford those drugs and at the end of the day, they are left on the beds to wait for their death -(Member timed out.)

5.41
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had the privilege of growing up in one of the hospitals; one of my guardians was working in Kitagata Hospital. These hospitals in Kitagata, Bundibugyo and others in Yumbe were built by Obote in the 1960s and 1970s. However, one health centre, Kabatunda Dispensary, which was built in my constituency in Kasese in 1988 has collapsed. Meanwhile, those which were built in the 1960s and 1970s still stand. 

I have been wondering why in this modern era where we have advanced in technology, we build structures that can collapse before 30 years have elapsed while those structures, which were built 50 or 40 years ago are still there. 

As the Opposition, we visited Pallisa Hospital in 2014. In the theatre of Pallisa Hospital, there was no bulb and the operating table is a chair and one wonders! We were in Yumbe where the situation is bad -(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have attentively listened to hon. Nzoghu. However, I do not know whether he is procedurally right. Although his concerns are correct, he is addressing issues regarding general hospitals yet we are particularly looking at the Auditor-General’s report regarding Mulago Hospital and we want serious input concerning that. Is hon. Nzoghu procedurally right to lead us in that direction when we would like to attain more information about Mulago Referral Hospital? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, indeed you said you were listening very attentively and if you were, you would have heard that it has to do with the Ministry of Health and Mulago Referral Hospital.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Last year, we had a scenario, which was presented on the Floor where nurses who were going to commence their studies were required to pay between Shs 800,000 and Shs 900,000 and yet we know that they were going to study on government sponsorship.

Mr Speaker, why do we have a higher per cent -(Member timed out.)

5.46
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are discussing this report, I think we are looking at value for money. In the report, there is an issue where they are stating the purchase of ambulances. These ambulances were basically Land Cruisers and pickups instead of procuring the Land Cruisers. I am wondering why a hospital like this does not follow the procurement plan. Does it mean that they flaunt the PPDA Act so that they do what they like in the disguise of hiding certain costs? I believe such cases should be investigated. 

There is also an issue that was raised regarding the consumption of utilities by individual Mulago Hospital staff. I believe this is what has been escalating the tendencies of cutting services like electricity, and water to the patients because of individuals using these utilities. Government pays all of us salaries, including the hospital staff. Why can’t they have separate bills for the hospital wards, hospital administration and the staff instead of punishing the patients?

Last year, when National Water and Sewerage Corporation came in and cut off the water, the patients suffered and I believe this is a disservice to the patients –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Nyakikongoro. The information that I would like to give is that government must be seen to be doing the work that it is supposed to do. For example, if we have wards in the hospital as hon. Nyankikongoro is proposing that it may be built differently for water and electricity; that may affect the operations of the hospital. A doctor who has not accessed water or a nurse who has not accessed power will go to the ward when annoyed; and when annoyed their performance definitely deteriorates. I would think that in this case, I would support a decision of government to have water and power for hospitals and hospital quarters. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating honourable member?

MR NZOGHU: I am giving information, Mr Speaker.

MS NYANKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu. One -(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About Mulago, I think when you move to other countries with serious hospitals, the leaders of those countries go to their hospitals and that is why they invest and make them the best.

Provided that we still have members of Parliament being insured with IAA, ministers fly to India and America and the Judiciary getting planes to go outside then we cannot help our own hospitals. That is why when you go to Mulago the people there are those who cannot afford Nakasero Hospital, Kampala Hospital and other such hospitals.

Therefore, for us to make Mulago functional, I think we can give it confidence by getting treatment from there. These ministers should stop flying outside and only then will Mulago be equipped and the doctors will be there –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Cadet to give me way. I remember in 2011, on that point you are trying to allude to, Parliament went an extra mile and gave the heart institute $4.5 million. Today when you go to Mulago, we have the best heart institute in Africa second to Aga Khan Hospital. Operations of children below 18 years can be done here; they no longer have to be taken to India; and we need only $2.5 million to operate adults as well.

Therefore, if we as Parliament can allocate money to these people, they can do a good job. Since Parliament went an extra mile and allocated money to the heart institute in Mulago, they now have the best equipment second to South Africa.  

MR CADET: Thank you very much. When you consider the heart institute that is a different accounting entity different from Mulago. It is located within Mulago but not part of the hospital. We are talking about Mulago Hospital.

Secondly, Mulago employs the best brains in terms of the doctors. However, because of the little pay, they end up working as part-time doctors in three hospitals. By the time you go there, much as he is good, the man is totally tired and is about to leave. To avoid that, Mulago should become social status like Kampala Capital City Authority. A doctor in Mulago getting Shs 2 million and a driver in Kampala Capital City Authority getting Shs 8 million, is abnormal! Therefore, we need to get back to the drawing board and place things in order.

Lastly, the situation in Mulago is a symptom of failures in the Ministry of Health. It is only in Uganda where you find administrators being doctors. Let doctors in Ministry of Health go to these hospitals; they are highly qualified. What you find in the Ministry -(Member timed out.)

5.53
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a good report. On the issue of human resource, there is shortage of staff in Mulago and we cannot expect that Mulago can perform when they do not have the staff. It is also surprising that while we have shortage of staff in our national referral hospital, we are sending our doctors abroad.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament increased pay for the doctors; I think the doctors are fairly paid unlike the nurses. The nurses stand on their feet right from 08.00 O’clock in the morning to 08.00 O’clock in the evening and they get meagre pay. Their other facilities like housing are also very poor! Is it possible for this Parliament to consider raising the pay for nurses?

Doctors run out of Mulago because of lack of equipment. We train doctors but they cannot adequately practise without equipment. We have a very poor maintenance culture that even the equipment we have is not well maintained. The women are shocked when they enter the maternity labour ward in Mulago Hospital. After the women have delivered, they lay on the floor. The bed where they deliver from has to be shared by many others. 

Mulago Hospital, being our national referral hospital, should be a shining example for all other hospitals that we have in the country. We have expiring drugs and yet people are given prescriptions to go and buy drugs outside Mulago Hospital. They buy drugs from Wandegeya and the surrounding towns. How can a national referral hospital purchase drugs that have a short shelf lifespan? What then will happen to the other hospitals? I think those in charge should be brought to book. As a referral hospital, they should set an example.

Mr Speaker, I know that members of Parliament are known to have high levels of stress. What do we expect of those people who stand on their feet from morning to evening talking to people who - (Member timed out_)

5.57
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I would like to also thank the committee for the report. Having looked into the report closely, I see a number of financial anomalies, misappropriation and flouting of the PPDA rules. I saw especially one when Shs 92 million was spent on a retreat to write a ministerial policy statement in Nile Hotel. I do not know which Nile Hotel is meant here because I know Jinja Nile Resort Hotel; I do not know any other Nile Hotel.

I wonder, Shs 92 million, to write a ministerial policy statement! How many people were in this retreat and how long did it take? Such a detail would have helped us because it is mind boggling. I wish a clarification could be given on that. I thank you.

5.58
RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. First, the starting gap in the ministry and Mulago; we have less than 50 per cent of the required staff. I think honourable minister you should carry out a human resource audit, you liaise with Ministry of Health so that critical posts are filled. You cannot expect a 100 per cent service with less than 50 per cent of the staff in the ministry.

Secondly, poor stores’ management: honourable minister, there is in the report a point that we lost equipment in some of the stores: the orthopaedic equipment which was supposed to go the local government. Carry out an asset audit; it strengthens asset management in the stores.

Thirdly, expired drugs; lack of capacity by the ministry and Mulago Hospital to destroy expired drugs - who can believe this? I think honourable minister next week you should tell us that you have now established capacity to destroy expired drugs.

Fourthly, the land titles: again the report points out that the ministry and hospital do not know the boundaries of their land. We do not have land titles for our health unit establishments. I think we need explanations as to why and they say the land is being encroached on. It is good that the lands minister is here. Surely, why should we not have land titles for Mulago Hospital and the others?

Finally, Mr Speaker, money lost by some staff: the committee pointed out that the accounting officer should be held responsible for lost funds. The staff that lost the GAVI funds should be held responsible - but you are not naming them. In the period under review, you may find several accounting officers have been there. Which accounting officer are we talking about? Why do you not in your report come out clearly to say accounting officer so and so should be held -(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make three points: First, over charging in hospitals where government has made some partnership or entered into a concession with private hospitals. You find there is no difference between where government is subsidizing and a purely private hospital. I wish the Minister of Health could get interested in this. Sometimes these charges are prohibitive and unmanageable.

Secondly, some of the Memorandum of Understanding that we have entered with private investors have expired and they are long overdue and not yet renewed. I wish the minister also could get interested in these agreements to determine the way forward.

Lastly, is about Kilembe Hospital. In 2013 and 2015, Kilembe Hospital was washed away and about 80 units of staff quarters were swept off. Nurses lost their academic transcripts and I would wish to know from the Minister of Health the plan you have to put up new staff units.

As for today, Kasese District is incurring a big expense transporting staff for duty over five to six kilometres every day. I wish to get your comments on when you will visit Kilembe Hospital and put up new staff units.  What is your programme? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.02
MS PYHLLIS CHEMUTAI: (FDC, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about weekends in Mulago Hospital. I am one of those who have been taking many patients to Mulago Hospital, but I have found it very difficult to find a doctor over the weekends. 

A week ago, I lost somebody from Kapchorwa on a Saturday but the body remained in the ward until Monday because there was nobody to attend to the corpse. Therefore, I request the ministry to ensure that Mulago Hospital services are made available all the time to our patients. It is a referral hospital; they must be able to receive the patients all the time and not the patients to find nobody in the ward. It is not only one time that I have been there, but many times over the weekends there is no doctor in the hospital. Thank you.

6.04
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Few days ago, I attended a re-union in Kigali of Ntare School Old Boys. I was surprised to meet very many Ugandans who had gone through Ntare, Makerere University and they were in Rwanda. 

When I asked them whether they had gone specifically to attend the reunion, I was shocked that they had left Uganda, Mbarara University and Mulago, but they were in Rwanda and they earn about Shs 7 million per month.

When you look at the economy of Rwanda and problems Rwanda has gone through you cannot even image Rwandans would attract our best trained doctors. 

Since 2011, we have been talking about remuneration and conditions of our health workers. The government has kept a deaf ear since 2011. No wonder the congestion, problems mentioned in the report; it is because Mulago Hospital is poorly managed. Why can’t we treat our professional doctors in a special way? You look after Uganda Revenue Authority Staff very well; you even pay Musisi of Kampala City Council well but you forget these people who go to the universities and study very difficult subjects. They work in difficulty; why can’t the government and Parliament pronounce that this financial year, we are going to do something about salaries for our health worker? I thank you.

6.06
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (INDEPENDENT, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. It is rather unfair to Ugandans well noting that planned activities of the Ministry of Health are abandoned and funds diverted to pay back misappropriated funds, for instance, the Shs 1,890 million are paid to Gavi without notice to Parliament. How then do you expect the ministry to operate or to have services delivered to the people?

Mr Speaker, I have benefited from one of the trips to Geneva. While I interacted with one of the people that are helping us get these funds, there is a lot of bureaucracy with the ministry. There is even failure to report back so that we can access more funding for the health sector. I do not know whether the ministry needs to shape up a little bit. Countries like Rwanda are benefiting twice or thrice more than us in Uganda, yet Ugandans out there are envied for their good services. The ministry needs to speed up the process so that we do not miss out.

Lastly, I believe Mulago Hospital is being stressed beyond its normal capacity. Why don’t we consider having these public and private hospitals around the country well facilitated so that people are not pushed to Mulago? Where are you going to put the people; people are stranded in the corridors of Mulago, people all the way from Kotido, Arua and Gulu. How do you expect Ugandans to get services in that way? The ministry needs to consider that at least for better service delivery. Thank you.

6.08
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In the report we realised that there was the diversion of money for the interns and for that matter, it made money to be paid to the interns twice.

Mr Speaker, this is unacceptable, in most cases when interns are not paid - you know that they are not fully trained and they are training on patients. Most of them miss if they do not receive their money. We realised cases where the interns sometimes leave gauze inside people or they do not treat them well and this costs people their lives. 

I feel that our ministry should really adhere to whatever they have planned and budgeted so that such mess does not really arise.

On the issue of utilities, we realised that simply because the executive director left all the work to the accounting officer, some of the medical workers are also subletting water and electricity and generating income. It was uncontrolled and this is the reason that the bills were too high for Mulago Hospital and the electricity and water supply was being cut off. I think the executive director should take charge of the whole institution so that we do not have such a mess.

Lastly, cash management is a greater issue and concern to Mulago. We have cases of the heart and urology. Just last month we lost two prominent people in Lira District. The doctors are paid but we end up paying for everything. If you have heart problems, you pay and if you want to a urology test, you pay for it and yet the money is being mismanaged here. I feel that government should see this as a major concern because Mulago is a national hospital – (Member timed out.)

6.10
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the committee and I would like to start by saying that the report has indicated a lot of mismanagement of funds and poor administration and management of issues within Mulago Hospital.

The Auditor-General has singled them out. I now would like to ask government, through the Ministry of Health, to take action and reorganise the system in Mulago so that resources are managed well and administration is effective. In the next report we want to see an improved situation.

Secondly, there are a lot of payments at Mulago Hospital. I have time and again talked about charging parking fees at the hospital as if it is not a government hospital. However, they continue to charge parking fees and it does not matter whether you have gone to collect a dead body or a patient. Is this a government facility or something that they even introduce a charge for parking? I think that this is very unfair. They say that services are free in the hospital but when somebody dies and you want to collect the body, this is when you find the highest charges. Why don’t you treat the body for free because you say that you are treating people for free – you now want a lot of money when people are bereaved? This is an area I want the ministry to take seriously. 

Secondly, we should not say that the hospital is free. There are a lot of charges. Let us therefore make it official if you want people to do cost sharing other than people paying money illegally to people who want to take it for themselves. 

For example, the services at the Private Wing of Mulago Hospital are one of the most expensive facilities in this country and even more expensive than at Nakasero and IHK hospitals. The good thing is that once you pay the money, all the doctors who are within Mulago will come and treat you and the medicine will be available – better than even in these other hospitals. The machines are also –(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): I would like to thank the committee. There is a point in this report about the land titles of this hospital and I think that the ministry should take keen interest.

There is a bit of mismanagement at the newly constructed Naguru Hospital because when you now look at it, the hospital is almost dilapidated and the Ministry of Health and KCCA are both struggling to be in charge of that hospital. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should come in and either give that hospital’s land title to the Ministry of Health or to KCCA so that the management is known. A lot of money was spent on building that hospital with the essence of reducing congestion – (Interjections) - no, it does not belong anywhere because the Ministry of Health and KCCA are fighting for it and the details of the land title are not known.

Secondly, we need to do something about allocation of money to Mulago Hospital. We have got the best consultants and doctors and I can use the heart institute as an example. Although the institute is a self-accounting entity, the subsidy from government is reducing the costs. People no longer go to India –(Member timed out.)

6.14
MR EPHRIAM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): I thank the committee for the good observations and recommendations. Much as we talk about the negligence and shortage of staff, most of the clinical and health staff do not abandon Mulago and the other health facilities to go to Rwanda but some of them abandon them and go home. This is partly because when people do not have accommodation near their place of work for ease of access, they feel at risk. 

Take this example of a medical doctor working at Mulago on the night or late evening shift and you stay in Naalya – most of the houses belonging to Mulago were sold off and the doctors therefore do not have accommodation. This is everywhere including in my sub-counties, counties and constituency. If a doctor is said to be on call and he or she is five or 10 kilometres away, that doctor for sure will switch off his or her phone and the patient will wait for hours before the doctor comes.

So, part of the recommendation we should give is that there should be accommodation for critical staff within reach of the health facility. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.16
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): The information that I wanted to give the House is that we were told that in the 1970s, President Idi Amin Dada and all his family members used to get treatment from Mulago Hospital.

I would like to suggest that maybe let all our leaders start receiving treatment from Mulago so that our doctors begin doing their work effectively. They may be reluctant knowing that none of the top leaders may go and receive treatment from the hospital. We need to stop flying out for treatment.

Secondly, my colleague was talking about our doctors going to Rwanda but if you go to our neighbours in South Sudan, 80 per cent of doctors there are from Uganda. You may wonder why a country like South Sudan could attract many medical doctors from Uganda away from our country.

Finally, in 2012, the Government of Uganda announced the increment in the doctor’s salary to Shs 2.5 million. It was effected and last year, the payment was stopped meaning that our doctors are earning less than Shs 800,000 per month and yet they are paid more than Shs 5 million when go to other countries. 

We need to start finding ways of motivating our doctors so that we have better and quality medical services in the country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Health.

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and colleagues for the good words that they have spoken about the health sector, the improvements that are being made despite some challenges that are still being faced.

First and foremost, Mulago is a national referral hospital, and we all know this. However, we are all aware that Mulago has been dealing with certain ailments that it should not be handling. When you go there, it is over crowed with patients with simple ailments like malaria that should be dealt with at lower health facilities. 

This is why we have invested funds in ensuring that we construct new health facilities in Kiruddu and Makindye, and of course Naguru which is already operational. The aim is to decongest Mulago Hospital so that it only handles what it is supposed to handle like any other national referral hospitals. We hope that before the end of this year, we shall be commissioning these two facilities at Kiruddu and Makindye.

It is not only the construction but we are also going to equip them with the necessary equipment and also stock them. Staff accommodation has also been built within the facilities. For some of you who may have been there, you have seen what has been going on there.

For Mulago, currently, renovation works are on. Of course there is bit of a mess when you go there now, but it is because of the construction works. Different wards have been shifted, some have been merged and the place is currently -(Interjection)- please can I proceed? Based on the current staffing level, Mulago has staff with a tune of 81 per cent. Although we would wish to have more staff, the ceiling given for Mulago now is still low but it is something we are going to address gradually with the Ministry of Public Service.

Mr Speaker, members have mentioned the challenges at Uganda Cancer Institute. You all recall the Uganda Cancer Institute was built way back in the early 1960s, and it was then a 30 bed capacity. Now look at the patients who are in cancer institute. This is the reason, why today we considered the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill, and we hope that very soon we shall bring it to Parliament to make the cancer institute an autonomous institution. 

We already have a six storied structure that was built using Government of Uganda funding to relieve the cancer patients from the challenges they are facing now of sleeping on the floors and outside. You can imagine capacity of only 30 beds. If you go there now, there are over 200 patients in the cancer ward. 

So we hope that when it is an autonomous institution, it is going to be given full mandate to also have other regional centres because it is going to be a centre of excellence that will deal with the challenge of cancer in the country.

That will also help us to reduce on the referrals abroad. Members have been raising the issue of people being referred abroad. This is because the cancer institute currently is just a unit and when we make it autonomous, then we shall be able to raise the salaries of the health workers and of course this is one way of bringing back our qualified health workers who wish to offer services here but they cannot in the state in which the cancer institute is currently operating because it is just a unit.

Mr Speaker, hon. Sseninde raised the issue of health workers mistreating patients. This is a challenge that I cannot deny. I know it exists. Personally, I sometimes walk into health facilities in my simple state and the way you are attended to, I just look on and it is only at the end that I introduce myself. So this is something that is existing; but we must also look at the current training of the health workers. Previously, being a health worker was a calling. These people were being closely mentored by the senior doctors, nurses, midwives. Today the training institutions are housed somewhere else. So this could be partly the reason for that. That is something that we have discussed and we shall continue discussing and find a way forward on this. 

To try and resolve this issue, we have provided uniforms to our health workers. Some of you must have seen them with their names, so that any health worker who mistreats a patient at least the patient can be able to say so and so did this at this time or asked for a bribe – but not all the health workers are actually covered.

The maintenance of equipment has been a challenge. However, I just want to inform members that we started biomedical engineering training at both Makerere and Kyambogo University and we are in discussion with the Ministry of Public Service because we now have graduates. We have been having a challenge of maintaining most of our equipment. Equipment is brought but at the end of the day we have to fly in people to come and maintain it. When there is no money, they remain there redundant. We hope that with these new cadres on board, we shall be able to deal with this challenge. 

The drug issue was a challenge before. We should note that this was an audit report for a period of the year 2010. Things have since changed from that time. We have seen an improvement in the distribution of drugs. 

However, I just want to inform members that for tertiary care, the drugs are expensive and much as we may say; “Why is Mulago asking us to buy the drugs”? There are certain drugs, depending on the consultant who is attending to you, there is a drug that may be in stock but it might not be able to help you. It is not a common problem that you can have everybody using drug A. So the National Medical Stores procures certain drugs based on the request. However, when a senior consultant comes in, sometimes they recommend certain drugs that may not be in stock but the drugs are actually procured.

For the lower health facilities, there has been an improvement in the distribution and delivery. Hon. Nzoghu said that the structures built in the 1950s are still there. Of course we have to deal with the challenge of corruption. You all know this. Yesterday, I was in Moroto looking at structures. The hospital was built in 1940 but the buildings although old now, are still there. So the challenge is with corruption -(Interjections)- no, I am speaking generally. 

There is a challenge with contractors today, and of course there is a challenge with the people who are supposed to be supervising these works. So we must admit that and it is an issue that is not for us government alone; it is for all of us to address.

Hon. Nyakikongoro talked about procurement of Land Cruisers. I just want to inform you - because of resources, sometimes we buy multipurpose vehicles. We cannot only go in to procuring ambulances. For example, if you go to the districts, you will find most of the health centres with double cabin pickups. This is because of the dual role that the pickup can play. It will transport the patient to the next facility but also act as - (Interjection) – yes. The health workers at the lower health facility are supposed to do out-reach. So, sometimes they move to these areas to conduct out-reaches and this is the reason we procure multipurpose vehicles other than the actual ambulances.

However, I want to inform you that we are aware of the challenge of ambulances. I think this was even raised earlier; we have been discussing at Cabinet level. There is a paper to establish a stand-alone national ambulance service because most of these ambulances, if I can say, have been abused. Seventy four per cent of the facilities in this country have ambulances. However, most of these ambulances are not doing what they are supposed to be doing. When we have a stand-alone ambulance service – delinked from the facility – we shall be able to address these challenges where you find ambulances being used to transport charcoal, carry people for weddings, transport immature fish and so on.

Mr Speaker, there were members who raised the issue of utilities. I would like to inform you that for the utilities, there was a challenge not only at Mulago, but most of the facilities countrywide. Just to inform you, there is a Cabinet sub—committee that was put in place to see how best we can deal with this challenge of utilities. In most of the facilities, the metres for the staff houses have been delinked from the hospital or the health facility. In addition, the current pay-as-you-use, the “Yaka” system, is also going to help us control these bills.

The honourable member from Bunyaruguru raised the issue of ministers being flown out for treatment. I am not one of those and I do not know of any. If they go, I think it at their personal cost because I have not approved any person’s travel abroad. The medical board must approve it; it is a process. You do not just come with malaria and think that the medical board will approve. Those who do it do so on their own; they have their own resources. We have facilities around that can handle most of the cases. 

You recall, also that the Uganda Heart Institute, on the recommendation of Parliament, is going to be an autonomous institution. We already have the Uganda Heart Institute’s Bill that was passed by Cabinet and is supposed to be here in Parliament. The whole idea is also to address the challenge of travels abroad. We hope that when we have these autonomous institutions, we shall be able to attract our senior consultants who are out there because the pay will be higher than what it is now.

Hon. Jovah noted that pay for the nurses is very low. When you go to the private facilities, you find these nurses being paid less, but they are there committed to doing their work. When you come to the government facility – even where accommodation is provided, people are not there to provide the services. Therefore, there is a challenge of supervision and a challenge of attitude as you said. I think we have to think outside the box and see how best to deal with this challenge of the health workers.

Imagine a doctor in Ethiopia earns $250; that is very low. However, they are there, committed to doing their work. They are bonded; they must work for their country for three years. If you want to leave, you can go after that. These are lessons we have got to pick from other countries and see how to improve our situation here. However, the cost of living here is high and we all need to find resources to motivate our health workers and improve on supervision so that they can be able to work and also work in an environment that is conducive. 

We increased salaries for health workers at health centre IVs. It was not for all the health workers in the country. As you all noted, most of the doctors moved away from the general hospitals; some even wanted to leave the regional referral hospitals for health centre IVs. We have left these people without increasing their salary. This is an issue that we must address together. Fortunately, our President has always been saying it; we need to motivate the scientists in this country. With resources available, we shall be able to do this.

On the challenge of women lying on the floors with no beds, we are going to address this in the next financial year. We are going to procure beds and mattresses for all health facilities across the country and of course this challenge will not be there any longer.

However, I think it is time we educated our people; they have a tendency of leaving a nearby facility and going to the next one, which overcrowds that facility. If you go to Iganga, for example, you will not believe what you will find. If you went to Mityana, it is a similar case. I was in Mityana and I could not believe it, everybody is moving and they feel that is where they must go and access the services, yet the health centre IVs are there and operational.

Mr Speaker, we also hope to equip our hospitals. You have seen the construction works that are going on in most of our health facilities. Of course, we hope that in phase two – we  have phase one – we shall consider the health centre IVs in different parts of our districts and also renovate them and equip them.

Financial impropriety of Shs 92 million, to write a ministerial policy statement. These are things that happened before, but fortunately action has been taken where funds were actually misappropriated -(Interjection)- yes, in 2010. The Permanent Secretary then is no longer there now. Action was taken and some officials were convicted; those who misappropriated funds at that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally.

MS OPENDI: Hon. Magyezi, I think these were majorly recommendations. The issue of asset management in stores and the challenge of expired drugs have been noted. 

On the boundaries of the land of Mulago and other facilities, Mr Speaker, allow me to inform members that it is true we have a challenge with the land at Mulago. It has been encroached on with assistance of some staff within. I think this is an issue that has been in the Health Committee. We have written to the Ministry of Lands to actually open the boundaries of Mulago Hospital so that they can be able to get their title.

Kasese Municipality MP raised the issue of the charges being prohibitive and unmanageable by the poor. Private wings are supposed to generate funds – the non-tax revenue, which is sometimes used for giving allowances to the senior consultants. You all note that their salaries are low. It is also used to attend to the other issues within the hospital. When you go to the private wing, expect to be charged.

Services that have expired
You did not give specific ones; it is difficult to respond to them.

On Kilembe Hospital, we are aware of the challenge that was faced by this facility. We have a budget that was provided – not small money – and we submitted this to finance to provide funds so that we can construct a new hospital at Kilembe.

The issue of parking

I thought this was removed when hon. Bitekyerezo raised the matter on the Floor here. Does it still exist in Mulago? I am surprised because I thought this matter had been dealt with at the time when it was raised by hon. Bitekyerezo. If there are charges, allow me to follow it up and find out. However, we should also note that when you have a free facility – where people just drive in and out – then you end up getting all kinds of thieves. This small fee is to enable the hospital recruit some security personnel to be around to at least protect your vehicle and whatever else you have in there.

The member for Kapchorwa raised the issue of working over the weekend. There are staff who are deployed to work over the weekend. The health workers work in shifts. Therefore, if somebody died on Saturday and the body was only removed on Monday, you need to give me details so that I follow it up. It is difficult for me to respond to it now. This is because I expect staff to be in the ward on a daily basis and they work in shift.

The pay for health workers, hon. Yaguma, I think I have already responded to this. There was an issue raised by the honourable member about the Shs 1.8 billion paid to GAVI-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to wind up, please?

MS OPENDI: Yes, I am winding up actually. The Shs 1.8 billion paid to GAVI without Parliamentary approval - we normally have MoUs with GAVI. Government of Uganda is supposed to make a contribution for the vaccines, so we do not have to come to Parliament for approval -(Interjection)- no, it was alleged that it was misappropriated but our response is that the money was paid to GAVI through UNICEF as our contribution towards the vaccine. 

Mr Speaker, I think that is it.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Chairperson, briefly!

6.39
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank all members who have made contributions. However, I will start by making some corrections. For example, when it comes to GAVI funds, the point in issue is that the people who misappropriated the GAVI funds are known. What government did, they went and encroached on the budget of Ministry of Health and refunded money, yet the people who had misappropriated the funds were known. What the committee was saying is that they ought to have recovered the funds from those individuals. 

When it comes to the drugs; they are stocked out. There are supplies of expired and also poor quality drugs. We are saying that the National Drug Authority should step up the inspections of such types of drugs.

On Ambulances; they budgeted to buy ambulances, but instead they bought pickups. This was what we also wanted to bring to your attention.

Then the other is that Ministry of Health has left the health sector largely in the hands of the interns. This is a startling issue that has posed a very big challenge in most of the areas and the doctors said they are stressed. They cannot work long hours and therefore it is the interns who are filling the gap. 

Therefore, we think as government, you need to take it up. I do not know how you would feel honourable minister, if you are being attended to by an intern when there is no doctor in charge. Honourable minister, you would agree that the interns are supposed to work under the supervision of a doctor. However, this is not what is happening. 

I want to say that the financial mismanagement largely contained in the report was because there was an oversight on part of Parliament that we passed the Ministry of Health’s budget without a procurement plan. Therefore because they now procure on time, they found themselves with money. That is why we found out that the heart workshop keep on spending the way they wanted because they had no absorption capacity of the funds.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I wanted to make a correction on the Uganda Heart Institute which hon. Kakooza was referring to. We have the best machines in this country, but because we have no personnel, we end up flying our patients out of the country. 

The director had made a concept paper which he had even given to the President and a copy to the Public Accounts Committee where if he was given five cardiologists, he would be in position to operate all the patients we take out of the country, double them and even make a saving of Shs 10 billion annually to this country. I wanted us to be clearly understood.

Mr Speaker, having said that, I want to end by requesting this House to adopt the report we presented. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, members of the committee and the whole House for this very elaborate report and discussion we have had. Honourable minister, thank you for your very sharp response to some of the issues raised. 

Honourable members, and I address myself of course to the whole House, tomorrow we have three decisions to make. I am calling upon all the whips to take charge and ensure that we have the sufficient attendance to make us make the decisions. 

Honourable members, the items I am talking about are first of all, a decision on the debate we have concluded on the matter of Uganda Coffee Development Authority. Another one is a decision on Ministry of Health and Mulago Referral Hospital whose debate we have just concluded. 

Also tomorrow, we will be having a full discussion and a decision is expected on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General on the Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Businesses. It will be a full debate and decisions tomorrow. Therefore, we expect sufficient attendance to enable us finish these.

We should have also been finishing with the issue of Kasokoso, but I have had a request from both the mover and seconder of the motion who happened to be representing this area that tomorrow would not be appropriate for them because they have consultations with those people. Therefore, they requested for another date when this matter can be completely and sufficiently concluded.

Therefore, Kasokoso will not be on the Order Paper tomorrow, but it will be on the Order Paper next week for finalisation. Hon. Seninde here who moved the motion and the seconder of the motion, made the request. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow, Thursday at 2.00 O’clock for decisions.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 12 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)





