

Tuesday, 7 March 2017

Parliament met at 10.44 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting and I thank you very much for coming. I am giving notice that I will have to inconvenience you again on Thursday morning so that you can come back to the House, owing to the amount of work we need to do by the end of this week, namely completing the Insurance Bill, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and the Anti-Terrorism Bill, all of which must be done by Friday. 

We shall sit this morning to deal with the Insurance Bill. Hopefully, we will finish it and be able to do other work in the afternoon and also on Thursday, as I have indicated.

On a sad note, we have again lost a very senior citizen in the person of hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi. He was the former Katikkiro of Buganda, former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission. The body will be brought here on Thursday at midday and that is why we have to sit in the morning to do some work. We will then pay tribute to him in the afternoon. 

I would, therefore, like to appeal to the Members to be here today and on Thursday. Thank you very much. 

10.47
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to present this matter of national importance. 

For the last 10 years, the Bugungu community of Buliisa in Bunyoro Kingdom has given maximum cooperation to Government for oil exploration, only to find out that we have absentee “mafia” landlords in Kampala claiming community land, even after the President had been informed about this matter. The President came to Buliisa in 2010 and revoked all those offers and directed that no more should be issued. 

To our surprise, two weeks ago, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Betty Amongi - and I would like to thank her for personally coming down to Buliisa. After the presidential directive she came and found that 36 villages, which the oil companies are interested in for the oil processing unit, for the well pad and for the pipeline are all being claimed by people in Kampala. Those people had done surveys by GPS and have deed plans without a single neighbour’s consent. They are now holding the oil companies at ransom and asking for billions of shillings in compensation. 

When the President gave licences for development and production, each village that the oil companies went to is being claimed by people in Kampala and yet they want to deal with the community to start work.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because it took our debate in Parliament here for the Bunyoro oil roads to be remembered. If it was not for that debate, the Budget Framework Paper had not provided money for any work to be done in the region. The lands sector was not talked about so, the roads are being remembered because of oil. 

We would like to ask the honourable minister Amongi, who has made the effort to come, that we need technical experts and surveyors, not only for the oil investment land to be surveyed. Our prayer to Parliament is that Government finds money for systematic demarcation of land in Buliisa and that it registers community associations where all this oil is found. This will ensure that the communities are the ones to be talked to for re-settlement and compensation instead of the Kampala “mafias” who deliberately speculated on this land, specifically for oil.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I thought we would raise those matters in the afternoon but he said it was something urgent. Hon. Aogon and hon. Rwabushaija will raise their matters in the afternoon sitting. I would like to go to the Insurance Bill. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the presidential directive written to the then Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, directing a review of all the land, which had been offered earlier and also to stop further offers. However, to our surprise, they have defied the President and have been doing their own things. I would like to lay this on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay on the Table, a letter from our able Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Betty Amongi, who is serving “Project Uganda”. She took time off her desk to reverse this injustice. The letter is directing that all these actions that were done after the presidential visit must be rescinded.

Madam Speaker, this leaves behind the purpose, which brought the President; the earlier offers. These are all areas, which were targeted for the earlier oil refinery option for the pipeline and well pad.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the minister’s findings regarding what has been done after the President’s visit. To our surprise, last week we found 28 more major installations and the record is even concealed. I think some of these people should be arrested because they have not only defied the President but they are also hard-core criminals; real mafias. 

The DPC has been chasing people from clearing their gardens that the land has owners in Kampala. The minister was there for two days but there was no single police escort. However, there are over 60 policemen chasing villagers from their gardens. It is a very highly connected mafia group, which I think we need Government to intervene. I thank you so much, Madam speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, the situation in Buliisa is a bit volatile. You probably need to say something about it. 

10.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Betty Amongi, is right on the ground. She has been cancelling land titles all over this country. 

A fresh directive was given recently in Cabinet by the President. We are not only going to cancel illegal land titles but we are going to penalise those who have connived in order to make sure that we recover - They have to compensate. Actually, the President called it “compensation”. For those who connived and got illegal land titles, cancellation of a land title is not enough. Such people are going to be handled and punished. 

I think this is an area where the Minister of Lands will keep on briefing Parliament and the relevant stakeholders through meetings with Members of Parliament. We have already done one in the central region and I am sure she will organise other regional meetings with Members of Parliament. This is a serious matter, Madam Speaker, and we are handling it. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to commend hon. Mukitale because he has been consistent in this struggle since the Seventh Parliament. (Applause)

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

Clause 39

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 39 stand part of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMTTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 39 as follows: “The capital requirements of a mutual insurance company shall be prescribed in the regulations made under this Act.”

Our justification is to remove the details of capital requirements to be paid by mutual insurance companies to be provided for in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 40 be deleted. Our justification is that it is a consequential amendment to having the capital requirements spelt out under the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 40 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 41 as follows:

    (i) In sub-clause (1), buy deleting the words “to transact” and substituting with the words “carry on”.
    (ii) By deleting sub-clauses (2) and (3).

Our justification is that these matters are to be provided for in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 41 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 42 by inserting a new paragraph (g), immediately after paragraph (f), as follows and the paragraphs to be re-numbered: “(g) Such other matters as the authority considers appropriate.”

The justification is to cater for other matters that may not be provided for under the above paragraphs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 42 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 44 as follows:

    (i) By substituting for sub-clause (2), the following: “(2) An insurance licence, issued under sub-section (1), remains in force until suspended, varied or revoked.”
    (ii) In sub-clause (3), by deleting the words “ninety days” and substituting them with “sixty days”.

The justification is for better drafting and to reduce the number of days the authority has to communicate its decision in regard to the grant of an application.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 45 as follows: 
    (i) By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following: “The authority may at any time vary, suspend or revoke the licence of an insurer to carry out business under this Act where -”
    (ii) In sub-clause (1)(b):
    (a) Inserting the word “and” immediately after the word “principles”; and
    (b) By deleting the words “and ethics as prescribed by the Uganda Insurers Association and filed with the authority”;
    (iii) In sub-clause (1)(c), by deleting the words “or that the net assets of the insurer are below the minimum prescribed paid-up capital”;
    (iv) By substituting for sub-clause (1)(d) the following: “(d) The insurer is not in compliance with the capital adequacy requirements prescribed in the regulations”;
    (v) By deleting sub-clause (1)(e);
    (vi) By adding a new sub-clause (9), immediately after sub-clause (8), to read as follows: “The provisions of the Act continue to apply to an insurer, despite the suspension or revocation of its licence.”

The justification is, it is proper that insurers conduct their business on sound insurance principles and practices.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 45 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 48 as follows:
    (i) In the head note, by inserting the words “and other prudential” immediately after the word “adequacy”;
    (ii) By deleting –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I have some difficulties. Okay, there is something I have found.

MR MUSASIZI: (ii), we propose to delete sub-clause (2) and substitute it with the following: 

“(2) For the purposes of this section, capital resources has the meaning specified in the regulations made under sub-section (3).” 

(iii) In sub-clause (3), by inserting the words “and other prudential, immediately after the word “adequacy”.

The justification is to cater for other prudential requirements to be prescribed in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 49 as follows: Clause 49 is deleted and substituted with the following: “(49) Technical provisions. An insurer and a HMO shall establish and maintain the technical provisions prescribed in regulations made by the authority under section 48(3).”

The justification is that “technical provisions” is the term used in the ICPs. The term “reserves for outstanding claims” is not correct as it implies that the insurer must know a claim before a reserve is required.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 50 as follows: 

    (i) By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following: “An insurer or a HMO shall comply with such requirements concerning investments as are specified in regulations made by the authority.”
    (ii) By deleting sub-clauses (2) and (3).

The justification is to provide clarity in the provision and the details contained in sub-clauses 2 and 3 are matters to be provided in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 50 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 51 as follows: In paragraph (b) by deleting the words “paid-up capital and other capital” and substituting them with the words “capital resources”.

The justification is to comply with ICP 17 that mandates the supervisors to establish capital adequacy requirements for companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 51 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete clause 52 and substitute it with the following: “(52) No reduction in share capital of insurer or HMO. An insurer or HMO shall not reduce its paid-up share capital, or cause or permit its paid-up share capital to be reduced, without the prior written consent of the authority and any resolution passed in contravention of this section is void and of no effect.”

The justification is to comply with ICP 17.9, which requires any variations in the regulatory capital requirements imposed by the authority to be made in a transparent framework.

MR OKOTH: Madam Chairperson, in clause 51 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have finished clause 51. We are now on clause 52.

MR OTIENO: Yes, but in clause 51, we have just replaced “paid-up capital” with “capital resources”. In clause 52, we are still maintaining that an insurer or HMO shall not reduce its “paid-up share capital.” Why don’t we adopt “capital resources”, which we have replaced in clause 51 instead of “paid-up share capital?” I thought that is what we just removed from the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, have you understood?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Before the chairman comes in, I am a member of the committee. What we intended is that an insurance provider does not reduce the share capital. Therefore, the solution is not in allowing the authority to authorise them to reduce it. I thought we had agreed that if you want to be an insurer, this is the share capital. 

The way you are reading clause 52 is that if the authority allows them, they can reduce the share capital. We are creating a situation where they can influence the authority to allow them. Probably, we should just stick to saying, to provide insurance capital in Uganda, this is the threshold. I thought that was the spirit in the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Otieno’s problem is that in clause 51, you have removed the word, “paid-up capital” and replaced it with “resources” but now in this one, you have brought it back. Therefore, he is saying, why do you have something different in 51 and 52?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, both words are being used in the Bill to mean different things.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why did you remove the other one then? I thought you did not want the words “paid-up capital” and that is why you introduced “resources.”

MR MUSASIZI: No. “Paid-up capital” and “capital resources” mean different things and, therefore, they are used in different situations, depending on where it applies, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the question is that clause 52 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, (i) we propose to amend clause 53 by deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following:
“
(1)	A life insurer shall establish and maintain segregated funds as required by the regulations.”
(ii)	By deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), segregated funds has the meaning specified in the regulations made under sub-section (1)”.
(iii)	By deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting with the following: “(3) An insurer that contravenes sub-section 1 is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.”

The justification is for better drafting and to have the details of the segregated accounts provided in the regulations and to provide for a default fine on contravention of sub-section (1).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 53 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 54 by:

    (a) Deleting the head note and substituting it with the following: “Restriction on loans.”
    (b) By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following:
 
(1) 	An insurer or HMO shall not, without the prior written approval of the authority, give a loan to an officer or a director of the insurer except - 
(a) 	where a loan on a life policy is limited to the policy’s surrender value where the right to borrow the same amount is also provided to the policy holder of that class; or 
(b) 	where a loan is forming part of the terms and conditions of service of that officer or director, repayable within three years.”
(c) 	By deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “(2)Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the total aggregate of the loans given to an officer or director of an insurer or HMO shall not exceed ten per cent of the paid-up capital of the insurer or HMO.”
(d)	By deleting sub clause (3) and substituting it with   the following: “(3)An insurer or HMO who gives a loan to an officer or director contrary to sub-sections (1) and (2), commits an offence and is liable to a fine double the amount of the loan given.”

The justification is to provide for stronger regulation of the authority and to provide for the HMOs that had been left out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 54 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 55 by deleting the words, “hold more than one-third of the shares of that company” and substitute them with the words “except as permitted by the regulations.”

The justification is to provide for flexibility in regulations executed by the authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 55 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 56 as follows:

    (a) By inserting the words “and HOMs” after the word “insurers” in the headnote. 
    (b) By inserting the words, “or the prior written approval of the authority” immediately after the word “Act.” 

The justification is that the authority should be able to give its approval on a case-by-case basis.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 57 we propose the following amendments:

    (a) By deleting sub clause (1) and substituting it with the following:
	“(1)An insurer or a HMO shall not make a distribution by any of its shareholders unless, immediately after the distribution, the insurer or HMO complies with the capital adequacy requirements prescribed by the authority in the regulations made under section 48(3) and all other prudential requirements applicable to the insurer or HMO.” 
    (b) By deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting it with the following: “(3)An insurer or HMO that contravenes sub-section (1) shall recover, from its shareholders, the dividends paid to them and be liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.”

The justification is to allow the companies to make distribution to their shareholders, provided they comply with the capital adequacy requirements.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 57 –

MR OKOTH OTIENO: Madam Chairperson, I note that there is a slight variation in the wording here. The text I have reads, in sub-clause (1), “An insurer or an HMO shall not make a distribution to any of its shareholders…” but when I listened to the chairperson of the committee, I noticed that he talked about “…distribution by any…” –(Interjection)– that is what he said.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, what did you say?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, our proposed amendment reads as follows: “An insurer or an HMO shall not make a distribution to any of its shareholders unless, immediately after the distribution, the insurer or HMO complies with the capital adequacy requirements prescribed by the authority in the regulations made under section 48(3) and all other prudential requirements applicable to the insurer or HMO.”

MR OKOTH-OTIENO: It is now clear, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members. The question is that clause 57 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 58 by inserting a sub-clause (4), immediately after subclause (3) to read as follows: “(4) The insurer or HMO shall carry out on-going review of the suitability of the board members, senior management, key persons in control functions and significant owners.”

Our justification is to make the law compliant with ICP 5.3 on on-going reviews on the suitability of the board members, senior management and key persons in control functions and significant owners.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 58 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59

MR MUSASIZI: The committee proposes to amend clause 59 as follows:
    (a) By inserting the words “or HMO” immediately after the word “insurer” wherever it appears in the clause;
    (b) By deleting sub-clause (2); 
    (c) In sub-clause (3)(a) by adding the words: “as prescribed in schedule 2” immediately after the word “person”;
    (d) In sub-clause (3)(b) by inserting the words “without the prior written approval of the authority” immediately after the words “in Uganda”;
    (e) By inserting a new sub-clause (5) immediately after sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “(5)The board of directors of an insurer or a HMO has ultimate responsibility for the business and affairs of the insurer or HMO and for ensuring its effective organisation.”

Our justification is: 
    1. To cover all licensees and to avoid cross directorship in licensees;
    2. Sub-clause (2) is provided for under clause 103(2), there is therefore no need to have it under this clause;
    3. To make the board have ultimate responsibility for the business and affairs of the insurer or HMO.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 59 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60 agreed to.

Clause 61

MR MUSASIZI: The committee proposes to amend clause 61 as follows:
    (a) In sub-clause (1) by inserting new paragraphs (e) and (f) immediately after paragraph (d) as follows: 
	“(e) Such other control functions as may be specified in the regulations made under this Act; and
	(f) 	Such other functions as the insurer considers appropriate for the nature, scale and complexity of its insurance business.”

(b) 	In sub-clause (2) by adding a new paragraph (d), immediately after paragraph (c), to read as follows: “(d) Internal audit function.”

(c) 	By deleting sub-clauses (3)(b) and (c) and substituting them with the following: “Appoint an individual to-
    (i) undertake the responsibilities of each control function; or
    (ii) where the responsibilities of the control function are to be undertaken by more than one employee or to be outsourced, have overall responsibility for, and oversight of, the control function.”

The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 61 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 62 by deleting sub-clause (2)(d) and substituting it with the following: “(d)Provide for the effective identification and management of insurance risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk, operational risk, reputational risk and such other risks as the authority may, by regulations, determine.”

The justification is to cater for other risks that may emerge that are not specifically numerated in the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 62 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 63 by deletion and substituting the following: “Payment of premium.

(1) 	Subject to sub-section (2), the insured shall pay in full the premiums payable under the insurance contract on or before the date of inception of the policy or renewal of the policy.
(2) 	The authority may, by regulations, provide for the payment of premiums in any other manner.”

Our justification is that the premium should be payable on or before the inception of the policy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 63 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 64 as follows:
(a) By deleting sub-clauses (1) and (2) and substituting with the following:
“(1)	An insurer or HMO shall not issue any policy of insurance if the premium rates and commission rates contravene any regulation made by the authority under sub-section (2).
(2) 	The authority may prescribe minimum premium or maximum commission rates for any class or type of insurance business.”

(b) 	By deleting sub-clause (3).

Our justification is that requiring the approval of the authority for all premiums and commission rates is an out-dated approach that is neither consistent with the ICPs nor risk-based.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 64 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 65 by deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “(2) Subject to sub-section (3), if the authority has approved the text or format of a policy or proposal form under sub-section (1), an insurer or HMO shall not make any amendment to the policy or proposal form without the prior written approval of the authority.

(3) Where the authority does not approve or rejects the text or format of a policy or proposal form or an amendment in the text or format within the prescribed period, the insurer shall treat the text or format of the policy or the proposal form or amendment as approved.”

The justification is for clarity and to give the authority the mandate to reject the text format of the policy or proposal form.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 65 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 66 by deleting it and substituting it with the following: 

“(1) Where an insurer lowers the approved premium rates without the approval of the authority, the authority may order the cancellation of the policy issued under the altered premium rates and a pro-rata refund of the premium in respect of the unexpired period of the risk shall be paid to the insured.

(2) Where an insurer lowers the approved premium rates without the approval of the authority, the authority may require the company to offer adequate refund to the insured.”

The justification is that policy holders affected by the cancellation should be adequately compensated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 66 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 67 by deleting it and substituting it with the following: 

“Reinsurance arrangements

    (1) A licensed direct insurer, HMO and a micro-insurance organisation shall have such arrangements as it considers appropriate for the reinsurance of risks under insurance contracts that it has entered into in the course of its business as an insurer or a micro insurance organisation.
    (2)  A licensed direct insurer, HMO or a micro insurance organisation shall not, without the prior written authorisation of the authority under sub-section (3) enter into a reinsurance contract as cedant, other than- 
    (a) with a licensed reinsurer;
    (b) with a qualifying foreign reinsurer; or
    (c) in accordance with such arrangements as may be specified in the regulations.
(3)	The authority may, on the application of a licensed direct insurer, HMO or a micro insurance organisation, authorise the insurer, HMO or micro insurance organisation to enter into a reinsurance contract as cedant, with-
    (a) a foreign  direct  insurer; or 
    (b) a foreign reinsurer that is not a qualifying foreign re-insurer.
(4)	The regulations may specify requirements in relation to the reinsurance arrangements of licensed direct insurers, micro insurance organisations and the retrocession arrangements of licensed reinsurers including, by-
    (a) requiring- 
    (i) licensed direct insurers and micro insurance organisations to provide the authority with prior written notice of their reinsurance arrangements; 
    (ii)  licensed reinsurers to provide the authority with prior written notice of their retrocession arrangements; and 
    (iii)  the approval of the authority with respect to certain specified reinsurance or retrocession contracts or arrangements. 
    (b) Imposing restrictions on the reinsurance or retrocession  of risks with foreign insurers. 
    (c) Specifying requirements in relation to the re-insurance arrangements of licensed direct insurers and micro-insurance organisations and the retrocession arrangements of the licensed insurers.”

The justification is to provide for risk transfer strategies appropriate to the nature, scale and complexity of their business, which are part of the wider underwriting and risk and capital management strategies to comply with ICP 13.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 67 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend it as follows:
    (a) In the headnote, by inserting the words “or cancellation”  immediately after the word “modification”;
    (b)  By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting it with the following:
	“(1)An insurer or HMO shall inform the authority within five working days of any modification or cancellation in the amount of its net retention in all classes of business, which it undertakes.
    (c) In sub-clause (3), by inserting the words “or HMO” immediately after the word “insurer” on the third line of the clause.

The justification is to provide for cancellation in insurers’ net retention and to reduce the number of days within which the authority should be informed by the insurer or HMO of any modification or cancellation of their net retention.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 68 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 69 by deleting it and substituting it with the following: “Annual reinsurance returns. An insurer and a reinsurance company licensed under this Act shall, within ninety days from the end of the calendar year, submit to the authority in a prescribed form, details of the reinsurance or retrocession returns and details of the reinsurers or retrocessionnaires with whom they maintain business relationships in respect of risks falling within the scope of this Act.”

The justification is that the 90 days should run from the end of the calendar year. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 69 be amended as proposed. 

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 71 and substitute it with the following: “Modifications where terms of reinsurance contracts not favourable. The authority may, after the scrutiny of a proposed reinsurance contract, direct an insurer in writing- 

    (a) not to enter into or renew the contract unless specified modifications are made to the terms and conditions of the contract;
    (b)  not to renew the contract if the terms and conditions of the contract are not favourable to the insurer or are not in the interest of the economy of Uganda or the insurance industry or are not in the public interest.”

The justification is to enable the authority direct modification of the reinsurance contract.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 71 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 72 by deleting the word “broking”. 

Our justification is that the companies are known as insurance companies and not insurance broking companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 72 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 73 by:

(a) 	Deleting the headnote and substituting it with the following: “Foreign reinsurers’ representatives”

(b)	In sub-clause 1(i), by deleting the words “reinsurance company” and substituting them with the word “reinsurer”;
(ii)	by deleting the word “authority” in the first line and substituting it with the word “approval”;
(c)	In sub-clause (2), by deleting the word “authority” appearing after the word “granting” and substituting it with the word “approval”; 
(d)	In sub-clause (3)(i), by deleting the word “authority” appearing after the word “where” and substituting it with the word “approval”;

(ii)	by deleting the words “reinsurance company” and substituting them with the word “reinsurer”. 

The justification, Madam Chairperson, is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 73 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 74 by:
    1. By deleting sub-clause 1(c) and substituting it with the following: “Uganda Re: a minimum of 15 per cent of its reinsurance of its treaty and -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wanted you to explain the word “facultative” to me.

MR MUSASIZI: Facultative sessions-
(b)	By deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting it with the following: “(3)An insurer or reinsurer who fails to comply with sub-section (1) is liable to a fine to be prescribed by regulations.”

(c)	In sub-clause (5) by inserting the word “national” immediately after the words “of the” in the first line.

The justification is to enable quick administrative action by Insurance Regulatory Authority to deter further contravention and to provide clarity to the clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is someone going to give us an explanation? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 74 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 76, in sub-clause (1) by deleting the words “one of which is licenced under this Act”. 

The justification is to provide clarity to the clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 76 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed.

Clause 81, agreed.

Clause 82

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 82 in sub-clause (2) by deleting the words “for the purposes of sub-section (1)” and substituting with the words “without limiting sub-section (1)”.

The justification is to broaden the prohibition provided for under clause 82(1).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 82 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 83 in sub-clause (1) by deleting paragraph (h). 

Our justification is that third party administrator license is not an insurance intermediary. In fact, the actual word is “licensee”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 83 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 84

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 84 by:

    (a) In the headnote, inserting the words “or reinsurance” immediately after the word “insurance.”

    (b) By inserting the words “or reinsurance” immediately after the word “insurance” in the second line of the clause.

The justification is to have reinsurance companies carrying out business in Uganda to be incorporated under the Uganda Companies Act, 2012.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 84 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 85 by:
    (a) Deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting it with the following:
	“(3)The authority shall not grant a licence or renew an insurance intermediaries licence if the applicant is not a fit and proper person within the meaning of Schedule 2 to the Act.”

    (b) By adding a new sub-clause (6) immediately after sub-clause (5) to read as follows: “(6)Every insurance intermediary shall establish and maintain the following control functions-
a) 	a risk management function; and
b) 	a compliance function.”

The justification is to comply with ICP 18 that mandates the supervisor to ensure the intermediaries carry out their business in a professional way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 85 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 88 by inserting “58” immediately after the word “section” wherever the word appears in the clause.

The justification is that the provision should apply to section 58 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 88 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 89 as follows: 
    (a) In the headnote by deleting the words “certain insurance intermediaries” and substituting with the words “insurance and reinsurance brokers”.
    (b) By deleting sub-clause (1) and substituting the following: 
	“(1)Every insurance broker and reinsurance broker shall not carry on business of insurance broking unless it maintains, at all times while carrying on that business, a paid up capital as stipulated in the regulations and shall furnish the authority with proof of registration of the authority’s lien on the deposit.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 89 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90

MR MUSASIZI: We propose deletion of clause 90, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 90 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 91 by:
    (a) Inserting the words “or HMOs” immediately after the word “insurer” wherever it appears in the entire clause.
    (b) By deleting sub-clause (3) and substituting it with the following: “(3)An insurance broker or an insurance agent who receives any premiums, whether in full or instalments or other monies in cash, shall immediately but not later than the next working day from the day of receipt, without any deductions of commissions or otherwise, remit the premiums or money in cash to the insurer”; and
    (c)  In sub-clause (7) by deleting the words “commits an offence and shall on conviction be”.

The justification is to include HMOs in the regulation and to allow for prompt and appropriate action to be taken by the authority, which will enhance regulation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 91 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 93 as follows: 

In sub-clause (5)

    (a) By inserting the words “suspend or” immediately after the words “authority may” in the second line; and
    (b) Inserting the words “in case of revocation” immediately after the word “transfer” in the last line.

The justification is to allow the authority to suspend those insurance intermediaries that may not comply with the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 93 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 95(2) by deleting the words “five thousand” and substituting with the words “five hundred”.

The justification is that the penalty is excessive for loss assessors and loss adjustors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 95 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 95, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 96

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 96 as follows:
    (a) In sub-clause (1)(b), by deleting the word “cancel” and substituting with the words “vary, suspend or revoke”.
    (b) In sub-clause (2), by inserting the word “vary” immediately after the word “fines”.
    (c)  In sub clause (2)(i) by adding the words “of competent jurisdiction”.

The justification is to enable the authority to have the power to vary, suspend or revoke a licence and to provide for clarity under clause (2)(i).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I put the question that clause 96 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 100 by deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting it with the following: “(2) The micro insurance organisations and insurance agents may, by statutory instrument, be exempted from the application of this part.”

The justification is that the ICPs require the supervisor to be independent. Constant referral to the minister does not depict that independence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 100 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 100, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 101

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 101 as follows:

    a) In sub clause (2)(a) by deleting the words “increase or reduce the person’s shareholding” and substituting it with the words, “significantly increase or reduce the person’s control”. 
    b) Immediately after sub clause (2), insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows and the clause be renumbered: 
“(3)	For the purposes of sub-section (2)(a), regulations made under this Act shall specify the circumstances in which an increase or reduction in a person’s control is significant.” 

The justification is that the definition of substantial shareholder does not comply with the ICPs and it is important that the authority has the power to issue a directive to a substantial shareholder requiring the shareholders, for example, to dispose of the shares held or some of them as this represents an interference with the property rights. It is considered essential that it is provided for in the primary legislation not in the regulations. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, the question is that clause 101 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101, as amended, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 101 to read as follows: “Authority’s power concerning significant owners:

    1) The authority my issue a directive under sub-section (3) to-
    a) a person who becomes a significant owner in or acquires increased control over a licensee without obtaining the authority’s prior written approval; or 
    b) a person who is a significant owner of a licensee if the authority has reasonable grounds for believing that -
    i) the person does not satisfy its fit and proper criteria; or
    ii) by virtue of the person’s significant ownership in or control over the licensee, any of the factors specified in sub section (2) apply. 

    2) The factors referred to in sub section (1)(b)(ii) are that the licensee’s ownership structure - 
    a) is not appropriate having regard to the nature, scale and complexity of its licenced business;
    b) adversely affects its financial soundness or the ability of the authority to supervise it; or
    c) is prejudicial to its customers.

    3) If any of the circumstances specified in sub section (1) apply, the authority may issue a directive to the person-
    a) requiring the person to dispose of the person’s interest in the licensee, in whole or in part within such a time period as is specified in the notice; or
    b) prohibiting the person from exercising any rights including voting rights attached to the interests.

    4) Where the authority issues a directive under sub section (3)(a) to a person, it may direct that during the period before the person’s interest is disposed of, the person is prohibited from exercising any rights including voting rights and the right to receive a distribution attached to the interest.

    5) Section 106, 107 and 111 apply in relation to any disposal to be made in compliance with a directive issued under sub-section (1).

    6) A person who without reasonable excuse fails to comply with the requirements of a directive issued under this section commits an offence and is liable to conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

Justification is to empower the authority with powers to issue directives to significant owners and to require the significant owners to comply with the requirements for the fit and proper test. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable chairperson, I want to know, you are talking about sections 106,107 and 111 of which law? You said these sections apply – to which law? So, it should be clause 106? Okay, so we adjust that; it should be a section – 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to repeat 5, by replacing the word, “section” with “clause”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 103, we propose to amend in sub-clause (2) by deleting the word “fifteen” and substituting it with the word “ten”. 
The justification is to shorten the time within which the authority should be notified of the changes that occur. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, the question is that clause 103 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 103, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 104

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 104 as follows:
    a) In sub-clause (1), by adding words “direct the licensee to”, immediately after the words, “by written notice”.
    b) In sub-clause (1)(a), by deleting the words “direct the removal of that person and to” and substituting it with the words “remove that person and”
    c) By deleting sub-clause (2)(d) and substituting it with the following: “(d) A person undertaking any function for a licensee specified by regulations for the purpose of this section.”
    d) By inserting new sub-clauses (5) and (6) as follows: 
	“(5) If a licensee becomes aware of any information that is reasonably material to the authority’s fit and proper assessment of the person concerned, it shall notify the authority of the information as soon as reasonably practicable.
	(6) A licensee that contravenes subsection (5) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points.” 

The justification is one, for better drafting and two, it is a known fact that statutory instruments are usually made by the minister and therefore there is no need to have the word “specifically stated”. Thirdly, to provide a requirement for the licensee to notify the authority if it becomes aware that a director, senior manager, etcetera is not fit and proper.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 104 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 104, as amended, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 104 to read as follows: 
“Information to be furnished by an insurer or HMO

    (1) An insurer or HMO shall prepare and cause to be submitted to the authority an audited balance sheet within three months after the end of its financial year.” Madam Chairperson, I think it was an anomaly to make four months. I am trying to amend by putting three months to be consistent with the auditor general’s requirements in the National Audit Act. 

“(2)	An insurer or HMO shall exhibit throughout the year, in a conspicuous place in each of its offices and branches and shall publish in a local newspaper of general circulation within four months after the end of the financial year the following –“ 

If the report comes out in three months, we have to give a period upon which it can be circulated and that is why this remains four: 

“(a) 	A copy of the auditor’s report 
(b) 	A statement of financial position clearly indicating the names and signatories of the Directors 
(c) 	A statement of comprehensive  income 
(d) 	The company’s own statement of comprehensive income and financial position before consolidating its performance with other sister companies
(e) 	Solvency ratios, claims ratios and management expense ratios for the current and previous financial year.” 

Madam Chairperson, our justification is to modify and provide for the publication and display of the copy of the auditor’s report; a statement of the financial position clearly indicating the names and signatories of the  Directors; a statement of comprehensive income; solvency ratios, claims ratios and management expense ratios for the current and previous year.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed – 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to ask if the committee chairperson is willing to substitute the words “general circulation” in sub-clause (2) with “wide circulation”. All newspapers generally circulate but not all of them widely. 

MR MUSASIZI: What is your proposal?

MR MPUUGA: “Wide circulation” as opposed to “general circulation” because general is as general as it sounds.

MR MUSASIZI: I agree with the proposal from the member for Masaka Municipality.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be further amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 104, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 105

MR MUSASIZI: On Clause 105, we propose to amend sub-clause (4) by deleting the words “default civil” in line two of the clause.

The justification is that they are redundant words.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are going to say “liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points” without the words “default civil”? When you remove those words, what you are left with is, “Is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is a default civil? You have not told us the  - 

MR MUSASIZI: It is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 105 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 105, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 106

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 106 as follows:

(a) 	In sub-clause (1) by inserting the words “risk advisors” immediately after the words “loss adjustors”
(b) 	In sub-clause (3) by deleting the words “and any other financial reporting standards prescribed by regulations under this Act” and substituting the words “as adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.”

Our justification is one, to include risk advisors to the list and two, the Council of ICPAU is empowered under section 12(i) of the Accountants Act, 2013 to issue and adopt international accounting and auditing standards and promote their usage in Uganda and make suitable adaptation where necessary.	

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 106 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 106, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 107 

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend Clause 107 thus:

(a) 	By deleting the word “insurer” wherever it appears in the clause and substituting the word “licensee”
(b) 	By deleting paragraph (c) of sub-clause (3) and substituting the following: “(c)Be an accounting firm or practising accountant licensed by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.
c) 	By adding a new paragraph (e) to read as follows:

	“(e)The audit has been conducted in accordance with the international standards on auditing as adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.”

The justification is one, the requirements are applicable to the licensees and not the insurers and two, a person cannot act as an auditor without a valid license and/or a certificate of practise issued by the Institute of Certified Public Accounts of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 107 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 107, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 108

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 108 sub-clause (1) by inserting the words “to which clause 106 applies” immediately after the words “a licensee” on the first line. 

The justification is that the section is intended to apply to those licensees specified under clause 106.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 108 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 108, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 109

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 109 be deleted and substituted with the following:

“Financial statements
    1) Every licensee shall prepare and submit to the authority within three months from the end of each financial year in a prescribed form annual reports containing- 
    a) prescribed particulars relating to all financial transactions undertaken by it during that year including where applicable a director’s certificate and financial condition report;
    b) a certified true copy of its financial statement, an auditor’s certificate and any report presented to shareholders;
    c) returns that shall be in the prescribed form in the regulations;
    d) auditor’s report;
    e) any report on the affairs of the licensee made to its shareholders in respect of the financial year;
    f) details of commissioned scales and incentive plans, bonuses or other incentives;
    g) a statement detailing premium which remain unpaid by the insured;
    h) any other information that the authority may require as may be specified in the regulation.

    2) A licensee shall, in respect of and within such period as may be specified in regulations made under this Act, submit to the authority-
    a) periodic financial statement that may be unaudited;
    b) a return in the form approved by the authority, if any;
    c) such other information and documentation as may be specified in the regulation.

    3) Every intermediary to which clause 106 applies shall, in accordance with the international financial reporting standards adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda; keep proper books and submit to the authority such annual and periodic returns and documents as the authority may, by regulations require to be submitted to it within the period specified in the regulations.

    4) Where the authority considers that financial statements or documents submitted by licensee under this section are inaccurate or incomplete or that they are not prepared in accordance with accounting standards, the authority may reject the financial statements or documents.

    5) Where the authority rejects financial statements or documents under sub section (4), the authority shall issue appropriate directives to the licensee to rectify the inaccuracy or incompleteness and resubmit the financial statements or documents. If the licensee does not comply with the directive, the authority may amend the financial statements or documents at the cost of the licensee.” 

Madam Chairperson, the justification is to make the law comply with ICP 9 that requires the supervisor to take a risk-based approach to supervision that uses both off-site monitoring and on-site inspection to examine the business of each insurer, evaluate its condition, risk profile and conduct the quality and effectiveness of its corporate governance and its compliance with relevant legislation and supervisory requirements. The supervisor obtains the necessary information to conduct effective supervision of the insurers and evaluate the insurance market. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I find sub-clause (1) (b) and (e) almost similar. If you are talking about certified true copy of the financial statements, an auditor’s certificate and any report presented to the shareholders, we need to realise the difference between any reports of the affairs of the licensee made to its shareholders in respect of the financial year. The audit and any other response referred to in sub-clause (b) are similarly referred to in (e) unless otherwise explained that they are different. 

Would you love to clarify whether (1)(b) – 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a problem with (b) and (e)? 

MR MPUUGA: Yes. We seem to be referring to the same matters and, therefore, we may not have to be repetitive. I suggest that we do away with (e) and retain (b) because they are referring to the same matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought (e) deals with licensees. Are the shareholders the same as the licensees? This is because (b) is presented to the shareholders. Then (e) “…report on the affair of the licensee” meant the shareholders of the licensee, I think. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. (b) Clearly specifies the financial statements and (e) talks about any other reports. An insurance company could have other insurance reports to make apart from the financials. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In (b), they are dealing with the authority but in (e) it is the licensees reporting to their shareholders. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 109 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 109, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 110

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 110. 

Our justification is that the concept of a solvency margin is a term that is not used in modern risk-based insurance supervision. Under a modern risk-based prudential framework, insurers are required to hold capital based on risks. 

Furthermore, clause 48 already establishes a capital-based framework. The solvency margin methodology is wholly inconsistent with the capital based approach established in clause 48. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 110 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 109, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 111

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 111 by deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting the following, “(2)The authority may require that the group financial statements are audited by the auditor of the licensee or by another auditor authorised by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda and approved by the authority in writing.”

The justification is that a person cannot act as an auditor without a valid license and/or a certificate of practise issued by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 111 be amended - 

MS STELLA KIIZA: I wonder why in section (2) we are giving that leeway of “may” not “shall.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Pardon? 

MS STELLA KIIZA: It reads, “The authority may require that the group financial statements are audited.” Why should we put “may” and not “shall?”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, they can choose not to? 

MS STELLA KIIZA: Yes, because they may or they may not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a problem with adding “shall” there instead of “may?” 

MR MPUUGA: I would like to help the chairperson. The quoting of this sub-section in mandatory terms is because the authority requiring auditing comes with a presupposition that something is wrong so you do not have to quote it in mandatory terms because there may be or there may not be. 
I believe this presupposes that necessarily, there may not be anything wrong. If we suspect wrong doing, we may or we may not. 

My other problem with this sub-section is that why do we need approval of the authority if the institute has actually recommended? Are we giving the authority room to reject the choice of the institute? Must it really authorise or we might choose another word other than “approval”? Does it have to approve? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want Members to also go back to the clause we have passed, where they say that the periodic financial statement that may be unaudited. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in Uganda, the Institute of Certified Public Accountants is mandated to license all practising accountants. However, organisations are at a liberty to prequalify from the list of licensed accountants, those they can use.  

Our provision is aimed at giving the authority leeway to be able to prequalify from the list of already licensed accountants, those it thinks it can work with. 

Madam Chairperson, unaudited financial statements – all these proposals are aimed at facilitating the risk-based approach to regulation. The reason as to why we provided for unaudited financial statements to be availed is because we want to enable accessibility to all relevant information possible to enable risk-based approach take force.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you have still not answered the question the Member raised; why “may” not “shall?” Why do you leave it optional?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this has to do with the drafting. In the accountancy profession, we do not necessarily use these words interchangeably. However, when somebody says “may”, it means you can audit or you cannot.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: It means it is optional; so you can do it or you cannot do it. I think what the members are saying is that it should be an obligation. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we have already provided for the mandatory one under the previous clause - 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee. I thought that the honourable member from Masaka provided a feasible explanation that at this stage, if the authority suspects that the accounts are not proper, then it can call for an audit but where the accounts are found to be okay, then there will be no need for an audit. Thank you.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the word “may” there is very correct. It is just that the connotation is, is this audit of the constituted accounts in a situation of subsidiary companies? Some auditors are big audit firms and others are small. So, where the authority is not satisfied that the auditor of the consolidated account is a small firm, it may require a bigger firm to carry out the work. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 111 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 111, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

12.48
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2017” and passed clauses 39-111.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, with amendments, honourable minister. We did not just pass what you brought. (Laughter) Report properly.

MR BAHATI: That was obvious, Madam Speaker, with amendments. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done some work but we still have another 40 clauses to go, but I would like to suspend the House until 2.30 p.m. We will come back to finish the Bill and do the other business which is on the Order Paper.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for all the work we have done, the minister and the chairperson of the committee. The procedural matter I am raising is whether it would be procedurally okay to compel the Attorney-General to be here, when we are having these Bills passed.

We neither have the Attorney-General nor his deputy. To make matters worse, we also go to his office but he is never there. You can imagine that you have handled a Bill here, where there is no input of the Attorney-General. I had something to say but I had to keep quiet, that is why you saw the Chairperson say that “We economists”. These are matters of the law, where there is legislative drafting, yet the Attorney-General does not appear.

How is he going to put into practice this law? We have complained about the Attorney-General and his deputy - I would like to know whether you can compel the Executive to be in the House. If not, we get somebody else. Otherwise, this should not happen. The Attorney-General should be the first one in this House every day, before the Speaker comes in. 

I know this law and I can say something about it but I must argue it out with him and since there was no one to argue with, I had to keep quiet while the Bill was being discussed. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were some definitions we wanted to have explained but up to now, no one has explained them to us – “facultative sessions” – but we have finished. May be you report in the afternoon. However, it is important for the Attorney-General or his deputy to come so that if there are areas where we need assistance, they should be able to assist us. 

Okay, honourable members, House suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.50p.m. until 2.30 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.48p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oyet, we addressed your issue in the debate and before the report comes, we need to wait for the Treasury Memorandum after six months.

2.49
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning UPE and USE capitation grant.

The Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Urban Development usually sends money to contribute to the wellbeing of the learners in school. It remits Shs 10,000 per year per child for UPE and Shs 141,000 per year for USE.

That means that every term, schools are supposed to receive a third of the above mentioned. Madam Speaker, as we talk, we are in the fifth week and soon going to half way the term. However, we still have a problem in many of these schools, for example, in Pader, Amolatar, Amuru and many of the schools in Teso region have not received the money for this term.

This is a concern for all of us particularly this august House. We know that if they do not get money in time, it affects the quality of education. We also know that head teachers and school administrators are not supposed to charge any money. Therefore, it is this money that they get that is used to buy scholastic materials, like chalk.

When students do not perform well, it goes back to the teachers. For instance, I am aware and many of us could be aware as well, that in Buyende and Nakaseke, about 20 head teachers were demoted and sent to teach instead of being administrators because of last year’s poor performance particularly in USE.

That is why it is a concern, I represent workers and I feel that we should address this issue. My concern right now is that we need to support these schools so that the quality of education does not go down. My prayer is that the ministry concerned- Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they are the ones who remit the money-

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think we have your issue. You want to know why the money has not gone by the fifth week.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague for raising this issue. First, to the best of our knowledge, we released money for the third and the money for capitation grant was inclusive. The only issue that we are sorting out was to align the quarterly releases with the termly releases. While the term takes more than three months, we had to release for the quarter so we are reconciling that.

Secondly, some of these areas could be having issues to do with accountability or issues with speed at which district accounting officers move first to disperse this money to schools. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I will check and then come back to the House on Thursday with a report on what exactly is happening in Teso and Amolatar. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish everybody a good Women’s Day tomorrow. 

2.54
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Last Saturday, I went to my constituency. A family that had been stuck due to hunger consumed a certain variety of cassava, which turned out to be poisonous, and a primary four pupil died as a result.  I am told it was not yet ready for consumption.

This was a family of one Micheal James Otukei of Abubur cell, Abubur ward southern division of Kumi Municipality. The whole family was affected particularly those who ate the food. They were hospitalized. After the other one dying, the rest were improving but by yesterday, another one had been taken back to hospital.

I would like to attract the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture. I bothered to carry a sample of the cassava cutting so that Government takes on from there to find out where exactly this variety is coming from because in that village, more than ten families have been affected. I am told that another family consumed the same cassava and nine people were seriously vomiting.

I am also informed that once an animal eats the leaves of this cassava, it also dies. Therefore, it seems to be a very serious one. Madam Speaker, my prayer is that, Government should come in.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we direct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries to check the situation in Kumi. If it is really a poisonous variety, it should not be with our population and the ministry should give us a report.

2. 56
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance with tears because right now, they are burying two people in my constituency because of the heavy rains.

The affected sub counties are: Nawanjofu, Busolwe and Busabi. As I talk, four schools were blown off, the health centre III of Busabi the sub county and some churches. Madam Speaker, many people are sleeping out. 

My prayer is that the ministers in charge of disaster and the one for education are informed that these people need emergency relief. They are sleeping out, and 18 are hospitalized in Busolwe Hospital.  

The Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness and other members should come and we go and assess the situation in Butaleja, and to provide some tarpaulin and tents for these school-going children.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We direct the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to go to Butaleja and assess the situation. However, honourable members, I think the ultimate solution would be planting trees. These buildings are being blown because there are no trees, we have finished them.

I think we had better go on the campaign very early so that maybe we do not have roofs flying in the next four to five years. 

2.59
MR ABOTT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that is a threat to my life, dignity and above all that has thrown my name into public odium.

Madam Speaker, you recall that His Excellency in 2016 suspended the activities of Beach Management Units (BMUs) and fisheries in the waters, and he called them “poachers”. You also recall that in February 2017, His Excellency directed that UPDF be deployed in the waters, which is a very good idea to curb illegal fishing and piracy in the waters.

To my dismay, on 26 of February a one Maj. Nuwagaba in charge of the operations in one of his meetings in Lolwe islands told people that their MP has failed to develop this area he is the one perpetuating illegal fishing, and he has also failed to remove the Kenyans from the island especially Migingo and that he has even failed to deliver the ferry.

Madam Speaker, I thought this was a joke. I called the GISO, RDC and PISO and they told me that something should be done about Maj. Nuwagaba because they had also called him but he said that he can only listen to one person who deployed him and that is His Excellency.

On 28 February, I took my time and called him on his number 0772650012 (Laughter) and I said, “Good afternoon, Sir.” He answered, “Whom am I talking to?” I answered that Abott. He told me, “Please, stop talking to me; when have you seen civilians talking to the army?”

Those were his exact words; then I answered, “Sir, if I have a problem why can’t I talk to you.” He said, “I have come to the island which you disorganised for a long time and I am going to organise it.” And I told him that I have been an MP for only eight months. Madam Speaker, my prayer is that - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Minister for the Presidency to examine that complaint and give us an update but a soldier deployed under the President - 

3.02 
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of urgent national importance. The issue I am rising on is about the national security of our people bordering our neighbour, South Sudan. On the Saturday 4 March, two people were killed by armed men from South Sudan in the name of border disputes in Orom Sub country, Kitgum District. 

For long, we have been having border disputes with our neighbour South Sudan and it has not only been in Orom but also in Lamwo, Amuru and West Nile. When we were having the last funeral rites of the late Gen. Okello Tito Lutwa, the son who is a minister in this Government made a request to His Excellency the President that a barracks be established to contain this aggression coming from South Sudan to protect the lives of our people. 

Indeed, there was a clear indication that the President was willing to deploy and to establish a barracks whose land was availed on free conditions. However, to date we have not seen any deployment and the lives-(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Oyet complete your statement. 

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, we would like the Government to urgently respond to the plight of the people bordering our neighbour, South Sudan. We have lost very many Ugandans who had gone to South Sudan to do business and this has been a continuous practice. 

Our prayer is that the Ugandans who are within the border should not be killed by armed men from South Sudan whom we treat with utmost good faith and hands and with total love when they come to our country –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this has reminded me that since the Ninth Parliament Government had said that they were demarcating our boundaries; we have not yet got that report. I do not know whether it requires the Prime Minister or the Minister for Lands. 

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I have taken my time to find out why this problem has not been solved. I went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I interacted with Ministry of Defence and Lands.

They told me that sometime back a technical committee was set up to define and sort out the issue of the boundary; but the Government of South Sudan did not respond by sending a technical team and that is why up to now they still push their claim. 

In Lamwo District, they are claiming more than 40 kilometres inside Uganda. In Olego in Amuru District they are claiming more than 50 kilo meters inside Uganda. This thing needs to be urgently addresses. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the minister for regional cooperation to follow-up that matter, inform the Cabinet that the Sudanese are not responding and give us a report because if they are the ones delaying we cannot continue. 

One day, five of my members were abducted into Sudan. They had gone near the border.

Honourable members, Bills Second Reading. 

As we go to the Bill, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers from World of Life School Kitende. They are on both sides of the House with their teachers, represented by hon. Peter Sematimba and hon. Seninde of Wakiso. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2017

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, I do not know whether you have found out the meaning to those words we wanted addressed in the morning or you are waiting for the Attorney-General? There is something that we passed and I asked you what it meant maybe you look for it as we proceed with the Bill.

Clause 112

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no amendment in clause 112. I put the question that clause 112 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 112 agreed to.


Clause 113

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 113 and substitute it with the following:

“(1) 	Subject to subsection (5), a licensed insurer or HMO shall appoint and at all times have an appointed actuary who may be an external or internal actuary. 

(2) 	A licensed insurer or HMO shall, within two months after a person ceases to be its appointed actuary, or such longer period as is permitted by the authority, appoint another person to be its actuary. 

(3) 	A licensed insurer or HMO shall not appoint a person as appointed actuary under sub-section (1) or (2) unless-
(a) 	the person is a qualified actuary; and 
 (b) 	the authority has given its prior written approval to the person’s appointment as actuary of the insurer or HMO. 

(4) 	The authority shall not approve the appointment of a person as an actuary of a licensed insurer unless it is satisfied that the person is qualified, has sufficient experience and is competent to act as an actuary for the insurer or HMO. 

(5) 	The regulations may exempt specified types and descriptions of micro-insurance organisations and of non-life direct insurers from the requirement to have an appointed actuary. 

(6) 	Subject to subsection (7), a licensed insurer or HMO that contravenes subsection (1) or (2) commits an offence and is liable to a fine of not exceeding one thousand currency points.”  

The justification is to ensure that licensed insurers have actuaries who are appointed by the insurers with the approval of the authority to ensure the insurance companies are properly managed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson of the committee, of course, you will have to substitute “clause” for “sub-section”. Otherwise, the question is that -

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have some observations. The first observation I have is on clause 113(2), which tends to give the authority the latitude to prescribe the time within which an actuary should be appointed. I thought we needed to restrict the timeframe not to be too open to guard it from abuse.

Secondly, on the proposed amendment in sub-clause (5), I would have preferred the wording in the Bill to be retained since this particular sub-clause does not show who is going to make these regulations.

Lastly, yes sub-clause (6) is making reference to sub-section (7), but does not show which particular section because I can see that this particular clause 113 ends on sub-clause (6). Therefore, from which section is this sub-section (7)?

Subject to those concerns, I would have no objections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal on the time?

MR NIWAGABA: I would prefer a timeframe not exceeding five months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want more time? I thought they said two months?

MR NIWAGABA: They are restricting it to two, but here they are giving the authority such a longer period and it is not being restricted. If you open it wide, it is subject to abuse.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I don’t think I have understood you because clause 113(2) says: “A licensed insurer or HMO shall, within two months after a person ceases to be its appointed actuary….” You now want to make it five months?

MR NIWAGABA: According to the report, the licensed insurer has a period of two months. If the two months expire without appointing an actuary, then the authority may allow the licensed insurer a timeframe – which is not stipulated – to appoint one. I am saying that if we give it that latitude, it will be subject to abuse. However, if the chairperson could agree, maybe we would restrict it lower from five to three months.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, reducing the period from five to three months as proposed by hon. Niwagaba doesn’t cause any harm and so we can go with his proposal.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there was an issue raised by hon. Niwagaba regarding the amendment by the committee chairperson, referring to a section which is not in the Bill. I would like to request the chairperson to maybe withdraw the amendment because it is a bit redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Unless he knows which section it is part of and which clause, by the way?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, this was an anomaly and we propose deletion of sub-clause (6) which reads: “Subject to sub-section (7), a licensed insurer or HMO that contravenes sub-section (1) or (2) commits an offence and is liable to a fine of not exceeding one thousand currency points.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 113 be amended as proposed – 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I thought the spirit of the proposed amendment was good. However, if the error is in respect of reference to sub-section (7), we could look for the sub-section to be used because the spirit of the amendment – to penalise these insurers who contravene the particular provisions – would be good. So, if the committee chairperson could tell us which particular sub-section he was referring to in the entire Bill, then we would rephrase this clause, but retain it.

In addition, I was suggesting to the committee chairperson that we could rephrase sub-clause (5) of your report to actually reflect what the Bill specifically stipulates. This is because here if you say the regulations “may exempt” without stipulating as to who will make the regulations, it will remain a bit unclear  yet sub-section (5) is clear that he authority makes these regulations.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we stand over this and handle it at the end.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Chairperson, I think the quick solution is by deleting the phrase, “Subject to sub-section (7)” because the principle of the penalty would still stand. Let us just remove “Subject to sub-section (7)” and start from “a licensed insurer” and it would be fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you comfortable, committee chairperson? Honourable members, I think let us stand over it. You can give your proposals to the committee chairperson and let him look at them. We will come back to it at the end.

Clause 114
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 114 and substitute it with the following: 

“114. Actuarial investigation and actuarial report 

(1) 	A licensed insurer or HMO shall — 
(a) 	ensure that its appointed actuary undertakes an actuarial review of its business and, if required by the regulations or the authority, a group actuarial review, in respect of each financial year; and 
b) 	take all reasonable steps to ensure that the appointed actuary prepares a written actuarial report complying with the regulations within sufficient time for the insurer or HMO to submit the actuarial report to the authority. 

(2) 	A licensed insurer or HMO, shall ensure that the appointed actuary has access to all documents and records that the actuary requires to carry out an actuarial investigation and to prepare the report.
  
(3) 	The appointed actuary is entitled to require from a director or an employee of the insurer or HMO, such information and explanations as the appointed actuary thinks necessary for the performance of the duties of an actuary. 

(4) 	A licensed insurer or HMO that contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

Our justification is to give the appointed actuary the mandate to carry out actuarial reviews of the insurance business including actuarial investigations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 114 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 114, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 115

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 115, be deleted.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 115, deleted.

Clause 116

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 116 and substituted it with the following:

“Authority to inspect licensees
(1) 	The authority shall inspect the affairs of every licensee at least once in three years.
(2) 	The authority may, at any time, for the purpose of performing its function under sub-section (1)-
    a) inspect the premises and the business, including the procedures and controls, of a licensee or a subsidiary or holding company of a licensee; 
    b) inspect any premises or business of a person to whom a licensee has outsourced any functions or activities; 
    c) inspect the assets, including cash, belonging to or in the possession of or control of a licensee or any of its subsidiaries or holding companies; 
    d) examine and make copies of documents belonging to or in the possession or control of a licensee, any of its subsidiaries or holding companies; or 
    e) seek information and explanations from the officers, employees, agents and representatives of a licensee or any of its subsidiaries or holding companies. 
(3) 	The authority may, at any time before the expiry of three years, inspect the affairs of a licensee if it has reason to believe that-
        a) interests of the policyholders, shareholders or members of the public could be prejudiced; 
        b) licensee is unable to meet his/her obligations under the Act; 
        c) licensee has not complied with the provisions of this Act; 
        d) licensee is not complying with the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating financing of terrorism laws; and 
        e) any other reason. 
(4) 	The authority may appoint competent persons to carry out the inspection on its behalf.  
(5) 	The person appointed to inspect under this section may question any officer of the licensee under oath. 
(6) 	The licensee shall cooperate with the person appointed to inspect under this section by providing him/her full access to books, records, files and other documents, which are relevant to the inspection, and any person who fails to cooperate commits an offence. 
(7) 	The authority shall inform the licensee of the conclusions reached following the inspection and may require the licensee to comply, within a period it may specify, with any directive it may issue to remedy defects disclosed by the inspection. 
(8) 	The authority shall give reasonable notice to the licensee or other person of its intention to exercise its powers under this section except that where it appears to the authority that the circumstances so justify, the authority may exercise its powers without giving notice of its intention to do so.
(9) 	A person who prevents the authority or an inspector from performing the duties under this section commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

Madam Chairperson, our justification is for clarity and to provide for a higher contravention penalty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, I have some difficulty with sub-clause (8), where you say that, “the circumstances so justify, the authority may exercise its powers without giving notice of its intention to do so.” You mean that you just come? Why? Okay, under what circumstances would this be justified - where I do not give notice?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I think this is where there is complete failure in compliance to these requirements. We would like to give the authority leeway to come in as and when it feels necessary especially, with those who completely fail to comply.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My question is: why do you want them to do it without notice?
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, my experience with regulations is that they always ensure that the dos and don’ts are in place. For example, if I am your regulator and I tell you to do a, b, c, d and you do not do it, I still need an opening to come in without notice, as long as you are under my regulation.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the committee should throw more light on the “reasonable notice” by the authority. What does it mean? If you talk about reasonable notice, it may be within one week or two or three months. That is reasonable. Shouldn’t we ensure that there isn’t any grey area and that “reasonable notice” is clearly defined?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, if we leave the person regulating to do whatever they want, under sub-clause (8), it becomes dangerous. We should specify that period. If four days are the final time of compliance - there is no way we can say we give reasonable notice without specifying the period in terms of days or weeks. That is the best thing to do. We should specify; otherwise, it will be very dangerous.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am sure after we have passed this law, there will be regulations and those regulations will specify the period.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, other than substituting the word “insurer” with the word “licensee” to cover all persons licensed under the Act, this particular amendment largely rhymes with the provisions of the Bill. 

However, the proposed amendment leaves a crucial aspect as provided in the Bill, particularly when amendment tries to do away with sub-clause (9). This is a particular clause dealing with inspections and ordinarily, an inspector should be sanctioned to make an inspection report.

When an inspection report has been made, it is a question of natural justice that both parties including the licensee, who has been inspected, get a copy of the report. 

Therefore, I implore the chairperson of the committee to, at least, reconsider and bring back sub-clause (9), which requires the authority to provide licensee with a written report as a result of the inspection that has been carried under the forgoing provision.

Your proposal in sub-clause (9) becomes sub-clause (10) so that sub-clause (9) deals with giving the inspection report, basically, as stipulated in the Bill itself for the sake of fairness and natural justice. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the spirit of the Bill, under sub-clause (9) that reads thus: “the authority shall provide a licensee with a written report summarising the outcome of every inspections it undertakes…” is a good spirit. So, I would like to propose that we insert it - (Interjections) - no, we proposed to delete clause 116. Therefore, if we are taking only sub-clause (9), I pray we insert it in our amendment as sub-clause (9) so it becomes sub-clause (10). Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 116 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 116, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 117

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, before clause 117, we propose to insert a new clause to read as follows:

“Notice to provide information or produce document 
1) 	Where reasonably required by the authority for the performance of its functions under this Act or any other written law, the authority may, by notice in writing given to a person specified in sub-section (2), require the person to-
    a) provide specified information or information of a specified description; or
    b) produce specified documents or documents of a specified description. 

2)	A notice under subsection (1)- 
    a) may be issued to - 
    (i) a licensee; 
    (ii) a former licensee;
    (iii) a person the authority reasonably believes to be carrying on, or to have at any time carried on, unauthorised business;
    (iv) a related party in relation to a person specified in subparagraphs (i), (ii) or (iii); or
    (v) to any person who the authority reasonably believes is in possession of the information or documents; and
    b) shall specify the place where and the period within which the information or documents shall be provided or produced.
 
3) 	The authority may require-
    a) any information or documents provided or produced under this section to be- 
    (i) provided or produced in such a form as the authority may specify; and
    (ii) verified or authenticated in such manner as the authority may reasonably specify; 
    b) that the information is to be provided to, or the documents are to be produced to a person specified in the notice; and
    c) that the person to whom the notice is issued, or a person who is or has been a director, auditor or actuary shall provide such explanations relating to the information or documents as the authority may reasonably require. 

4) 	The authority may take copies or extracts of any document produced under this section. 

5) 	Where a person claims a lien on a document, its production under this section is without prejudice, to that lien.

6) 	A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a notice issued under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not exceeding one thousand five hundred currency points.”
 
Our justification, Madam Chairperson, is to empower the authority to require the provision of information and documents. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, you need to delete the word “of” between the words “fine” and “not.” See the “to a fine not exceeding” otherwise, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed -

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, this is definitely a very good insertion. However, my concern is on subclause 2(iii) specifically in reference to the phrase “unauthorised business.” That terminology becomes too wide and ambiguous. If I would – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? 

MR NIWAGABA: It is on page 44, sub-clause 2(a)(iii) where it says “a person with authority reasonably believes to be carrying on, or to have at any time carried on unauthorised business.” I would implore the chairperson - if we restricted the carrying on of the business that is covered under this particular Bill and therefore, instead of using the words “unauthorised business” I suggest we use the phrase, “carried on insurance business with or without a licence.” This is because I thought that is the person you tend to capture. Otherwise, if we left it as “unauthorised business,” it would be vague and too wide.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this is business under this Act? It is not business as the Trade Licence Act.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the spirit of the addition is to ensure that the authority has powers to require information from any person who has dealt with insurance business. 

If that be the case, it is not necessary to use the phrase “an unauthorised.” I would rather we make it general by using the phrase, “the authority has the power, if it deems necessary that any person has carried any business to do with insurance, to demand production of documents.” 

In that case we shall avoid the usage of the words “ unauthorised…” While the principle is good, I would like to propose that we formulate it properly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but, honourable members, supposing I am running a bakery and in the night, I also carry out insurance? My official business is bakery. Isn’t that unauthorised? I have a bakery during the day but underhand I am also doing insurance business. That is not authorised. My licence is for bakery and no insurance. 

MR RUKUTANA: Well, the word “unauthorised” now is in relation to insurance business. And what I am saying is that the principle is good. One could be doing something, which is related to insurance business but they are authorised or licenced. 
What the addition is proposing to do is to ensure that if the authority deems it necessary - whether the person has been authorised or licenced - if the business they have been carrying on is related to insurance to demand –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have it covered under clause 4 of the original Bill - see “meaning of unauthorised business.” It is further clarifies thus: “for the purpose of this Act, a person who carries on unauthorised business, where the person carries on any activity or business without a valid licence issued by the authority in accordance to the Act…” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What he is saying is that the term “unauthorised business” is defined in the interpretation section, which is part of our law. So, we cannot run away from it – yes, it is defined under clause 4.

MR NIWAGABA: Having seen the content of clause 4, I withdraw my earlier concern.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced into the Bill as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 118 by deleting paragraph (a) and substituting it with the phrase, “(a) the licensee has breached or is likely to breach solvency control levels specified in the regulations made under clause 48(3).”

Madam Chairperson, our justification is to comply with ICP 10 and 17 where the terminology used is “solvency control level.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that 118 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 118, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 119

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 119 by one, deleting sub clause (1) and substituting it with the following:
 
    a) “A licensee shall, within such period as the Authority may require the licensee, provide a recovery plan for the Authority; and 
    b) By inserting the words “no longer meets the purpose or requirements upon which it was approved” immediately after the words “recovery plan” in the second line.

The justification is to provide clarity to the clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 119, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 119, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 120, agreed to.



Clause 121

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 121 as follows:

    a) By deleting subclause (I) and substituting it with the following:
    (I) Where the Authority:
    a) has reasonable grounds to believe that: 
    (i) the licensee has departed substantially from most recent business plans submitted to the Authority;
    (ii) the governance structure of the licensee is no longer appropriate having regard to the nature, scale and complexity of its business and the risks to which it is exposed;
    (iii) one of the grounds specified in section 118 applies to the licensee;
    (iv) whether as a result of inspection or otherwise has identified a matter that in its opinion, represents a supervisory risk; 
    (v) the Authority may issue a directive for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
    b) by inserting a new subclause (3) to read as follows: “(3)a licensee that fails to comply with a directive issued under this section is liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

Our justification is to provide for more grounds for which directives may be issued, including requiring a recovery plan and to provide for a penalty for contravention of the clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 121, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 121, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 122, agreed to.)

Clause 123

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 122 to read as follows – this becomes a new clause 123 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Why don’t you leave the numbering to the right people?

MR MUSASIZI: Okay, appointment of investigator:

    (1) The Authority may appoint one or more competent persons as an investigator to conduct an investigation on its behalf:- 
    a) with respect to a licensee if it considers that there are grounds for the authority to:
    i) require a recovery plan; 
    ii) issue a directive; 
    iii) apply to the court for a protection order or/and; 
    iv) The Authority is of the opinion that it is desirable to appoint an investigator in the interest of the customers or creditors or potential customers or creditors of the licensee or in the public interest; and 
    b) with respect to any person if it appears to the Authority on reasonable grounds believes that the person is carrying on, or had carried on, unauthorised business. 

(2)	The matters investigated by an investigator appointed under subsection (1) may include:-
    a) the nature, conduct or financial condition of a person’s business;
    b) a particular aspect of the person’s business;
    c) the ownership or control of the person being investigated;
    d) In the case of a licensee, whether there are grounds for taking any of the actions specified in sub section (1)(a)(i) to (iv); and
    e) whether the person is carrying on, or has carried on, unauthorised business.

(3)   The Authority may give directions to the investigators concerning any one or more of the following:
    a) the scope of the investigation;
    b) the period for the conduct of the investigation; 
    c) the conduct of the investigation; and
    d) the manner in which the investigator shall report to the Authority.

(4)  Where an investigator is appointed with respect to a former licensee, an investigation under subsection (2) shall extend only to:-
    a) in the case of paragraphs (a) and (b), the person’s business carried on at any time when the person was a licensee; and
    b) in the case of paragraph (c), to the ownership or control of the person at any time when the person was a licensee.

    (5) An investigator shall submit a report of his or her investigation to the Authority. 

    (6) The Authority may direct that the licensee pay the costs or such part of the costs as it may specify, of an investigation conducted under this section. 

(7)	The Regulations may provide for the:- 
(a) 	notice to be given to a person to be investigated under this section; 
(b) 	conduct of an investigation; 
(c) 	powers of an investigator appointed under this section; and 
(d) 	Payment of remuneration to the investigator. 

(8)	A person who fails to provide all assistance reasonably required by an investigator appointed under this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not exceeding one thousand currency points. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, on page 47, I do not know whether you are not creating too many problems for the Authority – see page 47, on the appointment of the investigator, where you say, “With respect to any person, if it appears to the Authority on reasonable grounds believes that the person is carrying on or has carried on unauthorised business…”

Now you are bringing into question whether the grounds are reasonable or not reasonable. Why don’t you simply say, “If it appears to the Authority that the person is carrying on…” otherwise you are putting a burden on the Authority. Someone may say that the grounds were not reasonable. So, I want you to remove the words, “reasonable grounds” in 1(b). 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

MR NIWAGABA: I substantially have no problem with this insertion. However, under sub clause (v), I invite the chairperson to concede that if an investigation report is made, a copy in all essence should be furnished to the person who has been investigated. 

Under No.6, I invite the chairperson to delete this clause. If the authority, on its own emotion, conducts an investigation and then vests the payment of the costs on to me, we will end up having overzealous officials in the Authority who will want to cripple down specific companies or organisations and all the time appoint investigators and demand payment from the companies.  

I think if the Authority is to carry out an investigation, the cost of the investigation should be borne from the fees it has collected. That is why I invite the chairperson to accept that No.6 is detrimental to the business environment and would lead to overzealous officials to unnecessarily victimise specific individuals and companies. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you have issues on No. 6?

MR NIWAGABA: I had proposed an amendment to No. 5 saying that a copy should be provided to the entity or individual that has been investigated and that No.6 should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you moved an amendment to that effect when you said that we should retain clause 9. Not so?

MR NIWAGABA: That was in respect of inspection and investigators. These are under different clauses and sections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So do you want to add the Authority and the person inspected?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, both should be given a copy because if one has investigated any person, in all fairness, the investigated person(s) need to know what the final report has been.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any problem with that?

MR MUSASIZI: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 123

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is a new clause and I do not know whether it is still 123. Anyway, I put the question that the new clause, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 123

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us address clause 123 before we go to clause 124. Look at page 49 – the old 123.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, 123 was a new clause that we proposed and which the House has just adopted. We are now going to clause 124.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You brought a new clause that I requested you not to name but you are now addressing the old one as 123 yet you want it deleted.

MR MUSASIZI: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is what you said here. Clause 123 should be deleted and substituted with the following – it is on paragraph 88. We want to deal with the original clause 123 that you want deleted. 

MR MUSASIZI: But clause 123 is the new clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what do you do with the original one? Does it remain there?

MR MUSASIZI: It is just an issue of numbering.

MR NIWAGABA: Ordinarily it would have been reworded as clause 123 (a) (b) (c) for proper following because if clause 123 in the Bill is to be retained and we have now created and passed another 123 before the main clause 123, then the wording of the first we passed should have been 123 (a), the next 123 (b) and then the original 123 in the Bill becomes 123 (c).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us leave the numbering to our legal team. Committee chairperson, if you look at Page 47, you have clause 123 as a new clause but on Page 49, you say that clause 123 should be deleted - the original 123 - that is where we are. What do we do with it? Paragraph 88 – then present it.

MR MUSASIZI: The challenge is the numbering.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Leave the numbering; it will be corrected by the drafting people.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have a difficulty in the numbering, but I believe that the drafters can deal with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? Tell us the clause and we forget it.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you for giving way. This being a new Bill, it is not only an amendment but we should continue with numbering as 123, 124, 125 and so forth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have said we leave the numbering to the drafts people. What do we do about the management take over? It is the headnote.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, my I go ahead and read our proposal on management take over?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because I would like to leave that part of clause 123 and go to the others.

MR MUSASIZI: And then I will come back to clause 124 when we get there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, for clarity, we are now considering and we have amended a clause in respect of appointment of an investigator. I see in the report, a consequential amendment speculating the powers of the investigator. So, it would have been prudent for us to deal with the powers of the investigator before we can go to management take over.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Propose the powers of the investigator.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose a new clause to read as follows: 

“Powers of the investigator:
(1)	Subject to subsection (2) and to any direction under section 123 (3), an investigator appointed under this section has: 
(a) 	the powers to require the person under investigation or any person connected with the person under investigation to attend before the investigator to answer questions; and 
(b) 	The powers of the Authority to require the provision of information or documents.

    (2) The investigator may only exercise the powers under subsection (1) to the extent that the investigator considers it necessary for the purposes of the investigation. 

(3) 	An investigator appointed under section 23 may, if the investigator considers it necessary for the purposes of the investigation, on giving written notice to the person concerned, also investigate the business of any person who is, or at any relevant time has been:-
(a) 	a member of the group of which the person under investigation is a part; or 
(b) 	partnership of which the person under investigation is a member.”

The justification is to empower the supervisor to appoint an investigator.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now what do you describe as a member of a group? In 124(3)(a) member of the group of which the person under investigation is a part. What is your description of that group?

MR MUSASIZI:  I am sure this is intended to cater for the micro insurance and the mutual insurers where the groups are involved. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is mutual insurer defined? On page 13, it is stated that a mutual insurer means a company which by its constitution, only policy holders are members of the company and which has no share capital. 

Supposing we are the Buganda Caucus, do you investigate all of us because we are part of the group associated with hon. David Bahati who is unlawful carrying out unauthorised insurance business? I would like us to have this group defined properly. Can they look at it because otherwise –

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, these are companies under the same family or the ones we call related parties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why you need to define them in the interpretation section. Can someone workout for a definition? When we go back to clause 3, we shall need a new definition.

MR AOGAN: Madam Chairperson, when he uses a phrase, “a member of the group” the way we understand it - for companies, the main company can be having interests after taking over some smaller companies and so they become a member of that group. 

Therefore, when we say, “a member of the group,” it simply means a member of the parent group. There is a parent company and the smaller ones come aboard; that is what it means. 

MR NIWAGABA: We could use the legal jargon of a holding or subsidiary and it would stop at that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Someone should workout the interpretation, which we shall come to when handling clause 3. Okay, honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 123

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 123 and substitute it with the following:

“Management takeover:
(1) 	The authority may, on any ground specified in subsection (2), appoint a person to be known as a statutory manager to manage, control and direct the business and affairs of the licensee and to take custody of its assets; 
(2) 	The following grounds are specified for the purposes of this subsection.
(a) 	The licence of the licensee has been revoked under this Act; 
(b) 	in the opinion of the Authority: 
(i) 	in the case of an insurer, it has breached or is likely to breach a solvency control level specified in regulations made under section 48(3); 
(ii) 	the licensee is conducting its business in a manner contrary to this Act; 
(iii) the continuation by the licensee of its activities is detrimental to the interests of its customers; and
(iv) 	the licensee is engaged in or is knowingly facilitating criminal activities. 
(3) 	the statutory manager of a licensee shall have the power to: 
(a) 	continue or discontinue any of its operations as a licensee, notwithstanding the revocation of its licence; 
(b) 	employ necessary staff;  
(c) 	execute any instrument in the name of the licensee;
(d)	initiate, defend and conduct, in its name, any action or proceeding to which the licensee may be a party;  
(e) 	appoint an advisory board;
(f) 	close the licensee; 
(g) Sell or otherwise dispose of any of the property of the insurer and any subsidiaries and holding companies; or 
(h) 	do any other act, which is necessary to enable the statutory manager to execute his or her obligations under this section or section 124. 
(4) 	The statutory manager may, after his or her appointment, appoint an auditor to perform such functions as the statutory manager may consider appropriate. 
(5) 	The Authority shall, upon appointing a statutory manager of a licensee, immediately inform the public. 
(6) 	Upon appointment of a statutory manager, the board of directors of the licensee shall stand suspended. 
(7) 	A statutory manager shall have the functions of the board of directors of the licensee, including the board’s powers of delegation and use of the seal. 
(8) 	A statutory manager shall, upon assuming the management, control and conduct of the affairs and business of a licensee, discharge his or her duties with diligence with due regard to the interests of the licensee, its policy holders and other creditors. 
(9) 	A statutory manager shall hold office on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed in the instrument of appointment, and in any case, at the cost of the licensee. 
(10)	The Authority shall oversee and give general direction to the statutory manager in the performance of his or her duties under this Part. 

The justification, Madam Chairperson, is to provide for the circumstances under which a statutory manager may takeover their powers. 
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, under sub-clause 3(f), I think that you cannot close a licensee, maybe you can terminate the license because the licensee is a person and you cannot close a person.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I am not opposed to the principle, but bundling the principle of takeover, the grounds upon which takeover can arise and the obligations under takeover is too much of a cloud in one section. Why should we not separate them so that there is certainty in what we are talking about?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you make some proposals on how you would like it to look?

MR RUKUTANA: Well, it would need complete redrafting unless I get some time to sit with my colleague here. Bundling them together and terming them as management takes over is not very clean.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support your earlier observation on the closing of a licensee. 

Even if the licensee is a natural person, you do not close him. You simply declare him insolvent under the insolvency law. However, if it is a company, you wind it up, so the proper word should either be “winding up” or “insolvent.” You do not close a person or a business. 

THE SPEAKER: You terminate the licence because we are dealing with a license. 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes or you just terminate the license. 

MR AOGAN: Or you close the activity but not the licensee.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to replace the words used under 3 (f) with the word “to terminate the license.” 

THE SPEAKER: How about the reservation by the Attorney-General that there are too many things in one clause. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we feel our proposal is alright. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am drawing this to your attention that you do not terminate a license; rather you can only revoke it. That is the standard. You can only revoke the license but not terminate it. Thank you. 

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, my concern goes to 3(h) under this clause which reads, “Do any other act which is necessary to enable the statutory manager to execute his or her obligation under this section or section 124.” 

I was proposing that we delete “under this section or section 124” and we plainly say “under this Act.” This is because there are other obligations that are incidental or connected under the Act. We should, therefore, leave “under this Act” and delete “under this section or section 124” That is even more legal than what appears here. 

THE SPEAKER: So we should not confine the manager to only section 124 because he has the general powers under the Act. Is that okay, chairman? 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether the chairperson would feel comfortable under 9 to leave terms and conditions open because I guess this includes the timeframe. Would it be okay if we prescribed it in the law; because if you leave it open, for how long is this going to be? 

I am just thinking aloud; should we leave it to the Authority depending on circumstances to prescribe?  I believe terms and conditions include a timeframe. It might be improper for the manager to look at this as permanent employment. We should have a point of termination prescribed so that- I do not know whether it is there and I have skipped it but I am trying to find that and I cannot see it- 

THE SPEAKER: Before you go very far, honourable member, what is the responsibility of the statutory manager, because he is not defined in this law. This will enable us answer whether we need to define the time or we leave it to the circumstances prevailing. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I believe we shall deal with the definition in the interpretation stage. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we shall but for purposes of this amendment, he is asking whether we need to set the terms. That is why I was asking for what the statutory manager does. If we can define his work, then we can know whether we need the short term or long term- 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, our proposal is very clear; “conditions as may be prescribed in the instrument of appointment” This will, therefore, state the duration, the responsibilities and everything- (Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  A statutory manager is appointed based on the circumstances so you cannot limit yourself on the timing. When the circumstances are done, the Authority may decide basing on the circumstances. That is the clarification I wanted to give. Thank you. 

MR MPUUGA: Why that remains a bit disturbing is that again under 3 (e) you have these powers of appointing an advisory board so this is a bit ambiguous. I do not know whether an advisory board is defined somewhere because I have been trying to look for it so that we can know the range of advice in these kinds of circumstances. That would not leave room for people to abuse powers once given to them. 

I do not know whether the regulations will be able to address this in the view of the chairperson and would not leave these gaping holes for future exploitation, just need some comfort from- 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I beg that the honourable member from Masaka Municipality reserves his proposal until we get to the interpretation clause. Some of his concerns can be addressed there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall have to define what a statutory manager is in the interpretation clause. I put the question that clause 123 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 123, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 124

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 124 as follows:

    a) by deleting sub-clauses (1) and (2) and substituting the following:
	“(1) The statutory manager shall undertake his or her functions with the objective of protecting the interests of the policy holders of an insurer or the customers of an insurance intermediary;
    b) in sub-clause (3) by deleting the word “six” and substituting the word “twelve”;
    c) by deleting sub-clause (4) (f) and substituting the following: “(f)Issuing a new statement of financial position and statement of comprehensive income”;
    d) by deleting the word “depositors” in the third line and substituting the word “policy holder”;
    e) by deleting subclause (6) (a) and substituting the following: “The declaration of a moratorium shall be apprised giving first priority to insurance policy holders and beneficiaries, and then equally to all other classes of creditors.”
    f) by deleting sub-clause 6 (b), (c) and (d) and substituting the following: 

(7) During the period in which a moratorium is in force in respect of a licensee:
(a) 	no steps may be taken to enforce any security over the insurer’s assets;
(b) 	no steps may be taken to repossess assets that are being used or occupied by or in are in the possession of the insurer;
(c) 	no proceeding, execution or other legal process may be commenced or continued or distress levied against the insurer or its assets.
(d) 	no share may be transferred and no alteration may be made in the status of the members of the insurer, whether by an amendment of the regulations or in any shareholders or member agreement or otherwise; and
(e) 	no resolution of the members of the insurer may be passed, except with leave of court or with the consent of the statutory manager.
(f) 	by deleting the words “financial institution” in the last line, and substituting it with the word “licensee”.
(g) 	by deleting sub-clause 8 and substituting it with the following; “(8)a person who wilfully fails, refuses or neglects to provide any information requested under subsection (4) of this section is liable to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points.

The justification is: 
    1. Need to emphasise policy holders protection during statutory management
    2. Depositors apply to banks not insurance
    3. To provide for the penalty or sanction as a civil default fine not as an offence, to enable quick administrative action.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 124 be amended as proposed.

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to raise one issue particularly on subclause 7, the proposed amendment. Any amendment that intends to oust the jurisdiction of court or to restrict by legislation a citizen’s right to petition court, is unconstitutional under Article 137. Therefore, any provision that has been read to restrict the rights of licensees or creditors to appeal to court during a moratorium would be declared unconstitutional. I would, therefore, invite the Chairperson to consider deleting clause 7 (a) and (c).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you address us on the rationale of the moratorium? Why is there a moratorium? I think that is the key word.

MR NIWAGABA: To me, the moratorium would be unnecessary – yes to protect the interests particularly of the policy holders, not any other person. It would be to affect the licensees or the board members of the licensees from engaging in any conduct that would in any way affect the interest of the policy holders.

However, you will have innocent third parties, for those who have supplied the licensee stationery and you say that they should not be paid, or cannot go to court or they have a judgement and cannot enforce it. To me, that would be unconstitutional.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a provision we passed which set out a hierarchy of payments; you start with policyholders on wards. There is hierarchy which is already approved, we have passed it.

MR RUKUTANA: I partially agree with hon. Niwagaba’s proposition but it can be cured by subjecting a, b and c to obtaining leave of court. No steps except with leave of court may be taken to enforce the security over the insurer’s assets; no steps without leave of court may be taken to re-possess assets, among others.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, my concern is on 124 (8); “any person who wilfully fails, uses or neglects to provide any information should be placed under section 4 of this section, commits an offense and liable on conviction. I propose that we delete “conviction”, this is because, this can be handled administratively by the Authority as per ICP.

If we say that “on conviction”, that means that there will be a court process, a competent court and the Authority will be derailed and the decision will take long to be implemented.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to concur with the Attorney-General, particularly when it comes to 7(c). As you are aware, in the famous case of Ssemwogerere and Zachariah Olum, once legislation intends to block a party’s right to seek justice, automatically it becomes unconstitutional.

I am therefore of the considered opinion that, this provision C should be deleted and we re-draft, in order to suit the provisions of the constitution and the ratio discidendi we have on record, such that we leave it in the hands of court and if you would like to block it or do anything contrary, then you must seek the consent or approval of court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No one has explained to me the purpose of the moratorium. This applies to me during the moratorium. I therefore would like someone to explain to me. Why is it there? It is not the ordinary activities; they say that there is a moratorium. Can someone explain to us?

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, mine is not on the moratorium. I just would like to support hon. Ssebagala on clause 124(8) for allowing administrative action by the Authority, which is required by the ICP 10(2). They are supposed to take timely, preventive and corrective measures and that is quick action. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I would like to look at original clause 124 and see what the rationale for those provisions was. Should we stand over it for a while? I would like to understand why it is a moratorium and why those conditions are attached before we can - let us go to clause 125.

Clause 125

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend it as follows: 
(a)	in the headnote by inserting the words “and termination” immediately after the word “removal” 
(b) 	by re-numbering the clause and inserting new sub-clauses (2) and (3) to read as follows: (2) “The Authority may, by written notice, terminate the appointment of the statutory manager and the statutory management process if it is of the opinion that:  
a)	the purpose of the statutory management has been achieved or cannot be achieved or 
b) 	the licensee should be wound up under part XIV.

iii) 	On the termination of the statutory management, unless proceedings for the winding up of the licensee under part XIV, are commenced, the management of the insurer revests in the board of directors.

The justification is to comply with ICP 10.

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 125 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 126, agreed to.)

Clause 127

MR MUSASIZI: Clause 127, we propose to amend it by inserting the words “without the prior written approval of the Authority” immediately after the words “up voluntarily” in the third line of the clause.

The justification is that the prior written approval of the Authority should always be required for voluntary winding up of an insurer in order to comply with ICP 12.

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 127 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 127, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 128

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, when we talk of winding up of the licensee and leaving it only to the Authority-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you dealing with?

MR NIWAGABA: Clause 128

THE CHAIRPERSON: Powers to wind up licensees?
 
MR NIWAGABA: And you leave it to the Authority and yet we did pass the Companies’ Act that provide for modes of winding up of respective corporate bodies.

One of the known modes of winding up is actually by court. Would we not be providing a contradiction in our jurisprudence to say when it comes to companies, licensed under this particular 	Act, only the Authority can wind up and yet those companies are initially registered and incorporated under the Companies’ Act?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did we include “licensee” in the Company Act? 

MR NIWAGABA: Because the definition of “licensee” in this Act-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Did we include it in the Companies’ Act so that it is covered?

MR NIWAGABA: No. It is not and yet most of these licensees are incorporated under the Companies’ Act and this Act has a whole chapter on winding up. I would think the only power for this Authority would not to actually wind up a licensee but maybe to revoke the license because winding up has other implications and legislations to cover it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the word “winding up” may confuse but I think what they mean is, you end the license of that licensee. We may have to change the word.

MR NIWAGABA: We could then substitute the word “wind up” with “revoking.” That the only body authorized to revoke a license not even licensee.

However, even when you look at subsection (2), we would be doing a disservice to ourselves to bring a conflict between this Act and the Companies’ Act, which is an Act of general application for all body corporate including those licensed under here or other provisions of the laws for doing business. I do not know the opinion of my other Attorney-General the other side.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if you look at (2), it says winding up petition relating to the licensee shall be differed to the Authority which shall decide whether to handle the petition or give permission to the petitioner to proceed with other court processes. Therefore, it is not closed. You can go to court.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, look at subsection (1), it is mandatory. It is the only body authorized to wind up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the word wind up is a misnomer. You know that means extinguishing. However, the Authority only licensees; I give you a license then I take it away.

MR RUKUTANA: I think sub-clause 2 cures my colleagues concern. 1 gives the power to wind up to the Authority but where the Authority feels that the court should take over under (2), it can take over the process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, do you still think we should use the word “winding up?” 

MR RUKUTANA: I would rather we maintain the word “winding up” instead of revoking a license because revocation is complete but winding up has some steps to be undertaken as opposed to completely cancel or revoke a license. In my view, winding up is consistent with other principles of law.

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe, if we read the intention clearly under clause 127, which seems to suggest that in cases of voluntary winding up, it is only the Authority that can be responsible.  Then we restrict this particular winding up under clause 128, to cases of only voluntary winding up where then, the licensee or the person petitioning that this particular licensee be wound up voluntarily gets authority or permission from the Authority or the Authority refers that petition to court.

However, that would mean that we rewrite clause 128 to restrict it to cases of only voluntary winding up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to understand, what is voluntary winding up? Is it me doing it by myself or I am directed by the Authority? Is that voluntary or it is a directive?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, voluntary winding up only applies where the licensee itself passes a resolution to voluntarily wind up its business; no extraneous force applied. The shareholders or if it is a partnership, decides to voluntarily wind up.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I think it is getting complicated. Mine is to guide that we stay what the alternative Attorney-General brought forward because we are dealing with two variables; independent and dependent. 

In this particular case, we are looking at practice and principle. It is not the mandate of the Authority to determine when and how to wind up a company because that is already catered for under the Companies’ Act. Therefore, I would encourage us that we probably resist ourselves from staying the winding process; revoking in this particular case will be acceptable because it is a process. You do not just wake up one morning and say company A; you can wind up; you can only as an authority exercise the power interested in the Authority by this Act, to revoke not wind up. Thank you. 

I hope that is a bit clear, Madam Chairperson, we should drop the winding up aspect because in this particular clause we are looking at the principle and then practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can someone check the Companies Act, I would like to know whether the licensee is provided for under this organisation because if it is not-

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, and honourable colleagues, I would like us to look at this insurance business like we handle the banking industry. 

Well the bank is a registered company but we have gone ahead to have a specific law to describe how the banks will operate; how they will wind up and in the interest of the businesses that they are doing. 

It is a special area handling specific issues not general trading that is why I would like to ask the Shadow Attorney-General to reflect on it before you mix the two concepts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why should we send the insurance industry on a fishing expedition; to go and check the Partnership Act, the company law - why don’t we have the courage to make this complete for the industry?

MR MUSASIZI: Further clarification. Madam Chairperson, this winding up would in the in essence come after revoking the licence and if we go the Companies Act way, the policy holders will not have protection. We are moving this way to provide for the policy holders pay offs before any other obligation is settled. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 128 do stand-

MR MPUUGA: Maybe you could stand over this but before you guide, clearly clause 128 (2) and (3) cannot be in the same document. If you look at the physiology of (i) the Authority is the only body authorised to wind up a licensee.


(ii) Becomes a contradiction where the Authority recognises that even court can wind up. So the acknowledgement in (ii) becomes a contradiction. 

We need to find a solution to the phrasing of (i) so that we do not legislate a contradiction here. I find it a bit problematic; these two do not seem to rhyme. If we can find a cure then perhaps we shall be able to move-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose we put in the word “initially authorised” if they fail there then they go to court.

MR MPUUGA: Naturally even without mentioning it here, it will be unconstitutional to legislate while impeaching the powers of court to intervene in any matter. Even if we do not include it there it will almost be implied that if the Authority illegally winds me up I will petition court. 

I am very sure court will entertain any such petition where you think that the principles of natural justice have been violated. 

The view of the minister for Finance Planning and Economic Development also becomes problematic because at the end of the day, even if it were a bank and you winding it up; the laws relating to insolvency will come in and relate to whatever you would want to do with the bank. These laws sometimes work together without necessarily one impeaching the other, so cross reference is allowed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are legislating for the whole country; the lawyers know where to find the law. We are not legislating for the lawyers. That is why I am asking, why do you send the public on a fishing expedition; first you read this one and then you put it under your arm, and then go to the Companies Act-

Hon. Mpuuga, if the Authority does not revoke you, what do you take to court? Maybe it will be squash factor that will take you to court, but there must be something they do so that you leave to go to court. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, even Bank of Uganda has got the same provision on winding up. This is not a new phenomenon, it is something that already exists in our laws.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would suggest that we leave it open and say; “the regulator can revoke the license and then recommend for winding up.” The question now is recommend to whom? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 128 do stand as part of Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 129 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we proposed to amend Clause 129 by inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows and the clause be renumbered:

“(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Companies Act, 2012 and the Insolvency Act, 2011, in the winding up of an insurer or HMO, insurance claims shall have priority and the assets of the company, shall first be applied in satisfying the company’s liabilities under insurance contracts after payment of the properly incurred costs and expenses of the winding up.” 

Justification:

It is a requirement under ICP 12.1 that the policyholders be given priority when winding up proceedings are being conducted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 129 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MPUUGA: I do not know whether I got the amendment right that prescribes prioritising insurance claims and negating statutory obligations -(Interruption)- I am trying to look at the amendment made by the chairperson. 

Won’t there be a problem if you say that insurance clients have priority and  the assets  of the company shall first be applied to satisfy the company liabilities under insurance contracts after payment of property, incurred costs and expenses. 

In most cases, if you look at the laws governing winding up not necessarily statutory claims - I do not know whether we can be guided by the alternative Attorney-General. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, unfortunately I cannot find the clause where we passed the hierarchy of priority. There is a hierarchy in the insurance industry. You first deal with policy holders and then others follow, you cannot run away from it and we passed it 

MR MUGOYA: I have a problem with this provision because as we all know, the Companies Act – legally speaking it is a jus cogens – it is an international law or not. I do not know how we are going to harmonise this provision with our jurisprudence. That is the guidance I am seeking.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not see any contradiction. The Companies Law does not say you cannot enact any other law. That is not what he says.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What my colleague is trying to augment is that the Companies Act, in an event of insolvency, lists the order of ranking or the priorities – government taxes, statutory obligations and so forth . There is a list of things to be paid. However, we are now putting other things ahead of things such as government taxes. We are saying when an insurance company is winding up, it should first pay the claims of the individual. We are now making government taxes come second or third. 

I thought we should address our minds to it, because we want to avoid a situation where the claims of the individuals take 99 per cent of the money and the Government walks away without a single penny in taxes. The Companies Act provided for those rankings, but now we are trying to overturn it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what interest does the Government have to take money and not pay the policyholders? Why should the Government take first priority when the policyholders have not been paid? Should they tell the people who have paid, “it is too bad for you, let us first pay the Government their taxes then we shall think about you next year”?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at a scenario where the insurance is deliberately run badly and say its tax liability is Shs 20 Billion, while the responsibility to the policyholders is Shs 200 million. Anyone would deliberately run that company badly to ensure that they run away from government taxes knowing that the easy way out is to pay the liabilities of the policyholders. What I would propose is that we would probably leave the taxes and statutory obligations to come first and this one we are proposing comes third.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, insurance is a specialised instrument for a person to cover himself against risks. In this case he has entered into a contract and he is covering himself against risks. Surely, unlike Companies Act where he is a shareholder or participant, it is proper that if he has bought a policy to cover himself he is given first priority in the event of winding up of an insurance company. I do not see that we are wrong in prioritising risk coverage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me draw your attention to Clause 38 which we passed on the issue of security deposit. It says, “the deposit of an insurer shall be applied in the following priority-
    1- To pay insurance claims;
    2- Satisfy the costs of, or associated with any remedial measures or enforcement powers exercised by the Authority…” 

Therefore, priority is the policyholders.

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 129 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 129, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 130

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately before clause 130 to read as follows: 

“Requirement to consult
(1) 	Before making, amending or replacing any regulation or issuing any guidance, the Authority shall— 
(a) 	provide persons that the Authority considers will be substantially affected with a copy of the proposed— 
(i) 	regulations or guidance; 
(ii) 	amendments to the regulations or guidance; or 
(iii) 	replacement regulations or guidance; 

(b) 	give those persons a reasonable opportunity to make written representations to the Authority; and

(c) 	consider any written representations that it receives. 

(2) The Authority may comply with its obligations under— 
(a) 	sub-section (1)(a), by publishing the relevant documents on its internet site; and
(b) 	sub-section (1), in respect of a person by consulting with any professional or trade association of which the person is a member and considering representations by that association.  

(3) 	The Authority may provide a response to any written representations that it receives.  

(4) 	The failure of the Authority to comply with subsection (1) does not affect the validity of any regulations made or guidance issued.

The justification is that this will ensure compliance with ICP 2.6 that provides for the requirement to consult.

MR MUGOYA: There is an issue about restricting the representations to written form only. In my view – and even under international law – you cannot restrict it to written form only. It can even be oral. Therefore, I was of the view that where there is only written we can say “oral or written representations”. That may not be injurious to the intent and purpose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do you send them to the affected persons if they are oral? The provision is saying you must pass them on to the affected people. If they are oral, how will they go?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, now that our Attorney-General is busy, I think the Shadow Attorney-General can help us with subclause (4) of the new clause proposed by the committee chairperson. Subclause (1) of the proposed new clause is commanding the Authority to make consultations with affected persons before replacing any regulations or issuing any guidance. However, subclause (4) says if the Authority does not comply with the section, it does not affect the validity of this regulation or guidance. What is the importance of subclause (1)? If it is not mandatory and failure to do it does not affect the validity, maybe then the whole section should not be here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, how can you deal with this new proposal before you make any amendment or replace the regulations? How can you amend the regulations without consultations?

MR BAHATI: If you read sub-clause (4) of the proposed clause, it says, “the failure of the Authority to comply does not affect the validity of any regulation”. I think subsection (4) should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: People should be encouraged to do things more formally. We delete sub-clause (4). Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 130, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 130, agreed to)

Clause 131

THE CHAIRPERSON: Put the question that Clause 131, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 131, agreed to.

Clause 132

MR MUSASIZI: On clause 132, we propose to amend it by;
    (a) by inserting the words “arbitrate or arbitration” wherever the words “mediate” or “mediation” appears;
    (b) by deleting sub-clause (2) and substituting the following: “Regulations shall prescribe for”. 

The justification is that the ICPs require the supervisor to be independent, constant referral to minister does not depict that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 132, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 132, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 133 

MR MUSASIZI: On clause 133, we propose to amend it by:

    a) by deleting the word “lawyer” in subclause (2), appearing in the last line of the clause and substituting the word “advocate”-(Laughter).
    b) by adding a new sub-clause (6), immediately after sub-clause (5), to read as follows: “Expenses of the administration of the tribunal shall be borne by the Authority, or as shall be determined in the Regulations.”

The justification is that an advocate is qualified to practice law in Uganda as opposed to a lawyer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Assuming I am not an advocate; cannot I be a good lawyer especially, if I am not enrolled or maybe I am corporation’s secretary?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, we have many lawyers but we have very few advocates. As you are rightly aware, very few of us can show this year that we have practicing certificates. We conquer with the observation of the committee. Hon. Odongo Otto is giving me information that even in courts, there is now a circular to the effect that if you do not have computer, you cannot appear before any judicial officer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this is a tax appeal tribunal and probably the others are going to be civilians. I am not sure whether we should focus on advocates.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, we must have efficacy in our profession. Not every Dick and Harry should be moving in town saying I am lawyer. We must have strictly advocates to represent clients and entities in all establishments. Also, for purposes of enforcing discipline, I think we should conquer with the observation of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General, what do you think?

MR RUKUTANA: Not every lawyer is an advocate but every advocate is a lawyer. We are putting the stakes higher. I think it is okay to maintain the amendment to insist on an advocate. He has read the law and he knows the practice.

MR MPUUGA: I do not know whether it will not be prudent for us to provide for quorum for this tribunal. Madam Chairperson, one of the reasons why the Labour Court is dysfunctional is because of quorum problems. We have three members of the tribunal and one of them is the chairperson. So, what happens in the absence of the Chairperson? 

Madam Chairperson, when we provide for quorum, by implication, if quorum is met, then one of the members can become a chairperson automatically and business of the tribunal still goes. I have a problem with the abstract provision for quorum. They are three - What happens if one of the three is away and the chairperson - the tribunal stalls permanently –

MR MUSASIZI: If he can give a proposal, we shall take it.  

MR MPUUGA: First of all, my sense is that we need to increase the number of the tribunal to five, make provision for quorum of about two thirds and also make provision in absence of the Chairperson – either we have a chairperson or the vice chairperson who automatically becomes the chairperson in the absence of the substantive chairperson so that the business of the tribunal does not stall. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, that principle is okay but that should be catered for in the regulations not in the parent Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about increasing the number to five? The proposal is that they are going to be three. So, either the quorum is two –

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we welcome the proposal to increase the number from three to five.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In any case, it is not a full time tribunal.

MR AOGON: Even after increasing that number to five, I am sceptical about the issue of restricting it to an advocate. 

Madam Chairperson, we are going to keep away people who have potential advocacy in future and that will be a problem –(Laughter). We can restrict and say, the chairperson must be an advocate but other members of the tribunal can be lawyers so that others have an opportunity to learn and climb the ladder.

Madam Chairperson, I am an accountant but if we say that if you are not a certified public accountant of Uganda, you do not hold any finance office – where would we be? Can we get the people? We shall be in trouble.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 132, clearly states that “one of whom shall be”- it does not close them out.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, when it comes to issues of raising our professions, we should not compromise for any purpose. Uganda is well known as a country where professionalism is respected in high regard. I belong to the accountant profession - I do not know whether my colleague is a registered accountant. However, when we were amending the accountants Act, we made it categorical that all senior financial positions in Government must be held by members of the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda. Therefore, similarly to the lawyers, we need to raise the bar. Until this matter came in the committee, I did not know that there was a difference between a lawyer and an advocate because so many people out there are called lawyers. (Laughter) I did not know that advocate is of a higher bar. 

Madam Chairperson, we must insist on having people who are advocates-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am persuaded by the argument of the Attorney-General that we are all lawyers, but the advocate has gone further to enrol as an advocate of the High Court to get a practising certificate.

MR MUGOYA: There is some clarification I wanted to make. As you aware of the influx of universities all over this country, those who finish their fourth year in Law School start moving around calling themselves lawyers when they have never gone to LDC for the bar course. Even if you enrol for the bar course, you must pass it. Even if you pass it, you must go either in the chambers or elsewhere such that you attain the requisite experience and then you enrol. Even if you enrol, you start with the Magistrates Court for a full year before you are given a PC of the High Court and other courts of Judicature. Therefore, it is a process. We should wipe out the Dicks and Harrys in this profession. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I had already said I am convinced by the argument of the Attorney-General. Let us have advocates. Honourable members, first of all, have we agreed on increasing the number to five?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chair, I would like to agree totally with the- What we are looking at right now is the tribunal. At this point, when you are Constituting the tribunal, you have to be specific on who will come on board. It is always very important especially in matters- It is because along the way, you find things that have to be subjected to legal interpretation. 

I would like to agree with the chairperson of the committee that a legal person, and in this aspect, an advocate has got to be this.

Madam Chairperson, before you get to that, we are probably adopting the number of the members of the tribunal to be five. I would encourage you to have two members of the revised tribunal to be female because of gender system.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable Members, first; the question is that the members of the tribunal be adjusted to five.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Then, I put the question that at least two of the Members of the tribunal shall be women. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Then the last one –(Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the proportion is catered for under the Constitution. Do we need to put it in the law? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Attorney-General, what is the percentage of women in the Cabinet? It is 22 and not even 30 and yet it is in the Constitution –(Laughter)

Therefore, honourable members, for avoidance of doubt, I put the question that at least two members of the tribunal be women.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The quorum of the tribunal shall be three? Is that okay?

MR BAHATI: The Attorney-General suggested, Madam Chairperson, we can capture that under the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Finally, the question is that clause 133 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 133, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 134, agreed to.

Clause 135

MR MUSASIZI: In Clause 135, we propose to amend:

(a)	by deleting the words “the Minister by” in sub-clause 4 appearing in the third line of the clause;

(b)	by inserting the words “on recommendation of the Authority” in sub-clause 5(a) immediately after the word “licensees.”

The justification is to provide clarity and to have the supervisor have a say on the premium to be levied on the licensees. 





THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 135 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 135, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 136

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete clause 136 and substitute it with the following:

Regulation on Policyholders’ Compensation Fund

“The manner of governing the Policyholders’ Compensation Fund, the entitlement to payments from the fund and payments out of the fund shall be prescribed by regulations”. 

Our justification is that the ICPs require the supervisor to be independent. Constant referral to minister does not depict that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 136 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Attorney-General, do you have a problem?

MR RUKUTANA:  When I look ahead at clause 148, it says “the minister may, on the recommendation of the board and by certain instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act”. To me, this covers everything. Why must we specify the Policy holders Compensation Fund here? Why should we have clause 136 when there is a general provision for regulations under 148?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is anticipation. Honourable members, the question is that clause 136 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 137

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 137 as follows:

(a)	by deleting sub-clause 4 and substituting the following:
	“An insurer or HMO shall remit to the college an insurance training levy as provided under Section 138.
 
(b)	by inserting a new sub-clause 8 immediately after sub-clause 7 to read as follows and the clause be renumbered:






	“(8)Every person licenced under this Act shall be a member of the Insurance Institute of Uganda. 
c) 	By deleting subclause 8 and substituting the following: “Regulations may be made by statutory instrument on the recommendation of the authority prescribing...”

Madam Chairperson, there the new subclauses in addition to what is provided for here and we propose to insert them immediately after subclause (8) to read as follows:

“(9) 	The offices in existence immediately before the commencement of the Act are continued in existence subject to this Act. 
(10) 	All persons who, immediately before the commencement of this Act were employed in the training institute, shall continue to be employed in the insurance training college.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, isn’t that a transition clause? Should it come here? That is a transition clause; it should come at the end.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we thought this would provide clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it should be brought under transition. You provide for a transition and say will stay, or go and so forth.

MR MUGOYA: I would like to know from the presenter whether this is going to be a private or Government College. If so, are we abdicating our responsibility as Parliament to appropriate resources? For example the LDC, UMI and all these institutions come to Parliament. Therefore, I would like clarification about that.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, our proposal is from the best practices we benchmarked and world over, the insurance industry operates like this. This is how their colleges are funded. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it through the levy?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I remember that question came up. The challenges here to which Members should probably address their mind is that the levy is going straight to the college and is being put in the regulations. Therefore, what the honourable colleague is raising is that we may see a situation where the college has a lot of money, which we created by law.

That is where we should address our minds because with the Law Development Centre, the Uganda Management Institute, Makerere University Business School and even Makerere University Medical School, we at least have a say in appropriation. 
However, with this college, we are enacting a law where every student should pay a fee and the fee will go straight to the school account and the fees will be determined by the authority in the regulation. We may get a situation where it can get out of hand. I think that was what was raised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a clause we stood over to do with the funding and we were at crossroads because in the Public Finance Management Act, we had said that we appropriate everything from here and no one should get money on their own. We have not resolved that yet; so, I do not know whether we can allow it now and I hope the people we asked to look at it will help us.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, before I came here, I was from the academia. I wonder whether we have justification for this college, especially making it part of the Bill – (Interjection) – yes, it could be because you have done some benchmarking but for the health of this Bill, I would rather that we do not commit ourselves to the college because when we talk about a college; are we now going to say it has to sign up with the Uganda National Council for Higher Education? 

Also, will this Bill be in position to commit itself in as far as the professors or tutors of this college, in this case maybe the head or dean of this college has got to be a professor with a PhD in insurance or applied economics?

Madam Chairperson, I think that we try to fetch or import things that probably other government institutions could be doing. In this case, how come we do not have a college of banking in Uganda? Mr chairman, my point is that the training college may not be necessary because when you go to Makerere, the institute or school of economics in applied economics is what produces or supplies the insurance industry with –(Interjection) – sorry; the college? –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: I would like to give you information. Madam Chairperson, there exists an insurance training institute. What this Bill is seeking is to transform it into a college.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, to me, what we need to resolve is whether we depart from the Public Finance Management Act. I do not know whether as a one off because we had already agreed that all the money comes from here; that we appropriate everything and that no institution should collect money. That is what we need to resolve. Do we allow them and what are the implications? We shall have to resolve that.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, it is a global practice that institutes are established to cater for professional growth and also continue serving as check systems in as far as professional integrity or accountability is concerned. However, the moment you try to translate or upgrade the institute of insurance into a college, then you have to probably seek clearance from our National Council for Higher Education.

And their mandate will overwhelm this Bill because you will have to look at who heads the college in terms of deanship, the mode of hiring, mode of qualification and it is going to distort this. We would rather keep what we have and may be strengthen it with the existing regulation. I just wanted to really -

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I suggest that the Attorney-General study this and give us - you know, we are stuck with the Public Finance Management Act. We were very insistent on it that all the money must come from this House. If you could study it and tell us how we navigate out of it or do we sustain our position that all monies must be appropriated here and not the levy going directly to the institute. You may have to sleep on it because it is an area we have not resolved right from the time we started this Bill.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, as he studies it, I would like to give information to this House that with that provision in place, we still have institutions that retain their monies. One of them is the Bank of Uganda; another is the Capital Markets Authority and the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) among others. So we may have -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  The Bank of Uganda Act was enacted in 1964, the Capital Markets Authority was enacted in the Seventh Parliament, the UCC was enacted probably in the Eighth Parliament and this law was made in the Ninth Parliament. That is why I want the Attorney-General to help us; do we allow them, do we stick to our position according to the law?

MR MPUUGA: I am sorry if I am taking the House round in circles because the way clause 25 was handled - if I can draw the attention of the chairperson of the committee to the amendment you made to clause 25, relating to funds and source of revenue to the Authority. Your amendment was to the effect that you impeach the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. I do not know whether that was stayed or – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I have asked the Attorney-General to help us. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with that; actually, the Act in section 59(9) – I am not sure of the section - provides room for application by the authority where it needs to retain some of the non-tax revenue it collects. My sense is that the authority can take advantage. I will need to crosscheck that clause; there is a provision in that Act that gives room for an authority to apply and retain part of the NTR it collects. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of that fact. 

If that provision does exist, Madam Chairperson, then we have no reason to violate our own Act by impeaching it in this particular amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over clause 137 and 138 until we have agreed how we are going to move. They are both dealing with the levy. 

Clause 139

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 139 by deleting the words, “one hundred currency points” appearing in the last line of the clause and substituting the words, “five hundred currency points”.
The justification is to provide for a stringent penalty for contravention of the clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 139 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 139, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 140, agreed to.

Clause 141

MR MPUUGA: On clause 141, the Attorney-General may have to guide us on the provisions made for service to an authority. There is particular service that you give to the chief executive officer, courier to the CEO – there are other approved methods of service in the CPA and other laws. Why the limitation on service? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want them to be on notice in offices?

MR MPUUGA: Sure, all applicable modes of service that are known to the law should be applicable to this. Do we have reason to make this an exception to the known modes of service? This can be challenged. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is your rationale for restricting the mode of service under clause 141? It is only to the chief executive or an advised employee – delivers them at the office and obtain a receipt and then courier delivers to the chief executive. However, in the Civil Procedure Act, we have the possibility to put a notice in a public place – okay, let us get to clause 142. 

Clause 142

MR MUSASIZI: In clause 142, we propose to – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister said he will think about clause 141. I want to understand the rationale. The owner of the Bill is here. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: We don’t even have to pass that and go to the next one. The Civil Procedure Act provides for the time you can apply for subsidiary service: when you cannot find someone, when he is hiding or a weekend or after 5 p.m. there is a law on that. Therefore, if you cannot get a company in the manner designated, in the current form –(Interjections)– it is the normal mode of service. 

If you cannot get the company, then you invoke extra gears. That is why I was saying that we need advocates at certain levels because this is where those kinds of things come in – (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that we simply add those modes of service?

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, I am saying that for those modes of service, you make an application to Court. Therefore, we should leave it as it is in the law. If you cannot get the company in that form, then you make an application for substituted service; it is a standard procedure. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, this particular Authority has a definite home, which is known. I do not see why we should provide for service on the chief executive officer even if you find him in a bar or providing for service by handing over the documents to courier. Why don’t we maintain only (b)? The home is known; deliver your documents and get a receipt and that would be proper service. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you find me at a funeral and then you service me, I do not know if that is proper service. Is it okay if we retain only the requirement to service at the headquarters? 

Honourable minister, there is a proposal that we delete clause 141(a) and (c) and leave only (b). Is it okay? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 141 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 141, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 142 

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend it by addition of the following new sub-clauses immediately after subclause (2) to read as follows: 

“(3)	The Authority shall incur all the costs and expenses involved in prosecuting or defending legal proceedings brought against a member of the Board, staff of the authority or any other person engaged by the Authority to perform any duties under the Act, provided the legal proceedings arise from an omission or act done in good faith.” 

“(4) The Authority shall not be liable to any person in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in the performance, discharge or exercise in good faith of any function, duty, responsibility or power under this Act or any regulations.” 

The justification is to provide for the costs and expenses involved in prosecuting or defending actions involving the Authority to be borne by the Authority and to provide for immunity to the Authority where the actions are not done in good faith and outside the mandate of the Authority.

MR RUKUTANA: I have problems with the proposals. I think it is neater the way it was with clauses (1) and (2) because by the time you allow a case to go against you and judgement is passed against you, that means that you did not pass the test of whether the act or omission was done in good faith. So why should the authority pay for you? To me, maintaining 1 and 2 is enough.

MR MUGOYA: I also find a problem with the proposals particularly (3) and (4) which actually bar anybody with a claim against the authority to bring up an action because that is even contrary to the spirit under Articles 50 and 137 of our Constitution. In my humble observation, I request that we delete the two proposals.

MR MUSASIZI: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 142, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 142, agreed to.

Clause 143

MR MUSASIZI: For clause 143, we propose to delete the words “commits an offence and” and “on conviction” wherever they appear in the clause.

The justification is to provide for payment of money as the default fine. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 143 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 143, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 144

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete sub clause (2) and substituting the following:

“(2)	A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not exceeding fifty currency points.” 

The justification is that the penalty/ sanction  should be a default fine and not an offence to enable quick administrative action.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 144 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 144, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 145, agreed to.

Clause 146, agreed to.

Clause 147

MR MUSASIZI: Madam chairperson, we propose to delete clause 147 and substitute it with the following:

“Compliance with anti-money laundering and combating of terrorism financing.

(1) 	Every licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 and the laws relating to combating financing of terrorism. 
(2) 	The Authority shall, in consultation with the Financial Intelligence Authority, issue directives requiring all licensees to comply with anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.
(3) 	The Authority shall by regulations provide for the mode and requirements for anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.” 

The justification is to better draft the clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, you have specifically named the Anti-Money Laundering Act and we have over time amended the laws on terrorism. I do not know if you might not want to actually name them here because someone can say that they were not aware of those laws that you are talking about.

We have amended that law about three times. Why don’t you include the titles of those laws on terrorism? You have named one Act - the Anti-Money Laundering Act - but on the others you are being general by saying the laws combating financial terrorism. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to request the Attorney-General to give me information on the titles of these laws. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Before I do that, having read the principle in clause 147 (1), I do not see the necessity of tasking the Authority to issue directives. 

The laws are there and they are known. Why should we task the Authority to issue directives on the law because the law is the law? If, as a matter of administrative procedure the Authority wants to do that, they can do that. To me sub-clause (2) and the proposed subclause (3) are superfluous.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Anti-Money Laundering Act is a complete Act. Will they now reorganise it as an Authority?

MR MUGOYA: I was also looking at the Bill and I do not see any useful value added if we do not go by the provisions of clause 147 (1) and (2). 

In my humble opinion, they are self-sustaining and cover a wide range of the object and intent of what we are trying to cure. For example, if you look at clause 147(1) every licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act relating to the financing of terrorism and combating – actually, if you look at the proposal, there is repetition. 

When you go to sub-clause (2), it is equally self-sustaining as it covers a wide range. In my opinion, I think that we should abandon the proposals and proceed with what was given in the parent Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing the Authority is designing an application form and in that form apart from the issues of the authority, there are questions like: Have you ever been convicted? Have you ever smuggled money?  Will that be okay? 

They may want to design clearance for the licensees and part of that clearance may involve anti-money laundering. Some times when you apply for a visa, they ask you if you have been convicted of an offence and for how long, among many other questions.

MR RUKUTANA: The law is there and every person and body is deemed to adhere to the law. If in their implementation of this Act, they want to ensure that there is compliance, they can do so even without providing for that under Article 147. 

However, for emphasis’ sake, we could maintain sub-clause 147(1) and leave the rest to the implementers of this law to do whatever we have proposed, to ensure that there is compliance with the law. Otherwise, I would now say that the Authority shall, in consultation with the financial - issue directives requiring – are they going to change the law? We know the law.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am privy to information where three authorities seem to be having a problem basing on how the law is drafted. They are: the National Rotaries Board, the Uganda Revenue Authority and the Uganda Communications Commission. For the Uganda Revenue Authority, it says as long as the person pays taxes, they have no problem while the board says if one has no license, you are not allowed to trade unless you meet the requirements for the licensing. 

Therefore, I would like to propose, given the challenges the above three authorities are having and even decaling the stakeholders’ meeting has become issues. Probably as the chairperson guided, we may need to consider retaining that and we command all the authorities concerned by law to sit down and do something. If we leave it as it is; as of now we have people without licenses but because they are paying taxes, URA says they should not close them but the fact remains that they do not have a trading license in that particular area.

I would like to propose that we leave the committee’s suggestion in subclause (2) because by default, we are saying there has to be coordination between these agencies. However, if we leave only one, then we may find a situation like what I have just mentioned above. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, there is a host of many other laws they must comply with. Are we going to repeat them here including the Penal Code, the Public Finance Management Act, among others? Why don’t we comfort ourselves with sub-clause 147(1) and leave it at that.

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, this House passed the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013. There was also an amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Act which criminalised terrorism financing. I, therefore, think that the Attorney-General is right that we maintain sub-clause 147(1) but we need to add the amendments to the Anti-Terrorism Act, which deals specifically with terrorism financing and we abandon sub paragraph 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will ask the clerk to facilitate the chairperson to get the – we have made it twice. We have done the Anti-Terrorism Act twice - just arrange and give them because they are captured on the Hansard. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 147 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 147, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 148

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, clause 148 we propose to amend it as follows:
(a) 	in sub-clause (1), by deleting the word “Board” in the first line and substituting the word “Authority”
(b) 	in sub-clause (2)(d) by deleting the word “and” and adding the words “and intermediaries” immediately after the word “HMOs”
(c) 	in sub-clause (2)(1) by inserting the words “and combating financing” immediately after the words “money-laundering” on the third line of the clause.
(d) 	in sub-clause (2)(q) by deleting the word “valuation” and substituting the word “evaluation”.
(e) 	in sub-clause (2)(f) by deleting the word “reserves” and substituting the words “technical provisions”.
(f) 	in sub-clause (2)(v) by inserting the words “senior managers” immediately after the words “responsibilities of”.
(g) 	in sub-clause (2)(f) by inserting the words “and cross boarder” immediately after the words “to group”.

The justification is to provide for some of the details that had been left out at initial drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, correct the spelling of “boarder” with “border”. The question is that clause 148 be amended as proposed.

MS SYDA BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with clause 148(2)(a) which reads: “The minister may make regulations providing for licensing and regulation and supervision of Takaful insurance providers.” 

Madam Chairperson, tactful insurance is part of the finance products provided under the Islamic Banking Law. If we leave it optional for the minister to make regulations, I think there will be problems. We need to compel the minister to make regulations providing for the licensing of the Takaful insurance providers and products in sub-clause 2(a) under clause 148.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you like the word “may”? 

MS SYDA BBUMBA: Yes, if we can replace it with the word “shall”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have any problem with making it mandatory for the minister to take this action?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that in clause 148(1) where the chairperson has just substituted “board” with “Authority”; that we should stay the word “board.” I think that was the proposed amendment in sub-clause 148(1) where he said that we displace “board” and replace it with “authority”.

I would like to recommend that we stay the “board” because it is the board that is mandated to give what guides the authority. Therefore, to provide the procedure in sanction mechanism to the Authority, the Authority cannot check itself but it is the role of the board.

Madam Chairperson, in this Bill, we are congesting a lot of authority and power to the minister. When we get done with this Bill, we will find a lot of contradictions like what we have in the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) where we have the minister overriding the board because maybe the NSSF Act was not as clear as this one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, would you like to create a situation where the minister deals directly with the board and avoids the Authority? That is recipe for disaster. The minister over- directly with the board, forget the Authority.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, we are on the same page because when we talk about a minister, let me say this will be under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development unless we come up with another cabinet portfolio of ministry of insurance - These are individuals that have a lot on their plate. Therefore, I would rather suggest that much of the powers in the authority should be vested in the board than the individual called - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the court issue regulations? How will the board come here to issue regulations? The board cannot come to Parliament to lay the regulations because that is the role of the sector minister. 

MR KATUSABE: Oh, the sector minister. Alright, if that is the spirit, then I concede, Madam Chairperson.

MR MPUUGA: I am trying to pick up from hon. Syda Bbumba’s submission on the coaching of this particular provision because we have been marring clauses where we have been referred to regulations and here we are, putting it to the discretion of the minister to choose to make regulations or not. 

I, therefore, suggest that we coach this in mandatory terms; we should not leave it at the discretion of the minister to make regulations. This is because operationalising this Act requires regulations in a number of clauses; so we may have to make it compulsory for the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I seek clarification? What is the Takaful Insurance? It is here in 2 (a) as Takaful Insurance, Takaful brokers, Takaful agents and general conduct of Takaful. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I am also at a loss - I do not know what Takaful is because I have never heard of it. Having said that, we all know that to operationalise the provisions of this law, we need regulations. Why don’t we make it mandatory for the minister to make regulations and we do away with enumerating the regulations? 

The problem with enumerating is that somebody can argue that whatever we have not put here is not subject to regulations. In actual sense, when you remunerate, you delimit. Why don’t we just say, “The minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, whether the Authority or the board, by statutory instrument make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act” and we leave it there. We should make it mandatory, but we should also leave it open for them to sit and see what provisions they want to regulate, instead of enumerating. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I do not have a problem with this cataloguing. We can only say, “relating but not limited to the following” because we are not sure whether the minister will give us less or more. By trying to provide a kind of frame, we presume that on top of what was provided for here, you will take into consideration what is being guided here. 

I do not think we lose anything by leaving “in relation to but not limited to the following” there. That gives you a wider scope for you to even look at other considerations, honourable minister. I do not know whether leaving that there would injure anybody. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: There is an issue, my honourable colleague, hon. Katusabe addressed, which we need to dispose of; that is the issue of the Authority and the board. I think the minister may have to deal with the Authority because the CEO or the ED of an Authority virtually runs the Authority on a day-to-day basis. They are only checked by the operation of the board. If we create a situation where the minister deals with the board, it becomes very ugly where the ED or the CEO of that organisation comes in.

I, therefore, propose, as the committee had earlier said contrary to what my honourable colleague raised, that we first take it as a given that the minister will deal with the Authority. We have already made a law on the inside management of how the Authority is checked and how it corresponds with the board now, if that is agreeable.

On the second issue, I think we should follow the Attorney-General’s advice. This is because when we are broader, it is better than risking trying to list everything we have to do. For example we abandoned the list of the Anti-Money Laundering Act and the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority because we knew we could not list all the laws. Therefore, it is safer for us to have a general clause. 

Madam Chairperson, lastly, we gave a lot of powers to the Authority from the onset. I think we should put a timeframe in which those regulations are laid before Parliament. This is because virtually throughout the Bill, the Authority will go about the regulations. Therefore, as Parliament, we are given a lot of work and most of it is going to regulations. 

Let us add, “…from the time the regulation is passed, it shall be laid in Parliament within six days from the date it is issued.” I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we are assuming that the minister understands the industry from the word “Go” in that he will draft the regulations and licenses. I want to guide the minister. 

MR RUKUTANA: For any matter under a minister’s docket, the minister is deemed to be omniscient - to know everything -omnipresent and omnipotent. However, we have even provided here that he will do it in consultation with the Authority.

Therefore, all these things we are talking about are in the interest of both the minister and the authority to make sure that everything is covered. I insist on leaving it general because the regulations can keep on changing depending on the circumstances. Today there may be things we have foreseen and tomorrow, some new situations may arise –(Interjections)– no, they are read before Parliament. I think we should trust the wisdom of the minister because they are very intelligent since they consult with everybody. 

Madam Chairperson, I am happier leaving it generally and trusting that the minister will do what he is supposed to do.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I partly disagree with the Attorney-General. I am asking you, Madam Chairperson, to lead on this particular item. One of the reasons as to why we need specifics in these categories of laws is to ensure that we cushion or we provide some safety guard. Those safety guards or check systems help in the event that we get a worst case scenario of a minister, who is into the habit of over stepping their mandates. 

The moment you leave this open, he will use their open-endedness as a cover destabilise and subject procedures and practices to abuse. The solution is that we stay the specifics to provide or serve as a safety guard in as far as overstepping of mandate, especially in the line of the designated minister. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am not a lawyer but I am always informed about the principle of precedence. In this House, I have been privileged to participate in the formulation of over 200 Bills. 

For every Bill, when it comes to the regulations, we have always left it open so that the minister can study what Parliament has passed in a principle law and look at the circumstances, in the terms of implementations. The minister will then make regulations that can better the implementation of the law.

If we list all of them here, in a way as Parliament we are actually making the regulations. The choice we have made before is to leave it open and say that let the minister make regulations for the better implementation of the law that we have passed and it has worked very well.

As the Attorney-General said, ministers are very privileged; we actually have a whole institution behind us. You can get all the information you need, even if you need to hire a consultancy from outside, you can have them. I think it would be better to leave the minister with the responsibility to make the regulations for the better implementation of this law, rather than restricting it to aligning up issues that we want to be in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that means that, that clause is deleted. Can you make a proposal so that we can vote on it?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that the regulation should reads “The Minister shall, in consultation with the Authority, by statutory instrument make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: are you saying we should just keep clause 148(1)? Is that what you are saying? 

MR RUKUTANA: Yes, in clause 148, we can just say that, “The minister shall, in consultation with the Authority, by statutory instrument make regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act”.

MR MUGOYA: I entirely concur with the Attorney-General that it should remain a stand-alone provision under the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is what we are doing. Honourable members, the effect is that sub-clause (2), in its entirety, be deleted. That is what it means.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, there was a proposal from hon. Odonga-Otto that these regulations be laid before Parliament within 60 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 148 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 148, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 149, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 150, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 151, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 152

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 152-155, we propose that the words “Insurance Regulatory Authority” should be deleted and substituted with the word “Authority” wherever they appear. 

The justification is that in the interpretation clause, authority has been defined to mean the Insurance Regulatory Authority. It is, therefore, not necessary, to provide for it in full under this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clauses 152,153,154,155 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clauses 152,153,154,155, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, if we resolve the other issue of the money, then you can bring in the other transitional provisions of the students. This is where they belong – but not today. We need to resolve the money issues first, then we shall know if we have a levy or not. We shall remind you when we get to that after the Attorney-General has given us the advice.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have a new clause after clause 155. We propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 155 to read as follows:

“Adoption of risk-based practices, all insurers and HMOs shall progressively adopt risk-based practices and shall fully comply within a period of five years from the commencement of this Act.”

The justification is that risk-based supervision approach is a comprehensive one and the processes cannot be adopted in just one year. That is why we are providing for a period of five years.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson once a law is passed, it is the law. You do not need a timeframe within which to comply. When a law is passed, everybody must comply according to the new law. In other words, if the chairperson thinks that this law should not come into force, then we better state it in the law.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, maybe the Attorney-General did not get what I said properly. Our proposal is as follows: adoption of risk-based practices as the new clause under this law. All insurers and HMOs shall progressively adopt risk-based practices and shall fully comply within a period of five years from the commencement of this Act. This means that we are specifying the period under which companies shall be required to have fully complied with the risk-based approach to supervision.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I remember that risk-based practice is a whole concept, which when the insurers came to the committee, were worried that when they are being pushed, they may not meet the international compliance. Therefore, what the amendment is doing is to give them an excuse of five years. 

We are passing a law that they will not be ready in five years, which is dangerous. I think what the minister is saying is that if we are not ready with the law now, we give them five years to go and train in those practices.

Therefore, I still think that this is a third world country; let us attempt to do our best. To error is human but we are not going to allow people to make mistakes up to 2022 then they start saying now the risk management practice will start working from here. I do not think this House should encourage that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if you want to transform the industry, why don’t you say two years? Isn’t five years long? This is an asset industry maybe they are not ok on many things.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, my problem is that when we pass a law, the so-called risk-based practices are embedded within this law. If they are embedded within this law and we pass it, how do we, with another hand, say that to comply with these risk-based practices, we need five years? In other words, somebody is free to act outside the law which we have passed because we have given this window of five years. 

If that be the case, if anybody thinks that when we pass the law we shall not be ready to enforce it, then let us say so; we put some transition clause and say that this law will come into effect after five years.

If you tell me that the risk-based practices and principles are embedded in this law and we pass it, how do you turn around and say, well companies have five years within which to comply with the law? It cannot be because tomorrow immediately after passing the law, anybody is at liberty to go and enforce the provisions of this law in any courts of law.

Somebody will not say that the law was passed but we were given a window of five years to comply. We had better decide on what we want to do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is an example of the risk management provisions that they think they cannot handle until after some years?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, one of the requirements is that each of these companies for instance hires an actuary. I may not have the exact facts but the actuaries we have in this country are less than 20.

Another requirement is that these companies must install certain infrastructure and they must establish a department for compliance. Therefore, the argument here is; yes, we appreciate the development and the initiative as well but at the same time, there is need to have a transition period. In order for us to have all these requirements, we need a given period. You cannot just wake up and tell us put this in place yet some of the requirements are realistically impossible to have as soon as the law gets into place. Therefore, we are trying to make a realistic law and provide for a transition period.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, while we agree that the industry needs to mature and grow, I also think that we should not make a law that will hurt the purpose for which we are making it.

Like the Attorney-General has said, if we leave this window for five years, in effect actually we have not made the law. We would rather go and struggle with the industry and make sure that they comply with the law. If there are 20 experts, we can find a way in which they can serve the entire industry as we hire and channel other experts in the field.

Issues of infrastructure are things that we can fast-track to help the industry grow because as a regulator, for you go out and say I am going to regulate five years of preparation, even after five years they will come and say we are not yet ready and we need more five years and this would complicate issues.

However, some of the circumstances would be handled as we implement and can be captured in the regulations administratively. I think this industry is not as poor as we think or as the chairperson is trying to demonstrate here. Therefore, I beg the chairperson to concede and we agree that we move forward. 

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, would you like to preside over this House to pass a law, which will take effect in five years’ time? Is that your wish, in the next EALA elections 2022- (Laughter)? This is unacceptable. The industry should not come into the market if they are not ready or prepared. If they need actuaries, they should signal to universities to produce these qualified people that the market requires. We plead with the chairperson of the committee to kindly drop that.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

Schedule 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend Schedule 2 as follows; in the heading, by deleting the words “in licensee” and substituting the word “or.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend Schedule 3it as follows:
    a) in paragraph 9, by inserting the words “of the Authority” immediately after the word “seal.”
    b) in paragraph 10, by deleting the word “Board” in the second line and substituting the word “Authority.”
    c) In paragraph 11, by deleting the word “Board” appearing in the second line and substituting the word “Authority.”

The justification is to make the provision clearer because the seal being referred to is the seal of the Authority and the Secretary being referred to is the Secretary to the Authority and not the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us now go to paragraph 110 on cross-references. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, on the list of cross-references we propose to add the following Acts: 
    1. The Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 
    2. The Companies Act, 2012
    3. The Cooperatives Societies Act, Cap.112 
    4. The Financial Institutions Act, 2004 
    5. The Insolvency Act, 2011 and 
    6. The Public Finance Management Act, 2015” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have referred to the Financial Intelligence Authority; it is under the terrorism laws -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the Financial Intelligence Authority was established by the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you still have to deal the terrorism law which we are going to supply. Honourable members, the question is that the following cross references be included in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are areas which have not been resolved; we shall handle them on Thursday. The Attorney-General may have to go to his office and do some work to assist us on Thursday morning because we shall sit in the morning. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments and stood over clauses 2, 25, 28, 33, 35, 113, 112, 124, 137 and 138.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of whole House be adopted.

(Question put ad agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had wanted to deal with the issue of Kampala but it is coming to 7:00 p.m. and I know Members have to leave for Dokolo tonight. As I indicated earlier, we shall sit in the morning to do our ordinary work and later in the afternoon pay tribute to the late Mayanja Nkangi. 

I would like to invite you to come back on Thursday morning so that we can finish this Bill - there is a loan which has been persistent and also the Standard Gauge Railway. I do not know where hon. Sabiiti is. There are some things which have been coming back and forth on the Order Paper - 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence; why don’t we handle the Bill in the afternoon?

THE SPEAKER: The body of late Mayanja Nkangi will be brought here at midday; so, we cannot sit.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 10 O’clock on Thursday. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 March 2017 at 10:00 a.m.) 
