

Thursday, 2 March 2017

Parliament met at 12.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Your Excellency the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and Members of the House, I thank you for coming for this special sitting to pay tribute to a senior citizen, a man who made a contribution to the freedom we are enjoying today.

Let us quickly start the proceedings. We have to end before 2.00 p.m. because they would like to be in church in Mbale by 5 o’clock. So, we shall keep it short but effective. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late   hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana.)

The Uganda National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of Wreaths 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE   HON. JACK MAUMBE MUKHWANA, FORMER DEPUTY MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NRC MEMBER, BUNGOKHO COUNTY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we wait for the Prime Minister to move the motion, join me in welcoming Mrs Betty Maumbe and the family; hon. Freda Kase-Mubanda, former Member of Parliament; Mr Bernard Mujasi, the Chairman LCV Mbale; Dr Stephen Mungoma, Principal of Uganda Christian University, Mbale College; and Mr Robert Kabushenga, the Chief Executive Officer of Vision Group. 

From the outset, I would like to assure Mrs Maumbe and the Bamasaba that Members are not dodging the sitting today but as we speak, another funeral is going on in Kitgum for the husband of hon. Betty Aol, Member of Parliament for Gulu. That is why many of the Members are not present. However, even though we are a bit scattered, the spirit is firm in paying tribute to the late hon. Maumbe.

12.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am pleased to make this statement and move this motion after the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) have just laid a wreath in honour of Ndungu Maumbe Mukhwana because he was one of the founders of the National Resistance Army (NRA) and subsequently the UPDF. So, it is absolutely fitting. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana for his diligent service to the nation. I would like to do so under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the death of hon. Maumbe Mukhwana, a historical member of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), which occurred on Monday, 27 February 2017;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana was born in 1939 in Mbale District and attained a junior standard level of education;

RECALLING THAT the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana participated in the shaping of the destiny of Uganda by joining the Uganda National Congress in 1960, was a very active member of the Uganda People’s Congress in the Bugisu region, and thereafter together with Ignatius Musaazi founded the Uganda Soviet Friendship Society to further his political goals and struggles; 

FURTHER RECALLING the heroic role that the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana played in the Front for National Salvation (FRONASA) and the National Resistance Army liberation struggles both as a founder and historical member of the National Resistance Movement;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana, with dedication, served Uganda in several capacities as a member of the National Consultative Council, a founder member of the Uganda Patriotic Movement, the first Deputy Cabinet Minister of Information and Broadcasting in 1986, a Member of Parliament in the Fifth Parliament and as a Resident District Commissioner;

FURTHER NOTING that at the time of his death, the late hon. Maumbe was a strong party leader in the National Resistance Movement in the country and especially in Bugisu sub region;

APPRECIATING that the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana contributed immensely to Uganda’s liberation struggle and was a uniting factor for both the Opposition and the NRM politicians in Bugisu sub region;

NOW, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of this gallant son of Uganda, the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana;

2. 	That Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Maumbe Mukhwana to the community of Bugisu, to the people of Uganda and to the people of the East African region.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded from both sides of the House. Would you like to speak to give your justification?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give my justification. The death of Comrade Maumbe on 27 February 2017 is a great loss to the country. We have lost a man who was clearly of outstanding courage and patriotism and played a key role in the liberation struggle of our country. The man we are bidding farewell to today was and is a legendary freedom fighter, leader and patriot who successfully participated in a revolution, which was inspired by his devout vision of a free, equitable and prosperous Uganda.  

This great man was born in 1939 to Nathaniel Mukhwana and Mariam Buteme of Bira Village, Buwalasi Parish, Busiu Subcounty in Mbale. He went to school at Busiu Primary School, Masaba Junior Secondary School and subsequently, Budaka Junior Secondary School. Thereafter, he started work with the medical stores at Mbale Hospital.

Madam Speaker, Ndungu Maumbe was a trusted comrade of the struggle, whose loyalty and confidence we counted on at all times. President Yoweri Museveni reported to Cabinet yesterday and informed us that he had taken a decision to give Comrade Maumbe Mukhwana an official burial. That is why we are now here paying tribute to him. (Applause) Indeed, Cabinet unanimously agreed with President Yoweri Museveni. 

Those who have read President Yoweri Museveni’s book, Sowing the Mustard Seed, will remember the deep appreciation the President accords to the man lying before us this afternoon. In one of the sections of the book, President Museveni explained how one day in January 1973, hon. Maumbe Mukhwana’s home, house No. 49 in Maluku Housing Estate in Mbale, acted as a stage for a deadly battle between the freedom fighters and the Amin soldiers. The bloody fight in which some of President Yoweri Museveni’s comrades died at the hands of the Amin soldiers eventually emboldened the entire movement to intensify its efforts to uproot that dictatorship.

Madam Speaker, we have fond memories of those early years of the struggle and Maumbe’s contribution, wisdom and counsel. As President Yoweri Museveni wrote, on January 22 1973 he travelled to Mbale in the company of Martin Mwesigwa and Wukwu Kazimoto Mpima to check on the camps. Little did they know that Amin’s intelligence had spotted the camp. One of Maumbe’s cousins wanted to spite him for refusing to give him some cigarettes; so, he reported to the authorities that there were some guerrillas in the area. Fortunately, Maumbe learnt of the betrayal and evacuated the group to the mountain before Amin’s soldiers arrived. You can imagine what would have happened had he not acted in time. 

Madam Speaker, Maumbe Mukhwana’s contribution did not only stop at the revolution but he exhibited this in the various missions he executed. He played a part in ushering the NRM Government into leadership. His role was broad and all he did was to support the revolution in many different ways up to the time of the National Resistance Army/National Resistance Movement victory. 

As the victory was scored, he continued with his struggle but this time as a Deputy Minister for Information and Broadcasting from 1987 to 1989. Comrade Maumbe set the stage for the transformative liberalisation of the media industry that has seen the growth of radio stations from a single Radio Uganda to over 200 FM stations today. (Applause) This was a revolutionary now in action in Government. 

As a member of the National Resistance Council representing Bungokho County, Comrade Maumbe was an active and effective legislator. He was also a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in Kumi and Pallisa. In his work, Ndungu Maumbe was indeed outstanding. 

Madam Speaker, Maumbe Mukhwana also demonstrated to the world that sovereign equality is a paramount idea that must prevail at all times regardless of a nation’s size, economic and military muscle or its relationship with the power of the day. Maumbe Mukhwana steadfastly defended Uganda and its revolution for decades. He personally survived many threats to his life for the sake of his relentless love for a liberated Uganda. 

Hon. Maumbe’s enthusiasm for politics draws from as far back as the early 1960s when he joined the Musaazi-led Uganda National Congress. He later joined the Uganda People’s Congress Youth Wing and was also a member of the Uganda Vietnam Solidarity Committee. 

Madam Speaker, his love for the people of Uganda was indeed selfless and was clearly unshakable. His devotion to the idea of freedom and sovereignty of all people and all nations spoke through his actions, solidarity and statements. We learn from this icon that no price is too high to pay for freedom, shared prosperity and the best interests of our people. We bid goodbye to a great man, who led by example, stood firm and loved liberty in thought, word and deed.   

Madam Speaker, it is true that in the late 1960s and 1970s, Mbale became the political hub of revolutionaries. One of the magnetic elements in this was people like Maumbe Mukhwana, Dani Wadada Nabudere, Natolo Masaba, Solo Makanya and a number of others. 

What was the cause of his death? Madam Speaker, hon. Mukhwana succumbed to cancer of the colon. We have lost a man of great courage whose life, legacy and example we honour, celebrate and we should emulate.

Hon. Maumbe Mukhwana is survived by a widow, Maama Beth Maumbe, and four children, who fortunately are with us in this House. We share in the grief of this loss with the widow, Maama Maumbe, the family, friends and colleagues.

As you rightly said, Madam Speaker, it is very good that Mr Mujasi, the Chairman of Mbale District, has led a team from the area in big numbers to come and witness this important occasion in this august House. We wish that the Almighty God rests our departed comrade, leader and revolutionary in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to come and address the House.

12.49
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all extend condolences to the family of late hon. Maumbe and to the entire country. This country, Uganda, is for all of us and the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana made a significant contribution to the ideological, social and economic transformation of our country at a time when most Ugandans were still sober, dating from the 1960s to the early 1980s. 

Madam Speaker, it is with profound sadness that we learnt of the death of hon. Maumbe. He was a dedicated servant of the people and a multifarious talented man of integrity. We, as Parliament, therefore, have assembled here to honour and celebrate an accomplished legislator in the National Resistance Council, where he served as a Cabinet minister. 

Hon. Mukhwana is remembered as a politician who spent his time not on collecting instant headlines but achieving lasting results that would leave the world in a better shape than he found it. That was hon. Mukhwana. (Applause)

Hon. Mukhwana was a man who never looked down on those who looked up to him. He helped as many people as he could. He was a man who stood for his beliefs no matter what. He tried to unite all human kind through faith and love and this he did irrespective of their political ideology.

He was a towering figure in our national and political life. He was a man who won admiration across the political spectrum with the intrepid spirit with which he faced the ups and downs of his life in politics, especially in the early days as he resolved to fight the dictatorial regime of Idi Amin Dada. His commitment also revolved around the people of Bamasaba and his dedication to his motherland, Uganda.

Our country, Uganda, has very few people of that calibre. I always wonder why people of such character are not brought to the limelight so that the rest of the Ugandans can benefit from them. Why are they not always mentioned? A few individuals are mentioned but the important ones are hidden.

Madam Speaker, I would like to put it on record that hon. Maumbe’s determination to fight for a free and better governed country did not stop with the struggle for independence. His wish was not merely to replace the colonial administration with a government that was accountable and led by Ugandans. That is why the late hon. Mukhwana became a rebel within the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), especially when they dismissed their secretary-general then, John Kakonge, in 1964. He parted ways with that nature of politics and he must have been amused in 2015 when the NRM dismissed their former secretary-general, hon. Amama Mbabazi, because that is something he refused in the 1960s. 

The late hon. Maumbe believed in defiance politics. He never compromised his beliefs with petty benefits and handouts. As a young man then and a businessman, there was a lot he would have benefited from Amin’s regime but he instead opted to fight that dictatorship. He is an inspiration to the Opposition that it is not about the popularity of the regime but rather the ideals you stand for. 

Today, many politicians have betrayed their conscience out of fear, intrigue and manipulation to support dictatorship. They do not believe in themselves. This was not Jack; he would not allow this to happen. He therefore taught us a good life lesson that is built not on a single historic act but on a multiplex of heroism and in a thousand little things that build character.

Madam Speaker, this is why I have always mentioned here that when you contested for Speaker, your support was across the board, both the NRM and the Opposition, because of your character. I, therefore, would like to take this opportunity to thank the people from the east; the eastern part of our country has actually given us a reasonable number of people of good and dependable character. (Applause) 

Maj. Gen. Keinerugaba writes in his book, Battles of the Ugandan Resistance: A tradition of maneuver, that in 1971, Gen. Museveni, who was five years younger than hon. Maumbe, tried to indoctrinate him but he refused his ideology and belief in using violence. Hon. Jack Maumbe argued that it was not right to use a gun to oust a dictatorship, though later he coordinated the rebel activities that led to the death of Martin Mwesigwa and Kazimoto in his own compound. This forced him to join FRONASA to fight for justice.

Unfortunately, honourable colleagues, he has died before tasting the real social justice and equality that he so dearly cherished. These are people who loved their country and risked their positions on the “eating table”. I strongly believe that hon. Maumbe Mukhwana lived an exemplary and purposeful life, worthy of emulation by the young generation. I believe hon. Mukhwana has left a legacy for Ugandans to be inspired in advocating for transparency and clean leadership.

Finally, let me take this moment to pay tribute again to hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana. Let this be a time of soul searching for the type of legacy we shall leave behind. Whenever we are given an opportunity of leadership or management, we should bear in mind that we are doing so in the service of our people and the country and not solely for our personal benefit. 

May the family of the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana be comforted during these times of difficulty and may the soul of the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, join me in welcoming Mr Kisamba Mugerwa. He is one of those who worked with hon. Maumbe in the Cabinet and also in the NRC. (Applause)

1.00
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to Jack, a close friend of my late husband.

When I joined Masaba, it was Jack Maumbe with three of Natolo Masaba’s brothers who went to our home for introduction. At that time, we were not moving in convoys - only two or three people were enough. I got to know him from that time. Later, I discovered that he was the husband of my sister and friend with whom we were teaching. I used to go for seminars and workshops with Beth. She is popularly known as “Beth” and I have never called her by any other name.

After that, I thought he was the only friend of my late husband. However, later, he took me to the late Prof. Nabudere and we started working together. I knew the two were very close to my late husband. I used to hear about the current Prime Minister, Dr Rugunda, but I had never seen him and I did not know what they were doing. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to give this information. In 1972, I did not know what was going on, but my husband used to buy bread and milk for the home. When we would go to the village, especially when I was on holiday, he would buy extra and he told me he was taking it to Beth in Maluku because her husband was in Kasese. I did not know what was going on. 

In fact, when the Leader of the Opposition stood and talked about him, I thought he was going to give us some information that he had heard, because I am sure he was not born at that time. I thought he was going to say that he had heard that Jack was operating in Kasese, but he did not mention it. Maybe he was not in Kasese after all, although my husband used to tell me that he was there. Maybe it was their password.

Later on, when a scuffle broke out in Mbale in January 1973, that evening my husband told me that there were problems in Mbale and we left the town early in the morning around 6.00 a.m. I did not know what problems were going to occur in Mbale but we went away, only to hear the following day that there had been guerrillas in Maumbe’s home. It is then that he said, “I think we have to get rid of Amin”. However, I think it was too late because the following day, they were hunting for him. 

When we found ourselves in Makindye Barracks, I was pregnant but I cannot say what happened to me. They brought youth on our pickup. When he came from Kasese, my husband gave me a pickup, which he used to ferry the guerrillas from his Kasese venture. When we reached Makindye, they brought some youth, half-naked, and paraded them. We were seated there and they asked them if they knew Natolo Masaba. They said they did not know him. They were asked if they had ever heard of such a name and they said, “Yes and it is the vehicle that belonged to him that we knew was taking us up the mountain”.

From there, I knew there was trouble because I had already heard that Kakonge, Ben Kiwanuka and others had been killed. I was taken into custody and he was taken to another room. What happened is not something that I can mention here. In the end, many army men came to me and said, “If you give us some money, he will be released”. I would take cheques for him to sign in Makindye, withdraw money and give it to the army men but I would never see them again. Later on, I was told that he had been killed. To date, I have never seen his body. 

However, I wish to say that because of Jack Maumbe and my husband, we are enjoying these fruits today. (Applause) I am glad to be in this Parliament. Maybe I would never have got courage to contest because at that time I was very shy. However, because of what they ushered in, I picked courage, contested against men and came to Parliament. 

Maumbe Jack, may God rest your soul in eternal peace and Beth, I am with you as usual. Thank you very much.

1.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to give our sincere condolences to the widow, children, family members and relatives of Jack Maumbe who lies here.

Madam Speaker, the name Jack Maumbe is a household name in Bugisu and in Uganda as a whole. When you talk of the young people who struggled for independence in the 1960s, you will not miss out on the names of Jack Maumbe, Prof. Nabudere who also passed on, Chango Macho, Kisoro Makanya, Kirunda Kivejinja, Bidandi Ssali, Kakonge and Ndugu Rugunda comes in later. Those are the names of the people who struggled for our independence.

I came to know Jack Maumbe closely when I led a delegation from Sweden and Switzerland to the Moshi talks in Tanzania. He was at the airport and he received us. Later on, when I returned to Uganda, the late Maumbe was the Deputy Minister of Information. He invited me to his home, together with his dear wife, and they hosted me to a luncheon. He had invited me to tell him about education abroad because I had studied and lived abroad.

Jack Maumbe was a very simple person and very friendly. I felt touched when he was dropped as a Government minister. What shocked me is that he was also thrown out of a house just below Kampala Club, where he was living. He had taken over Jack Barlow’s house. He was thrown out, so he retired back to Mbale. 

When you read President Museveni’s book, you will see that this is a man who struggled for the liberation of this country. He was a man who never grabbed property. He did not have property in Kololo, Nakasero, Bugolobi, Mbuya and so on. However, when you look around, you can see what people have amassed in this country. He lived a very simple life and went to Bungokho to his simple house. 

When I met Jack again, he had taken on farming and he was looking for market to sell his oranges, which he had grown. Later on, I think word went around that he was living a hard life and he was again appointed RDC, but you know what RDCs do. I looked at him and his behaviour - You would not tell the difference between the Opposition and Government; when I met with Jack, we were so close. That is the politics I expected in this country instead of saying, “This one belongs here, the other there”. We are in the same country. 

Because he lived a simple life, it was difficult for him to access medical treatment. Madam Speaker, I have spoken on this Floor of Parliament about the situation in our hospitals. We have been told by Dr Rugunda, the Prime Minister, that he died of cancer. We have cried and asked why we cannot have radiotherapy machines in our hospitals. Last time I was so happy when I saw five children who had been cured of cancer being paraded.

If we had a machine in Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, we would not have lost a hero, a man who fought for the liberation of this country. That is the biggest problem we have. He was being rushed to Kampala. Why come to Kampala for treatment when we have Mbale Regional Referral Hospital? Of course, he did not have the money to go to Elgon, a private hospital in Mbale. 

My appeal to Government is that the people who vote for us, those who are seated up there and all over the country, deserve treatment. They do not want us to go and buy food in their homes; they just want medicine in the hospitals so that they can access treatment. Jack would not have died on the way being rushed to Kampala –(Member timed out.)

1.12
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One may wonder what my generation has to say regarding the late Maumbe Mukhwana. Besides being a senior comrade in the struggle, I was privileged to watch hon. Mukhwana in this House. I used to accompany the Chairman of NRC and would sit behind there. 

As a young man interested in the political struggles of this country, I had read about his works and I had seen those who were speaking from a nationalistic position and those who were pursuing their selfish ends. I would like to go on record by saying that hon. Mukhwana was a nationalist and a patriot irrespective of the threats of the time. You have heard from hon. Mutonyi about the risks he undertook. Besides what we read, we now have a living testimony.

Hon. Mukhwana was an accomplished statesman, a gentleman, very smart and yet unassuming. Irrespective of being a fighter, he did not throw it around over people. Hon. Mukhwana was a polished debater who put forward his issues intelligently and yet respectfully. I wish we, the legislators of today, could emulate the way people were legislating in the 1990s – respectfully yet intelligently. They would speak with facts, not out of emotion, and hon. Maumbe Mukhwana was one of those. I admired him for being a gentleman, very smart and able to put a point across.

I hope we do this so that we can learn from what others have done in the past and then use their experiences to ensure that we push our country to the better heights that they fought for. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

1.14
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our departed father, Jack Maumbe Mukhwana. I am also honoured to stand here not only as a Member of Parliament but also as a close family member. To this end, I must thank His Excellency President Museveni and the Government as a whole for the support so far extended to the family. 

Madam Speaker, it is indeed hard to eulogise a man with a profile as that of Mzee Jack. I will only attempt to summarise a life that has been well lived. The country has indeed lost a great person, a freedom fighter as already pointed out by other speakers. I am glad that his contribution is vividly highlighted in Sowing the Mustard Seed. There are a lot of lessons we can emulate from his sacrifice to the liberation of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, in spite of the fact that Mzee Jack had a military background, he remained a very humble person. He served his country with dedication in various capacities, as already pointed out. He was a minister, a member of the NRC, he became RDC and later on retired to his own community of Bungokho where he continued to serve the community.

I recall one time when I visited him, he had started a wonderful orange farm that he intended to use for commercial purposes. However, he ended up distributing these oranges to the community. You can see how kind and humble he was to the community that he served. 

Madam Speaker, when I decided to leave service and join politics, I got inspiration from Mzee Jack. I have, therefore, lost a mentor. As I conclude, I would like to say that in order to honour him, it is important that Government recognises people who make such immense contribution to this country – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed to stop at 1.45 p.m. You have half a minute to conclude.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that it would be very paramount for Government to choose at least one project for the community of Bungokho in memory of the late. (Applause)

Lastly, a lot has been said about cancer; I would be very happy if Government rolled out testing and treatment for cancer. Thank you, Madam Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall hear from hon. Werikhe and hon. Wamakuyu will follow. In the meantime, I would like you to join me in welcoming Prof. Kabwegyere. He was a colleague of hon. Maumbe right from the Moshi Conference. I also welcome hon. Augustine Ruzindana who worked with him during the FRONASA days. (Applause)

1.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen hero and brother, hon. Jack Maumbe.

Hon. Maumbe was an elder and a historical member of the NRM, but to me he was a brother. I have to declare my interest. He was my brother because he and I belonged to the same clan. I convey my condolences to the children and our mulamu. I join my colleagues to strongly support and attest to all that hon. Maumbe has contributed to this country. 

Hon. Maumbe was born into a family of a county chief, Musamali Mukhwana. Having been born in the family of a chief, he was exposed to all the trappings of authority. At that time, the subcounty and county chiefs had both civil and judicial powers. Hon. Maumbe was therefore exposed to politics at an early age, which eventually enabled him to link up with other progressive young men and women in this country. That is what propelled them into fighting for the independence of this country and eventually, standing up to fight dictatorship in this county.

Hon. Maumbe detested injustice, dictatorship and unfairness to whoever he came across. This is why he was able to link up with progressive young people in this country, including the various comrades that have been mentioned such as Nabudere, H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. These are the young men at that time who had discussion groups to see how they would propel this country ahead. That is why we ended up having the Maluku incident, which has been alluded to by some colleagues. Maluku was a turning point. Maluku is a place in Mbale where hon. Maumbe had a residence. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what to do because many people want to speak. I even want to shorten the time to two minutes. Okay, for the clansman, half a minute to conclude.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, who followed in the footsteps of hon. Maumbe as MP for Bungokho, we are going to miss the wisdom and guidance that we derived from him. He was a simple, humble and straightforward person. I believe any leader would appreciate if he followed in the footsteps of hon. Maumbe. 

I propose that as a Government, we should have some monumental facility in Mbale to remember the works of hon. Maumbe and other fallen comrades from the sub region. (Applause) To the family of hon. Maumbe, we stand with you and we will continue to stand with you through this difficult time. I pray that the soul of hon. Jack Maumbe rests in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.23
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, I also join the country to mourn Mzee Maumbe Mukhwana. I convey my condolences to the family and the entire country.

Mzee Maumbe Mukhwana, as Members have said, was just a simple person. It took a long time for me to know that he had a military background because whenever you would meet him, you would not discuss anything about wars or the army. One time, we were holding our annual general meeting for Bugisu Cooperative Union and we had a bit of confusion in the hall; some youth wanted to disrupt the meeting. When Mzee stood up, he did not say anything but I saw all the youth just moving out one by one. That is when I knew that people recognised Mzee so much.

Madam Speaker, we heard the news that Mzee had passed away in Kibuku District on the way to Kampala. We have a number of former leaders who have served in this country and the only support they want is some means of transport. If he had his own means of transport, I think he would have passed on while this end. Let us see how we can support them. They are not many. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let us see how to mobilise those who are still alive and provide for them means of transport. At this age, most of the time they have to be near health facilities. 

We have a one Mzee Muduku who was one of the pioneers in this Parliament. Most of the time he is sick but like others, he does not have means of transport, and they cannot sit on these boda bodas. Why can’t we, as Parliament and Government, find a way to support them with means of transport and also help them access medical facilities? Maybe they can be placed under a medical insurance scheme - (Member timed out.)

1.29
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of my family, I would like to give my sincere condolences to the family of the late Maumbe. 

I would like to begin from where hon. Mudimi has stopped. This goes to my Government, and I am happy that both the Vice-President and the Prime Minister are here; what does it take for our Government to make an inventory of these senior leaders who helped in the liberation struggle that made this country what it is? What does it take for this Government to support them while they are still alive? 

I am happy Ndugu Mujasi is here. When I was campaigning for Member of Parliament for the region, I visited the late. We cannot get a replacement within our generation for these senior leaders. Why is my own government failing to take care of their health and even to recognise their contribution to this great nation? 

Madam Speaker, that is my message for today. He has gone; what is going to happen to his family? What is going to happen to the widow? We are speaking here and we shall bury him but what are we going to do and what shall we do for those that are still alive?

Madam Speaker, last but not least, I would also like to –(Member timed out.)

1.29
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen gallant son of Uganda. The late Mukhwana Maumbe will be greatly missed for his selfless devotion to this nation through the service that he offered while in the bush with His Excellency the President and as a FRONASA member. 

The late Maumbe was true to himself, to the nation and particularly to Bugisu. We have lost someone with great institutional memory. He was someone you would want to run to in order to find out the history of this nation and the history of the Masaba land.

Madam Speaker, given the fact that he was a uniting factor in our region, this is a great loss. He played a big part in uniting the politicians of Bugisu region, as has been ably said by the Prime Minister. He was a very good hearted man, who wished everybody well. It has been said that he even saved the life of His Excellency the President. If he was not a good hearted man, he would not have bothered. He showed an example as a man who wished others well.

Madam Speaker, the late fought a good fight. I condole with the family and pray that the unity that the late had begun in Mbale is carried on.  (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you very much. It is very painful to lose someone who votes for you. The late was my mentor. He would call me and say, “My daughter, you are doing well but you should improve here and there.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to buy the idea by hon. Werikhe that we have a monument erected in Mbale so that everybody who comes there will remember that this was one of the agitators of peace in this country. I also pledge that if that is done, the people of Bugisu region will appreciate. 

Madam Speaker, on that note, we would like to appreciate the Government for according him this kind of respect. Thank you.

1.32
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen hero and elder. I started hearing about our late elder right from the times of our elder, Chango Macho. If you sit with our great elders like Aggrey Awori, they will narrate to you the journey that they took with our fallen hero and you will really feel we have lost a great figure.

As we pay tribute to the late hon. Mukhwana, I would like to appeal to our Government; we have very many leaders that have made a great contribution to this country and they are still living but living miserably. We are privileged to have the Rt Hon. Prime minister in the House; I think it is time for us to reflect and try to search for our own that have made us what we are today.

These fallen leaders have played a very big role in our lives. Young leaders like us would not be what we are today without these figures that are not leaving us now.  Therefore, I would like to appeal to our Government to remember the people who have played a great role in this nation. We have former Members of Parliament and former fighters in the National Resistance Army down there in the villages, languishing helplessly without support. I think this is the right time, Madam Speaker, for us to begin remembering our people. 

I convey my condolences and sincere tribute to the family of the late Mukhwana Maumbe - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, when we had the medal award ceremony, there was something we agreed on with the President, first in respect to the old four - Muduku, Kasakya, May lubega and Bwambale. There was a package we agreed on for those four because they are the most senior. I do not know whether it has been handled but we had agreed on something. 

We also agreed that Parliament works out a formula for the rest. The Parliamentary Commission is working out something for those beyond the First Parliament. When it comes, Prime Minister, I hope you will speak for it in Cabinet and make sure that it passes.

1.35
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana.

Madam Speaker, as I was reflecting, I realised that it is not easy to have such a person, moreover rising up at the time he did. In the 1960s, he was from the Uganda Peoples’ Congress but his patriotism blended well with people from other political shades like the current President, who was of the Democratic Party then, and they forged a way forward for this country. It was crosscutting - Uganda first. 

Having been born and raised in a privileged family, one would not have expected him to be patriotic, to stand to oppose the status quo, but he did and he indeed laid down his life. Members may take it lightly as they read the books, but for one to offer his house – At that time, amongst that group, he was fairly established. At a young age, he had family, a house and a home, so he would not have ventured into fighting Government. However, he offered his home to be a base camp and eventually it was attacked by the then Government. I think he deserves more honour for this. He deserves a bit more.  (Applause) 

He eventually went on to train, not like these kwara kwaras who jump on the bandwagon. He trained in Mozambique, came back and liberated this country. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, when this country was liberated, he was not a rebel. He had run away from that oppression within parties in the 1960s but in the 1980s, he was settled as a deputy minister. However, one wonders why he was dropped in spite of his historical contribution. Even as a Resident District Commissioner - a token to keep him calm - he was equally dropped in November 2001. He was still young and energetic and he could still serve, but this Government did not see any value in him. He was still energetic.

To that extent, you honourable members, hon. Muruli Mukasa, use your glasses to look further and see where this country is heading. (Laughter) It is not fair really. I think it is high time for us to do the right thing in time. I would like to thank hon. Ruhakana Rugunda; at least he was able in his capacity to send an ambulance to pick him. Unfortunately, he died on the way. He should have been one of the first citizens catered for by Government. His memory lives on and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

1.39
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I extend my condolences to the family, Bugisu parliamentary community and the entire Bugisu community.
 
Madam Speaker, you will recognise that what we are saying is not helpful to hon. Maumbe and that is very sad. We need to recognise as a country and bring forward a culture where we can be able to say these words to the people when they still live. We should have that kind of session, especially for those that are still alive and in his category. 

Madam Speaker, his death tells a lot about our health system. He was in Mbale, which has a referral hospital, and the referral hospital was helpless. He died on his way to Kampala. It is a sad situation. 

Madam Speaker, you will recognise that as a country, we have not prepared our leaders for life outside of this House. I would like to encourage your leadership to put a system in place where we can have a quarter or half pay for people that have served this country to be able to coordinate life outside of Government service or even the House.

Lastly, can we have a situation or a system where we can have some inscription to catalogue the contributions of these fallen heroes and even those that are still alive? In that situation, we would be able to know what they stood for and how much contribution they made to their country, especially in the House and even at committee level. Hon. Maumbe –(Member timed out)

1.42
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana, who was once an RDC in Pallisa District. On that note, I wish to convey a message of condolence from the people of Kibale and Pallisa; actually, the LCV chairman called me and said, “I hear that they are bringing the body of the late hon. Maumbe to Parliament, please convey our condolences to the family”.

When the late hon. Maumbe was the RDC in Pallisa, I met him on two occasions and I interacted with him. However, most importantly, because I was a small leader there, most times when people had problems, I would refer them to the RDC. Whenever they returned, they would give me feedback - “We had a very good and lovely interaction with the RDC”. That is the type of person we are talking about. He was able to listen to people and solve their problems. As you know, we have some local conflicts in the villages, which sometimes cost people lives, but with his leadership in Pallisa we had a person who was able to solve people’s problems.

Madam Speaker, we have talked about patriotism and nationalism here, represented by the late lying before us. However, I would like to implore Government; one of the biggest factors that united this country was education in Government sponsored institutions, which we know have collapsed. We had people from different corners meeting - (Member timed out.)

1.44
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen gallant son of this country. My condolences and prayers go to the family especially to my OB, Noah Maumbe. Most times when you talk about OB, people think it means “old boy” but it means “Old Budonian”. 

Madam Speaker, before us lies a father, a nationalist, patriot and a freedom fighter. No wonder he instilled those attributes in his children. Noah is a peace loving Ugandan; he stands for his country. However, most times we stand for our stomachs, our family and children. As leaders of this country, I believe we should emulate hon. Maumbe and stand for Uganda, speak for Uganda and fight for Uganda so that when our fathers are gone, they rest in peace knowing that whatever they started is on course.

To the family members, God is control. When he is gone, God becomes a father and a husband. Hon. Maumbe, rest in peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.45
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I support the motion and extend my condolences to the family. 

In the culture of the people of Lango, when a senior citizen who has made an enormous contribution passes on at the age of 60 years old and above, we do not mourn; instead, we celebrate. That is the spirit in which I am here, to celebrate a life well lived, a journey well-travelled and a fight well fought.

Madam Speaker, the journey of hon. Maumbe is not only a story of the region where he comes from. When you announced last evening that today we are paying tribute to him, I went home and perused through the famous book, Sowing the Mustard Seed. I then asked myself a fundamental question: if this gentleman lying here had not saved the life of President Yoweri Museveni in the 1970s, what would have happened? 

By saving his life in Mbale, he ended up directly saving the lives of many Ugandans, including my own life indirectly. (Applause) I say this because in 1986 at the age of six, when NRA took over power, the NRA soldiers were looking for Ojuko, one of the notorious commanders then. Ojuko was equally looking for Agetta who was part of Obote’s army. 

I come from the subcounty where Agetta comes from. We landed into the ambush of Ojuko but since the NRA who had reached Lira Town were also looking for Ojuko, they saved us. That was under President Museveni. If he had not saved his life, I would not have lived. This country would have not seen a gentleman called Obua because I would have passed on at the age of six in the hands of Ojuko. (Applause)

We must pay tribute to him because for those of us who attend the lectures of President Museveni, he is always grateful to him. He has always -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are not many of us from the NRC. I cannot contribute but let me invite some Members to speak on behalf of the NRC members. We shall have hon. Muruli-Mukasa, hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama and the General. You are a General – (Laughter) -

1.48
GEN (RTD) ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to add my voice in conveying condolences to the family of our great hero, hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana, whom we are sending off.

In life, you do not have to be a man every day but you can be a man just one day and that one day can transform not only your whole life but the lives of many. Here lies a freedom fighter that was unwavering, dedicated, focussed and committed to living a simple life. His principle was that what is most important is not the things you leave behind for your children but the things you leave in your children. His family can bear witness to that principle. He always associated himself with the grassroots people and shared with them a lot of knowledge so as to leave behind a lot of patriotic and nationalistic knowledge. Wherever he was, he never missed an opportunity.

Throughout the time we had him in the NRC and the time he was in the struggle, he was one of those who were strongly committed to the uniting individual merit Movement system of governance, so that people are united and move forward together. He was one of those who wished that everybody participated, and without a lot of expectation of being given what is killing people – money. He lived a simple life and he has left an example to show that one can sacrifice for their country. 

I am very happy and proud that his sacrifice has not been in vain. Many Ugandans and people on the African continent have benefitted from his contribution. He has left a landmark character. Every individual is different and has a character. He has left a character that needs to be emulated by all the freedom fighters, where you do your part wherever you are and the rest do theirs. He would not interfere with anybody’s life however much he would have liked to. He did not pursue –(Member timed out.)

1.51
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was getting very worried. There is a saying in my language that when you lose your dear one – I am Mugisu and this is my dear one - you are the one to carry the parts that smell most. I think it is a culture in most African traditions. Madam Speaker, I was therefore wondering why you were almost leaving me out. It is very unfortunate that we have lost a mentor, a peer, a fearless and courageous man in the Bugisu sub region where he was an elder.

I got to know about the late Maumbe Mukhwana when I went for my circumcision initiation in 1990. You know every even year, the Bagisu gather at Mutoto for blessings before one is circumcised. The late Maumbe Mukhwana gave a wonderful speech that was full of wisdom. In fact, it was from that time that I knew that I, Alex Burundo, could also become a leader. After that time, in 2001 I stood for the position of Chairman LC III for my subcounty and I have been serving for the last 15 years. Because of him, I am now here as a Member of Parliament. (Applause) (Member timed out.)

1.53
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. It is with deep sorrow that I convey my condolences to the family, the people of Bugisu, the NRM fraternity, and indeed the entire country upon the untimely death of hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana.

Jack Maumbe Mukhwana was a man of great attributes. He was smart, always correctly dressed, tall, handsome, charming and always carried himself with dignity. He was not ostentatious but quite spoken. These attributes would have made an ordinary person very arrogant but Jack Maumbe Mukhwana exuded humility and behind this humility was a strong character.

Madam Speaker, in the 1970s, a number of young men were shot because it was alleged that they were carrying out subversive activities. If you watched the shooting, you would have certainly been extremely shocked. We saw that shooting. Maumbe Mukhwana was part of the group that was fighting to make ensure there was a change and better life in this country. He knew precisely what lay in store for him should he be discovered by the Government forces at the time. However, he was not deterred and he went ahead. He is indeed a revolutionary hero. Had Jack Maumbe Mukhwana lived in 15th Century England, he would have indeed been a knight. 

Hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana leaves us with a legacy of courage, honesty, selflessness, humility, dignity and patriotism. All these attributes will be synonymous with the name Jack Maumbe Mukhwana. May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.

1.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I support the motion to pay tribute to the late comrade, Jack Maumbe Mukhwana. I offer my condolences to the family and the people of Bugisu on this sad day where we mourn a fallen hero. 

I would like to thank the President for recognising his contribution and for also according him a decent burial. I would also like to thank the Speaker and the Prime Minister for presiding over this function. We cannot take you for granted. This is the way you stand for a comrade like Jack Maumbe Mukhwana. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I have been around for some time and I got to know the late when I was a young man. I can only say that he has lived an egalitarian life – a purposeful life. His historical contribution is well documented.

I would like to agree with many speakers before me that he lived, he fought and his contribution is well felt here. However, as leaders, we need to draw lessons, and that is where we go wrong. We should always imagine that when you live a public life and the voters pull away their cards, what happens? When you are employed and the employment goes, what happens?  The laws do not adequately provide for that life but the way you live provides for this. Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

1.58
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. 

I came to know Jack Maumbe in 1994 as a student in Mbale S.S. At that time, there were Constituent Assembly elections and I was a student leader. There was recruitment among the students to support the NRM candidate, who was James Wapakhabulo. The late Maumbe knew how to break into the institutions and get the students out for campaigns. As a Samia student, I had the background of my father, Chango Macho, who was living in Mbale at that time. So it was easy to link up with the family. That is how my political career began - as early as 1994. 

The leader laying here today lived a simple life. What we can appreciate about him is that he loved to nurture people into good leaders. He loved his country. He would sacrifice without any complaint at all. 

There is a lot that I saw, especially when he was appointed minister with the late Chango Macho; they were not even expecting the appointments despite the fact that they had fought alongside the NRM, which had taken over power at that time. They did not anticipate being appointed as ministers. They retired home to do their own work. Later, they heard the announcements while in their sitting rooms that they had been appointed ministers. They were so patriotic. 

I want to appreciate the type of life that he lived. For those of us who saw and spoke to them while they were alive, there is something that we can borrow from them and instil in the youth - to live as people who love their country. (Member timed out.)

2.00
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Rtd. Moses Ali): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Many people might be wondering what I am going to say, so you listen to what I am going to say. (Laughter) Many things have happened since the 1970s and I thank God for allowing me to survive most of those happenings. 

I stand here first of all to convey sincere condolences on behalf of the people of West Nile, the people of the greater north, the members of my family and myself to the family of my fellow revolutionary fighter. I am speaking as a revolutionary fighter, a guerrilla and a former rebel - Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF). (Laughter) I am also speaking as a minister in this Government and the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, and above all, as an army general. (Laughter) So, for those who doubted what I was going to say, just listen.

I stand here to testify that the decision taken at that time by our late brother was even more risky than the cancer, which he succumbed to. It was so risky and yet he took it and survived. That decision can be equated to the first bricks laid for this peace we are enjoying in the country. (Applause)

Many people have shed blood, including the eight people who were shot in their various district headquarters; they were the first bricks laid for this peace. Their blood was the foundation that made this peace. It was not an easy decision; it was very risky. Therefore, we want to thank the Almighty for enabling our brother survive long and for enabling him survive those very risky times. We thank God for enabling him to live up to 77 years. 

Madam Speaker, I have discovered that the late was born in 1939 and so was I. (Applause) I want to thank God for that. It appears God has special consideration for those born in 1939. (Laughter) We underwent a lot of risks. He took a risk but he lived up to this time. I also took a risk to fight people who came in many colours – I fought all of them before I joined them in the fight. (Laughter) Therefore, those of us who were born in 1939 must thank God. 

We have another thing in common. I joined the late in 1987 in the first NRM Cabinet. He was a very humble man. You would not believe he had been a guerrilla fighter able to take such risky decisions. He was very humble, calm and polite. We believe many people of this character are protected by God because they do not show off; they respect God. I still thank God for protecting them. 

I want to pray to the Almighty to reward the late in a special way by taking into consideration all the risks he took, which contributed to the current peace that everybody here is enjoying. Therefore, I pray to the Almighty to reward him accordingly and I pray that his soul rests in peace. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we agreed to stop the tribute at 1.45 p.m. but we have now gone more than 20 minutes beyond that time and yet our ordinary sitting will start at 2.30.pm. I am sorry there are Members who wanted to speak but we have exceeded out time. I want to put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana as proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion carried.

THE SPEAKER:  The Clerk is directed to extract the Hansard of today and give it to Mrs Beth Maumbe and her children, and also of course the certificate, which you will transmit to them when ready. 


The East African Community Anthem

The Uganda National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Jack Maumbe Mukhwana)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a special sitting. The House is adjourned to 2.40 p.m. for the normal sitting. Thank you for coming to pay tribute to our colleague.

(The House rose at 2.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 March at 2.40 p.m.) 

